THE CODE OF THE CITY OF GRAYSON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2006 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
____________ 
Adopted: August 21, 2006  Effective: August 21, 2006 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
GRAYSON, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jim Hinkle 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jimmy Adams 
Allison Wilkerson 
Tammy Shumate 
Suzanne Hawkins 
City Council 
____________ 
Thompson & Sweeny, Attorneys at Law 
Lawrenceville, Georgia 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Laura Paul-Cone 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Jim Moff 
Code Enforcement Officer 
____________ 
Jimmy Brownlee 
Melody Mello 
Michael Sutton 
Todd Miller 
Code Enforcement Board 
____________ 
David Elrod 
Greg Shumate 
Linda Turner 
David Schroder 
John West 
Planning and Zoning Commission 
____________ 
Greg Shumate 
David Mudd 
Dan Sosebee 
Jerry Gwin 
Mark Payne 
Board of Appeals 
____________ 
Barbara Hinkle 
Arts and History Center Director 
____________ 
Angela Wirt 
Arts and History Center Assistant Director 
____________ 
Steve Starling 
City Historian 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Grayson, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of David G. Poucher, Code Attorney, and Diana Kampert, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Lee Thompson, City Attorney, Jim Hinkle, Mayor, and Frank Hartley of the Thompson firm for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Grayson, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Grayson, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Grayson, Georgia 2006. 
ORDINANCE 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Grayson, Georgia hereby ordain that: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Grayson, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 42 and Appendix A, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 16, 2006, and not included in the Code, recognized by reference therein, or specifically noted as not affected by the code in Section 1-10, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by any combination thereof. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 16, 2006 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
IT IS SO ORDAINED this 21st day of August, 2006. 



ATTEST: 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and correct copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council of the City of Grayson, Georgia, held on the ___ day of August, 2006. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
To provide a new charter for the City of Grayson, Georgia amending an Act creating the City of Grayson, Georgia approved December 16, 1901 (Ga. L. 1901, P. 662), as amended; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city, both specific and general; to provide for construction of powers, exercise of powers and ordinances of the city; to provide the ability to sue and be sued; to provide for the governing authority of such city, the terms of office, qualification for office, the creation of vacancies, and the filling of vacancies in office; to provide for compensation of members of the governing authority; to provide prohibitions for elected officials; to authorize inquiries and investigations by the governing authority; to provide general powers and authority of the governing authority; to provide for organization, meetings, rules and procedures, voting and enactment of ordinances; to provide for a code of technical regulations; to provide for the office of mayor and certain duties and powers relative to the office of mayor; to provide the authenticating of ordinances and the recording codification and printing of ordinances; to provide for administrative and service departments, boards, commissions and authorities, a city manager, a city attorney, a city clerk, a tax collector, a city accountant, consolidation of functions, position classifications and pay plans, and personnel policies; to provide for the creation of a municipal court, appointment of judges of the municipal court, the time of convening of the court and the jurisdiction and powers of the municipal court and a process for the appeal of decisions of the municipal court and the adoption of rules of the municipal court; to provide for regular elections, qualifying and nomination of candidates, absentee ballots, nonpartisan elections, election of governing authorities by a majority vote, application of general laws, special elections and filling of vacancies, grounds for removal of members of the governing authority and a procedure for removal; to provide for property taxes, tax levies, tax due dates and the issuance of tax bills, collection of delinquent taxes, licenses, occupational taxes, excise taxes, sewer service charges, sanitary and health service charges, stormwater fees and charges, franchises and franchise fees, special assessments, transfer of executions, general obligation bonds, revenue bonds, short term notes, procedures for establishment of a fiscal year, preparation of budgets, submission of operating budgets to the city council, action by council on budgets, property tax levies, additional appropriations, capital improvements budget, contracting procedures, centralized purchasing and disposition of city property; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for official bonds for officers and employees of the city; to provide for continuation of existing ordinances and regulations; to provide for definitions and constructions and penalties; to provide for severability; to provide for an effective date; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Grayson, as enacted by Ga. Laws H.B. 207 (Act No. 14). Amendments to this act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Grayson, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. Under that name, the city shall continue to be vested with all the property and rights of property which now belong to the corporation; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold property, real and personal as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will; and may exercise in conformity with this charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The city shall encompass all of the territory described within the following boundaries: 
(1)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter and as further described in Exhibit "A," which is attached to this charter and is incorporated herein by reference. Upon the adoption of this charter, the boundaries of this city shall include all of that area as described in the previous city charter as well as any areas added by amendment to said charter, and by all annexation ordinances adopted by the governing authority of the City of Grayson since the adoption of the charter. The boundaries of this city shall include those areas shown on a map entitled "Official Boundary Map of the City of Grayson, Georgia" dated December 20, 2010, which map shall be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and which map is incorporated herein by this reference. Alterations of the boundaries of this city may be made from time to time in a manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated: "Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Grayson, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map. 
(2)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of the State of Georgia as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Sec. 1.13. - Examples of powers. 
(a)  The corporate powers of the government of the city, to be exercised by the governing authority, may include the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this paragraph. 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of this city. 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades. 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes or fees. 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other laws as are, or may hereafter be, enacted. 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations. 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(9)  Environmental Protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment and vital areas of the city, region, and state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment. 
(10)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(11)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefitting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; and to provide for franchises, including exclusive franchises, for trash collection and disposal. 
(12)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(13)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose. 
(14)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(15)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares of the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials. 
(16)  Litigation. To bring or defend an action, at law or in equity, brought in a court of proper jurisdiction and to assert any and all defenses permitted by law. 
(17)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city. 
(18)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same. 
(19)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(20)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city and to lease property owned by the city for a period not to exceed 25 years or for such other length of time as permitted by law. 
(21)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(22)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same. 
(23)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property. 
(24)  Specific penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide penalties for the violation of Gwinnett County board of health rules and regulations and Gwinnett County health and sanitation ordinances. 
(25)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community. 
(26)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police or firefighting agency. 
(27)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public. 
(28)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide for any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(29)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances. 
(30)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial. 
(31)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission. 
(32)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances. 
(33)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the City of Grayson. 
(34)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so. 
(35)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system. 
(36)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others including the granting of exclusive or nonexclusive franchises for such services; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items. 
(37)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate junk dealers and pawn shops; to regulate the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind by taxation or otherwise; and to regulate professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, adult entertainment establishments, tattoo parlors and massage parlors. 
(38)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvements. 
(39)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation. 
(40)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law. 
(41)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles. 
(42)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program. 
(43)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.15. - Ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the governing authority. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and by Article V of this charter. 
(b)  Any person desiring to offer as a candidate for mayor shall specify that he or she is seeking the office of mayor. 
(c)  For the purpose of electing the four councilmembers of the city, there shall be four council posts to be designated Council Post 1 through Council Post 4. Any person desiring to offer as a candidate for councilmember shall designate the council post for which he or she is offering. 
Sec. 2.11. - Terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)  The four members of the city council shall serve for terms of two years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. The councilmembers who hold Council Posts 1 and 3 shall be elected in even years. The mayor and councilmembers who hold Council Posts 2 and 4 shall be elected in odd years. 
(b)  No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless the person shall have been a resident of the city for a period of one year preceding the date of the election of the mayor or members of the city council and must be a qualified voter in municipal elections for officers of said city; the mayor or councilmember shall continue to reside therein during their period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
Sec. 2.12. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected for and shall serve for a term of two years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city for one year immediately preceding his or her election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of his or her service. The mayor shall forfeit his or her office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
Sec. 2.13. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesman for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city, as approved by or in accordance with council authorization, all written and approved contracts, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  Vote on matters before the city council only in the case of a tie vote; 
(6)  Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; 
(7)  Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever the mayor deems it expedient; 
(8)  Recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as the mayor may be expedient; 
(9)  Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish; and 
(10)  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this charter, or by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the third Monday in December of each year for the purpose of swearing in elected officials whose term will begin January 1 st of the following year. The oath of the office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully perform all of the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of the City of Grayson in Gwinnett County, Georgia according to the best of my ability and understanding, so help me God. I further swear or affirm that I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due to this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof; that I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I am by the laws of the State of Georgia prohibited from holding; that I am otherwise qualified to hold the office of (mayor) (councilmember) according to the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; that I am a resident of the City of Grayson, Georgia and have been a resident for the period required by law; that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(Ord. of 10-20-2014) 
Sec. 2.15. - Mayor pro tempore. 
By a majority vote, at the first regular meeting of the mayor and council in March of each year, the mayor and council shall elect a councilmember to serve as the mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence. If the mayor pro tempore is absent because of sickness or disqualification, any one of the remaining councilmembers, chosen by the members present, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the mayor's duties. 
Sec. 2.16. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meetings on any date or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(b)  The mayor and city council may hold special meetings and may transact business therein in accordance with law. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council may be public in accordance with applicable law. 
Sec. 2.17. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairmen and officers of the city council, if any, shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.18. - Quorum; voting. 
The mayor, or mayor pro tempore, and two councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances may be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of the majority of the members present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Sec. 2.19. - Vacancies; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The mayor or any councilmember shall forfeit office if he or she: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during the term of office any qualification of the office as prescribed by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; or 
(2)  Is convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude. 
(c)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter. 
Sec. 2.20. - Grounds and procedure for removal. 
(a)  The mayor or any councilmember shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office, as provided by this charter or by law; 
(4)  Willful violation of any express prohibition of this charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by law. 
(b)  Removal of an elected officer from office may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By action of two-thirds' vote of the entire membership of the council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right to appeal from the decision of the council to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By information filed in the Superior Court of Gwinnett County, as provided by law. 
Sec. 2.21. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.22. - Holding other office; voting when personally interested. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Except as authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which the official was elected. 
(c)  Except as authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elected government office. 
(d)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall vote upon, sign, or veto any ordinance, resolution, contract, or other matter in which the official is personally interested. 
Sec. 2.23. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.24. - General power and authority of the city council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this charter. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, the Constitution, and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Grayson and may enforce such ordinance by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)  By ordinance the council may create, change, alter, abolish, or consolidate offices, agencies, and departments of the city and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies, and departments expressly provided for by this charter. 
Sec. 2.25. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof and, for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2.26. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Except as herein provided, every official action of the city council which is to become law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.27. - Ordinance forms; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. The enacting clause shall be "The Mayor and Council of the City of Grayson hereby ordains...." 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by the mayor or any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. 
Sec. 2.28. - Codes of technical regulations. 
The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally. 
Sec. 2.29. - Signing; authentication; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and shall record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known as and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Grayson, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as are deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  The city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, merge, consolidate, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director or department head of each department and agency of the city who shall be its principal officer. Each director or department head shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the Mayor (or City Manager if one has been appointed), be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operation of his or her department or agency. 
(e)  All directors or department heads shall be appointed by the council. All appointive directors or department heads shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by a majority of the council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(f)  The mayor and council may, by ordinance, delegate its authority regarding the administrative affairs of the city unless such delegation is prohibited herein or by the general laws or constitution of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter, or by other law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating such member to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of the office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Members of boards, commissions, or authorities shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The council shall appoint a city attorney, together with assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, who shall not be a councilmember, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the council as directed, shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers or employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain the city council records required by this charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 3.14. - City treasurer. 
The mayor may designate the city clerk or some other person, who shall not be a councilmember, as city treasurer and may designate a certain bank as city depository. The city treasurer shall be responsible for the general duties of a fiscal officer and such other duties as may be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.15. - City manager. 
The council may appoint a city manager, who shall not be a councilmember. The compensation and term of office of the city manager shall be established by ordinance. If appointed, the administrator shall be vested with the authority and responsibility to oversee and supervise the regular business affairs of the city, and shall act as the office manager of the City Hall. Except as otherwise provided by general or local state law, the city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall exercise executive supervision over all city employees and all departments. The city manager shall further have such other duties as the mayor and council may prescribe, and which are not inconsistent with this charter, or any state law. The city manager need not be a resident of the City of Grayson. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Grayson. 
Sec. 4.11. - Selection of officer to preside over court. 
(a)  At the discretion of the city council, the mayor may preside over the municipal court. The city council is authorized to appoint a mayor pro tempore or a member of the city council to hold and preside of such municipal court in the absence or disqualification of the mayor. While presiding over the court, said mayor pro tempore or member of the city council shall have such power, authority, and jurisdiction as is given by the charter to the mayor. 
(b)  The city council, if it so chooses, may appoint a chief judge to preside over the court in lieu of the mayor and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as are deemed necessary. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(c)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge, under subsection (b) of this section, on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. Judges, if any, shall be appointed by the council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(d)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(e)  Judges shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
(f)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of their ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt. Such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or 15 days of imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment and labor on the public works of the city for six months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and the care-taking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  The presiding officer of the municipal court may be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each presiding officer of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
The Uniform Rules for Municipal Courts of the State of Georgia, as amended, shall be the rules of the Municipal Court of the City of Grayson. In accordance with those rules and with the approval of the city council, the presiding officer of the court shall have full power and authority to make reasonable internal operating rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Election of the mayor and city council. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal election annually on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 2011 and every two years thereafter, the successors to the position of mayor and such two councilmembers who hold Council Posts 2 and 4 (the seat currently held by Allison Wilkerson Rooks shall be Post 2; the seat currently held by Marcus Hinton shall be Post 4) shall be elected and shall serve terms of office of two years or until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the day of the first meeting in January following their election. 
(c)  On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 2012 and every two years thereafter, the successors to such two councilmembers who hold Council Posts 1 and 3 (the seat currently held by Marc Gordon shall be Post 1; the seat currently held by David Schroder shall be Post 3) shall be elected and shall serve terms of office of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the day of the first meeting in January following their election. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by majority. 
The person receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; interim appointments; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office; provided, however, that if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, said vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the remaining members of the council. The special election to fill the unexpired term shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
All property city subject to taxation for state or county purposes assessed as of January 1 in each year, shall be subject to the property tax levied by the city. The council by ordinance shall elect to use the county assessment for the year in which the city taxes are to be levied and shall request the county to furnish appropriate information for such purpose. 
Sec. 6.11. - Tax levy. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.12. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, the method of such payment, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.13. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have full power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied upon residents of the city, both individuals and corporations, and on all those who transact or offer to transact business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.19 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require any individual, corporation, business, or practitioner who transacts business in this city or who practices or offers to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and to pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.19 of this charter. The city council, by ordinance, may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. 6.15. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, garbage or waste collectors, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purpose of railroads, streets railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, garbage or waste collectors, and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 6.16. - Service charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, stormwater services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.19 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Special assessments. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power and authority to assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains or appurtenances against the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.19 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.18. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.19. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.18 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.20. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.21. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.22. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.23. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies, provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the city at the close of the calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the O.C.G.A. or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be amended. 
Sec. 6.24. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Such fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.25. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital improvement budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.26. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or she may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed with the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.27. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of October of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.25 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such unit, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.28. - Tax levies. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.29. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council, by ordinance, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus. 
Sec. 6.30. - Capital improvements budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with his or her recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening the lives, health, or property of the inhabitants, when passed by a two-thirds' vote of the membership of the council. 
Sec. 6.31. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
Sec. 6.32. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; and 
(2)  It is made or authorized by the city council or is made or authorized by the mayor (or City Manager if one has been appointed) under authority properly delegated by the city council. 
Sec. 6.33. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council, by ordinance, may prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.34. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon request by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
Sec. 6.35. - Capital reserve fund. 
(a)  The city council shall maintain a capital reserve fund to be set forth in the budget for each fiscal year. The initial amount of this capital reserve fund shall be not less than $400,000.00. Said fund shall be for the purpose of providing funds to be used in the case of dire emergency, for the purpose of generating long term interest income to provide financial stability for the city, and for the purpose of making long term capital investments. Interest income generated from said fund and payable in any particular fiscal year shall be deposited into the capital reserve fund. 
(b)  The mayor and council may provide for the withdrawal of funds from the capital reserve fund to be used in cases of dire emergency or to make capital investments upon the passage of an ordinance finding that said expenditure constitutes a dire emergency or is a long-term capital investment in the best interest of the city. Approval of any such ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of at least four members of the governing authority. Should the council decide to use a portion of the capital reserve fund, the council shall designate in the ordinance the minimum balance that shall be maintained in the capital reserve fund. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of the city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended, modified, or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.13. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.14. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provision of this charter for which a penalty is not specifically provided for herein is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 120 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
Sec. 7.15. - Severability. 
In the event any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect nor impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.16. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor of the State of Georgia or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 7.17. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this charter are hereby repealed. 
EXHIBIT A 
The boundaries of the City of Grayson, Georgia, are intended to include and are hereby declared to include all of the area included within the corporate boundaries upon the effective date of this charter which includes all areas described in the previous charter (Ga. L. 1901, p. 662), all properties added through amendments to that charter, and all properties added by all annexation ordinances adopted by the governing authority of the City of Grayson since the adoption of that charter, which properties are intended to include and are hereby declared to include all of the property within the boundaries of the city shown on the "Official Boundary Map of the City of Grayson, Georgia" dated December 20, 2010, and all property included in the tax parcels set forth below as those tax parcels exist on the tax rolls and the tax maps of Gwinnett County for the year 2010, and all of the public roadways and right of ways adjacent to those parcels, including railroad right of ways lying adjacent to those parcels or to public road ways adjacent to those parcels: 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 

 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Grayson, Georgia." 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to all ordinances adopted by the city council unless the context requires otherwise: 
Generally. Ordinary meanings shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case words shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. The definitions of terms found in generally accepted dictionaries are prima facie evidence of meaning. In making interpretations of ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intent of the board of commissioners, as gleaned from the minutes of meetings reflecting the approval of motions by the board of commissioners, recitals found in ordinances and statements of policy and intent adopted by the board of commissioners. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, such provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Captions, maps, etc. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Code and any caption, illustration, map, chart, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
Adequate. The term "adequate" means equal to what is required, suitable to the case or occasion, fully sufficient, proportionate, satisfactory. 
All. The term "all" means everyone, or the whole number of particulars. 
Also. The term "also" means "in like manner," "likewise," "in addition," "besides," "as well," "further," or "too." 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
At. The term "at" may mean "in," "near," "within," or "about." Its primary idea is nearness, and it is less definite than "in" or "on." 
City. The term "city" means the City of Grayson, Georgia. 
City council. The term "city council" means the governing authority of the City of Grayson, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Grayson, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  And indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  Or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singularly or in any combination. 
(3)  Either ... or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singularly but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Gwinnett County, Georgia. When appropriate, the term "county" means a designated department, officer or employee thereof. 
Delegation of authority. Unless restricted by state law, whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. A word importing the one gender includes all other genders. 
Includes and including. The terms "includes" and "including" shall not be construed to limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend the meaning of a term to all instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons, or officers, may be executed by a majority of them unless otherwise provided. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. An "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions, or other agencies of the city by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions, or other agencies of the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, partnership, and body politic and corporate as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, marital interests and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. A "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street or road. The term "street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct, and any other public highway in the city including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," as applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, and references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters, articles, and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Territorial applicability. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided otherwise, this Code only applies in the incorporated areas of the city. 
(b)  Where the city provides service to an incorporated area, the ordinances relating to such service apply in that incorporated area. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance does not review any ordinance previously repealed. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the repealed ordinance. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the terms "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except where a violation is to be punished as a misdemeanor or other specific enforcement provision is set forth in the Code, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by any combination thereof. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
State Law reference— Maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuance of existing legislation. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of legislation existing as of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Matters not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any existing right or franchise granted by the city to any person. 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, defining, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(5)  Any appropriation or ordinance authorizing appropriations. 
(6)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting a plat or subdivision or regulating plats or subdivisions. 
(8)  Any zoning or rezoning ordinance concerning development. 
(9)  Any ordinance establishing salaries or compensation of city officers or employees not in this Code. 
(10)  Any ordinance approving the budget. 
(11)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes that have been consummated. 
(12)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in nature. 
(13)  Any ordinance that is special, although permanent in nature. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or otherwise relating to taxes. 
(15)  Any act or ordinance amending any act enacted by the general assembly of the state. 
(16)  The city zoning ordinance of 2005. 
(17)  The development regulations of the city. 
Sec. 1-11. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
Article I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Reimbursement of officers. 
(a)  The mayor and council members of the city shall be reimbursed for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the mayor and members of the city council in carrying out their official duties. 
(b)  Expenses incurred due to participation in activities of the Gwinnett Municipal Association, the Georgia Municipal Association, the National League of Cities, the Gwinnett Chamber of Commerce, Gwinnett Clean and Beautiful, and other similar professional and civic organizations in which the elected official represents the city, or attends functions or serves as a representative on an organization as a result of the official's position as an elected official of the city, shall be considered expenses actually and necessarily incurred by the elected official in carrying out their official duties and shall be subject to reimbursement. 
(c)  All requests for reimbursement by the mayor or members of the city council shall be submitted to the city administrator in written form and shall be accompanied by receipts evidencing the actual expenditure. No reimbursements will be provided unless actual receipts are received by the city administrator. The city will make no reimbursement for expenditures for alcoholic beverages, or for an amount exceeding $200.00 per day for food and lodging. 
(d)  The city cannot expend public funds for any expenses incurred by spouses or family members of elected officials who may accompany the elected official to a meeting or conference involving official duties of the elected official. All expenses for any spouse or family member shall be the sole responsibility of the elected official and shall not be subject to reimbursement. 
(e)  Should the city administrator have a question as to whether the requested reimbursement is an actual expenditure subject to reimbursement under this section, the city administrator shall place the matter on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled council meeting and shall not make the reimbursement until the reimbursement has been approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1997(2)) 
Sec. 2-2. - Unified fee schedule. 
The fees to be charged by the city shall be set from time to time by the mayor and council through the adoption of an ordinance, and said ordinance shall be maintained by the city administrator and shall remain on file at city hall. 
Secs. 2-3—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ETHICS FOR CITY OFFICIALS 

Sec. 2-31. - Purpose. 
Declaration of policy. It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics ordinance for all city officials is adopted. 
This Code has the following purposes: (1) to encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; (2) to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; (3) to require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in manners which affect the city; and (4) to serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2010, art. I) 
Sec. 2-32. - Scope of persons covered. 
Scope of persons covered. The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all members of the city council, planning and zoning commission, board of zoning appeals, all advisory commissions and committee members. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2010, art. II) 
Sec. 2-33. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
City official or official , unless other expressly defined, means the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, assistant city administrator, city clerk, deputy city clerk, whether such person is salaried, hired or elected, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as it may be amended from time to time. City official, unless otherwise expressly defined, includes individuals appointed by the mayor and city council to all city commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this article by the city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son, or daughter of any city official. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a council member in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions is incidental to the extent that the council member would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity: (1) the interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or (2) funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; (3) the person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or (4) the person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2010, art. III) 
Sec. 2-34. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  No council member or member of any board or commission shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(b)  No council member or member of a board or commission, in any matter before the council, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(c)  No council member or member of a board or commission shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or any board or commission. 
(d)  No council member or commissioner shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No council member or member of any board or commission shall enter into any contract with the city except as specifically authorized by state statues. Any council member or member of a board or commission who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with Georgia law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a city official or employee, if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair in judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the board or commission on which he serves or to his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant to make available to the public at large. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2010, art. IV) 
Sec. 2-35. - Conflict of interest. 
Prohibition of conflict of interest. A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity, or property in which the official or employee has a substantial interest; in addition, a city official or employee who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city of the entity. Where the interest of a city official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official or employee may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2010, art. V) 
Sec. 2-36. - Exemptions. 
Exemptions. This Code shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2010, art. VI) 
Sec. 2-37. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2010, art. VII) 
Sec. 2-38. - Penalty. 
Any persons violating any provisions of this policy are subject to: 
(1)  Written and oral reprimand by the council, board, commission or committee of which said violator is a member. 
(2)  A fine greater than $100.00 but less than $500.00 to be imposed by the council, commission, board or committee of which the violator is a member. 
(3)  Request for resignation by the council, board, committee or commission of which the violator is a member. 
Each council, board, commission or committee shall have authority to establish rules and regulations to impose said penalties. 
(Ord. of 11-15-2010, art. VIII) 
Sec. 2-39—2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCE AND PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to state the city's position regarding purchasing responsibility and authority and to clarify purchasing functions and outline purchasing procedures. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2013, art. III) 
Sec. 2-52. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the city shall be September 1 to August 31 of each year. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting for each and every office, department, agency and activity of the city. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2013, art. III) 
Sec. 2-53. - Budget—Time of adoption annually; submission of proposed budget; balance required; available for public inspection. 
(a)  An annual budget will be adopted by the council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than 45 days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget is not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, the amount appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The proposed budget shall be prepared by the mayor and transmitted to members of the council for its review a minimum of 60 days before the required date of adoption. 
(b)  The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues (including appropriated unencumbered surplus) equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. 
(c)  At the time the proposed budget is transmitted to members of the council by the mayor, a copy of the proposed budget shall be made available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk during regular office hours. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2013, art. III) 
Sec. 2-54. - Ethical considerations. 
(a)  Each person involved in the procurement process must adhere to a high standard of ethics. Actions such as acceptance of gratuities and kickbacks are expressly prohibited. This article seeks to avoid even the appearance or perception of impropriety. All employees are expected to conduct themselves according to the highest level of standards. Unethical actions by employees or vendors will not be tolerated. 
(b)  As a guideline, the National Institute of Governmental Purchasing (NIGP) has developed Ethical Procurement standards which are included by reference and made a part hereof. The following principles are to be maintained: 
(1)  Consider the city's best interest in all transactions; 
(2)  Purchase without prejudice, seeking to obtain the maximum value for each dollar expenditure in accordance with required quality standards; 
(3)  Subscribe to and work for honesty and truth in purchasing and avoid all forms of conflict of interest; 
(4)  Avoid all unethical practices and appearance of same; and 
(5)  Strive consistently for knowledge of materials and supplies required for use by the city. 
(c)  Employee conflicts of interest . It shall be unethical for any city employee, official, contractor, or service provider to transact any business or participate directly or indirectly in a procurement contract when the employee, official, contractor, or service provider knows that: 
(1)  The employee or official or any member of the employee's or official's immediate family has a substantial interest or financial interest pertaining to the procurement contract, except that the purchase of goods and services from businesses which a councilmember or other city employee has a financial interest in is authorized per O.C.G.A. § 36-1-14, or the procurement contract is awarded pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 45-10-22 and 45-10-24, or the transaction is excepted from said restrictions by O.C.G.A. § 45-10-25. 
(2)  Any other person, business, or organization with whom the employee or official or any member of an employee's or official's immediate family is negotiating or has an arrangement concerning prospective employment is involved in the procurement contract. 
(3)  An employee or official or any member of an employee's or official's immediate family who holds a substantial interest or financial interest in a disclosed blind trust shall not be deemed to have a conflict of interest with regard to matters pertaining to that substantial interest or financial interest. 
(d)  Gratuities, rebates or kickbacks . 
(1)  Gratuities . It shall be unethical for any person to offer, give, or agree to give any city employee or official, or for any city employee or official to solicit, demand, accept, or agree to accept from another person, a gratuity of more than nominal value or rebate or an offer of employment in connection with any decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, or preparation of any part of a program requirement or a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity in any proceeding or application, request for ruling, determination, claim or controversy, or other particular matter, pertaining to any program requirement or a contract or subcontract, or to any solicitation or proposal therefor. 
(2)  Kickbacks and rebates .It shall be unethical for any payment, gratuity, or offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor, or any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order. 
(3)  Courtesies . Employees may accept for themselves and members of their families common courtesies usually associated with customary business practices so long as a strict standard is enforced with respect to gifts, services, discounts, entertainment, or consideration of any kind from suppliers of merchandise, services, supplies, etc., to city staff and officials. 
(4)  Cash . It is never permissible for a city official or employee to accept a gift in cash or cash equivalent (e.g., stocks or other forms of marketable securities) of any amount. 
(e)  Contingent fees prohibited . It shall be unethical for a person to be retained, or to retain a person, to solicit or secure a city contract upon any agreement or understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee, except for retention of bona fide employees or bona fide established commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business. 
(f)  Use of confidential information . It shall be unethical for any city employee or official knowingly to use confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain, or for the actual or anticipated personal gain of any other person. 
(g)  Unauthorized purchases . No purchases of materials, supplies, equipment and services shall be made in the name of the city, except such as are required for official use by the city. Purchases in the city's name for personal use by an individual or for other than official use are prohibited, and no city funds will be expended or advanced therefor. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2013, art. III) 
Sec. 2-55. - Penalty. 
(a)  Legal or disciplinary action by city council . The city council may take appropriate legal and/or disciplinary actions against any city official, vendor, contractor, organization, or person in violation of these ethical standards. 
(b)  Administrative penalties. 
(1)  For employees . The city council may impose any one or more of the following penalties or sanctions on a city employee for violations of the ethical standards in this article as appropriate to the situation: 
a.  Oral or written warnings or reprimands; 
b.  Suspensions with or without pay for specified periods of time; or 
c.  Termination of employment. 
(2)  For outside contractors/vendors . The city council may impose any one or more of the following penalties or sanctions on a vendor/contractor or other person or organization for violations of these ethical standards: 
a.  Written warnings or reprimands; 
b.  Termination of contracts; or 
c.  Disbarment or suspension from contract/vendor eligibility. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2013, art. III) 
Sec. 2-56. - When price quotations, bids and proposals are required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the following dollar amounts shall be applied in determining the process to be used in obtaining bids/price quotations: 
(1)  One thousand dollars and under - City administrator is authorized to approve purchase/expenditure based on three verbal quotations. 
(2)  Over $1,000.00 but less than $2,500.00 - City administrator is authorized to approve purchase/ expenditure after receipt of three written quotations. 
(3)  Over $2,500.00 but less than $10,000.00 - City administrator shall obtain three written quotations and present those quotations with her/his recommendation to the city council for approval prior to purchase/expenditure of funds. 
(4)  Over $10,000.00 - Sealed bids or proposals shall be required with final approval by the city council. All opportunities for bids or proposals must be advertised. 
(5)  The mayor and city administrator are responsible for ensuring that the budget contains sufficient approved funds in the proper line item for each purchase, and that no project or purchase is subdivided in order to avoid the quotation and bidding requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2013, art. III) 
Sec. 2-57. - Purchasing functions. 
(a)  Source selection . Except as provided in this section, all vendor selections shall be made by the city administrator. When making the vendor selection, the city administrator will choose the lowest, best, responsible, responsive vendor. It is recognized that exceptional requirements may dictate a variance from this rule; however, sufficient documentation as to the reason for the exception must be presented and maintained with said purchase/ expenditure. This must be done in advance of any firm negotiations or commitment with the vendor. 
(1)  In determining where to purchase products and services based on competitive prices and costs incurred in obtaining the purchase, the city shall purchase locally when all of these requirements are equal. 
(2)  The city shall not make purchases of products or services from city employees or councilmembers or from businesses owned by members of these two groups unless specifically authorized by law and approved by the city council. The city shall have the right to piggyback from other municipality's contracts if the vendor will extend the same prices, terms, and conditions to the city. 
(b)  Quotation/bidding . All quotations for materials or service must be requested through the city administrator. Price quotations will be obtained in accordance with the requirements of section 2-56. 
(1)  Verbal quotes . The vendor name and quote must be written on the requisition, which is used to generate the purchase order. 
(2)  Written quotes . The request for quotes can be made either verbally or in writing. The written quote shall be on letterhead, an invoice, or other similar documentation from the vendor. 
(3)  Sealed bids . 
a.  The city administrator will request sealed bids on items or projects requisitioned that meet the following criteria: 
1.  The items or projects are valued over $10,000.00. 
2.  Clear and adequate specifications are available. 
3.  Two or more responsible offerors are willing to participate in the process. 
b.  These requests are always made in writing. Sealed bids will be publicly advertised for a minimum of once a week for two consecutive weeks in the city's legal organ or as otherwise required by law. 
c.  O.C.G.A. §§ 36-91-70 and 36-91-90 require public works projects over $100,000.00 to have payment bonds and performance bonds for 100 percent of the contract amount. The city will also require that a five percent bid bond be submitted with the bid. These projects will be advertised in the legal organ of the city as required by Georgia law. 
d.  Sealed bidding process and award . 
1.  Receipt of bids . No bid shall be eligible for consideration by the city unless it is placed in a sealed envelope or package and actually received by the city administrator by the date and time specified in the bid request. The city administrator shall cause all bids to be stamped with the date and time of receipt and secured until the designated opening time. A bid delivered late shall under no circumstances be eligible for consideration by the city, and shall be returned unopened to the bidder. 
2.  Bid openings . Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses on the date and at the time and place designated in the bid letter. The name of each offerer, the purchase price contained in each bid, and such other information as the city administrator deems appropriate shall be announced as the bids are opened. A record of bid information shall be recorded and available for public inspection. 
3.  Modification of bids . Any clerical mistake which is patently obvious on the face of the bid may, subject to the limitations described in this section, be corrected upon written request and verification submitted by the offerer. A nonmaterial omission in a bid may be corrected if the city administrator determines the correction to be in the city's best interests. Omissions affecting or relating to the price or insurance shall be deemed material and shall not be corrected after the bid opening. 
4.  Withdrawal of bids . Bids may be withdrawn at any time prior to the bid opening. After bids have been publicly opened, the bidder shall give notice in writing of his or her claim of right to withdraw his or her bid within two business days after the conclusion of the bid opening procedure. If a bid is withdrawn under the authority of this provision, the lowest remaining responsive bid shall be deemed to be the low bid. 
5.  Bid evaluation . Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the specifications. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that is not specifically set forth in the solicitation. 
6.  Bid cancellation. A bid may be canceled prior to the opening date or any or all bids may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, where it is in the city's best interest in accordance with regulations promulgated by the city administrator or, as a result of improper conduct on the part of a city employee. The reasons for any cancellation shall be made part of the bid file. 
7.  Modification of specifications after bid opening . The city reserves the right to negotiate with the lowest, responsive and responsible bidder after the bids have been opened and before an award is made in an effort to make sure that the specifications and budget have been met. This will allow staff to add or delete parts for equipment or value engineer a project in the city's best interest. On construction projects, the negotiations will be conducted with the design firm and city staff before a recommendation is made for the award of the bid. 
8.  Negotiation with lowest, responsive and responsible bidder . Once a bid has been opened and accepted, the city reserves the right to negotiate with the lowest, responsive and responsible bidder in an effort to ensure that the bid meets the approved budget and specification. 
9.  Bid award . 
(i)  Responsive and responsible bidder . Subject to approval by the mayor and city council, bids shall be awarded to the lowest, responsive and responsible bidder. 
(ii)  Approval of bids . All bid awards for amounts of $10,000.00 or greater shall be approved or rejected by the city council. 
(iii)  Rejections of bids . The city reserves the right to reject any or all bids if it determines such rejection to be in the city's best interest. 
(iv)  Disqualification of bids . The following types of bids shall be disqualified for consideration for a bid award: 
A.  A bid that arrives after the set time for submittal. 
B.  A bid which is incomplete in any material aspect. 
C.  A bid submitted without required bonds or insurance. 
D.  A bid submitted by a company on the ineligible source list. 
(4)  Request for proposals . The city administrator will be responsible for sending requests for proposals (RFP) when use of the sealed bid process is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city. The following criteria will be used when determining when to use the RFP process: 
a.  When the quality, availability or capability is overriding in relation to the price in procurement of technical supplies or services. 
b.  When the initial installation needs to be evaluated together with subsequent maintenance and service capabilities and what priorities should be given these requirements in the city's best interest. 
c.  When the market place will respond better to a solicitation permitting not only a range of alternate proposals, but evaluation and discussion of them before making the award. 
d.  RFPs will generally be solicited on a project-by-project basis. Professional services may be solicited in multiyear increments deemed beneficial to the city based upon the investment of staff time and return on such investment through savings on existing prices for service. A scope of services will be determined by the city administrator and she will then determine which of the following processes to use: 
1.  The city administrator will request letters of interest and statements of qualifications from qualified firms. The responses will be reviewed and interviews will be conducted with the firms selected by the city administrator. The price proposals will be requested from the most qualified firms. 
2.  The city administrator will request letters of interest, statements of qualifications and price proposals from qualified firms. The city administrator will review the information submitted and make a selection from this information. This process should be used when the city is familiar with the firms. 
3.  The city administrator will request letters of interest and statements of qualifications from qualified firms and schedule a meeting with all the firms to discuss the project and answer questions. Then the firms who have attended the meeting will submit price proposals. The city administrator will review all the information and make a selection. 
4.  Request for proposal receipt, evaluation and award. 
(i)  Dissemination of proposals. Proposals shall be disseminated through a request for proposal. 
(ii)  Receipt of proposals . No proposal shall be eligible for consideration by the city unless it is placed in a sealed envelope or package and actually received by the city administrator by the date and time specified in the RFP. The city administrator shall cause all proposals to be stamped with the date and time of receipt and secured until the designated opening time. A proposal delivered late shall under no circumstances be eligible for consideration by the city and shall be returned unopened to the bidder. 
(iii)  Proposal opening . Proposals shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses on the date and at the time and place designated in the RFP. The name of each proposer shall be announced but no other information shall be disclosed nor shall the proposals be considered an open record until a contract is awarded. 
(iv)  Proposal cancellation . A RFP may be canceled prior to the opening date or any or all proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, where it is in the city's best interest or as a result of improper conduct on the part of a city employee. The reasons for any cancellation shall be made part of the proposal file. 
(v)  Evaluation of proposals . 
A.  Initial evaluation . Each proposal shall be evaluated to determine whether it is responsive to the scope of services and other terms and conditions contained in the RFP. In evaluating the proposals, the evaluating team may communicate with each proposer to clarify and amplify each proposer's proposal. No information concerning any other proposer's proposal shall be communicated in any way to the proposer. 
B.  Request of supplemental information . Additional information may be requested of proposers. 
(vi)  Award of proposal. 
A.  Responsive and responsible proposal . An award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined to be the most advantageous to the city based upon, but not limited exclusively to, price and the evaluation factors set forth in the RFP. 
B.  Approval of proposals . All proposals where cost is $10,000.00 or more shall be approved or rejected by the city council. 
C.  Rejection of proposals . The city reserves the right to be in the city's best interest. 
D.  Disqualification of proposals . The following types of proposals shall be disqualified for consideration for award: 
(AA)  A proposal that arrives after the set time for submittal. 
(BB)  A proposal submitted without required bonds or insurance. 
(CC)  A proposal submitted by a company on the ineligible source list. 
(5)  Emergency purchasing . It is understood that, from time to time, occasions arise which require immediate action to purchase items in order to prevent disruption of operations. The city administrator shall have the authority to purchase commodities and services where there exists an emergency constituting a threat to public health, safety or welfare or to the soundness and integrity of public property or to the delivery of essential services, and where the adverse effect of such emergency may worsen materially with the passage of time. 
a.  Adherence to these regulations and procedures concerning dollar amounts and bidding will be followed as closely as circumstances will allow. All emergencies will be documented and reports given to the mayor and council. 
(6)  Brand name purchases . The city administrator may elect to purchase brand name products or services when the goods comprise a major brand system, program or service previously selected by the city and, due to operational effectiveness, future enhancements or additions, or maintenance or storage of spare parts, precludes the mixing of brands, manufacturers, etc. 
(7)  Sole source purchases. A contract may be awarded or a purchase made without competition when the city determines that there is only one source for the required products, supply services, or construction items. The city administrator shall conduct negotiations as appropriate, as to the price, delivery, and terms to determine reasonableness of price. A separate file of sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public record and shall list each contractor's name, the amount and type of each contract, and a listing of the items procured under each purchase order or contract. 
(8)  Grants/donations . Periodically, the city may be given private/public grants and donations from sources such as the state and federal government and private corporations. These types of solicitations are more restrictive and will dictate the procurement process and methodology that the city is to follow. 
(9)  State contract . A contract may be awarded or a purchase made without competition when the city determines that the pricing available through the department of administrative services is below market rates. The city administrator shall conduct negotiations as appropriate, as to the price, delivery, and terms to determine reasonableness of the overall procurement. 
(c)  Responsible for prices . The final determination of the price and terms of any goods, materials or services shall rest with the city administrator. 
(d)  Records . It shall be the responsibility of the city administrator to document all contracts, purchases, agreements for services, and leases and to maintain said documents consistent with the records retention policy of the city. All agreements or contracts binding the city must be in writing. There will be no exceptions. 
(e)  Negotiations of agreements . All negotiations of agreements for supplies, materials, or services shall be conducted by the city administrator. It is recognized that special situations may exist where there is a special need for the USER to be involved in the negotiation process. This must be in conjunction with the purchasing office at all times. The purchasing office will make the final recommendation for agreements. 
(f)  Approvals . 
(1)  It is the responsibility of the city administrator to secure all necessary approvals, or legal authority, in writing, when necessary to protect the city and its legal liability prior to the execution of a contract or purchase agreement. 
(2)  The city administrator may make any authorized purchase for which payment will be made in a current, routine manner following the receipt of the goods or services. Procurement by leasing, long-term financing, advance payments or deposits or any other special nonroutine method must be approved in advance by the city administrator. 
(3)  The council must approve any nonbudgeted purchase or contract over $2,500.00. The city administrator is responsible for submitting the recommendation for this award. 
(4)  In the case of contracts (other than routine purchase orders), leases or service agreements (either new or renewals), the approval process is necessary. All such documents will be forwarded to the city administrator. The city administrator will acquire the necessary approvals prior to execution of any agreement, contract or lease through the city attorney's office. When said contracts, leases or service agreements are up for renewal or expiration, the city administrator will seek council approval to either maintain the contract or bid a new contract. The city administrator will be responsible for maintaining a file of all current contracts, leases or service agreements. 
a.  The city administrator will review the contract for form, completeness, each situation. The city administrator will be responsible for having the contract signed by the mayor after it is signed by the vendor. 
b.  The city administrator will forward three copies of the contract for signature to the vendor, with the vendor returning two copies. 
c.  The original of the contract will be filed in the open contract file. The other copy will be attached to the purchase order. 
d.  Once a contract is awarded by the city the contract may be amended without the necessity of rebidding such contract; provided that such amendment shall not result in a variance in price exceeding $2,500.00. 
(g)  Delivery, quality, and payment . It shall be the responsibility of the city administrator to ensure the quality, delivery, and payment of required goods and services. 
(h)  Return of goods and/ or cancellation of agreements . All returns of goods must be initiated by the city administrator. Additionally, all cancellations of, or modifications to any agreements must be made by the city administrator. 
(i)  Use of state/co-op contracts . The city administrator may, independent of the requirements of bid process of this article, procure supplies, services or construction items through the contract established through competitive means by the purchasing division of the state, national co-ops (i.e., U.S. communities), and collaborative purchasing agreements when deemed to be in the city's best interest. 
(j)  Change orders . 
(1)  The city administrator will review all change orders and adjust encumbrances as applicable. Change orders will be processed to correct: 
a.  The account distribution; 
b.  Quantity; 
c.  Addition/deletion of line items; 
d.  Change in description; and 
e.  Unit price. 
(2)  If a change in price is equal to or less than $2,500.00, the city administrator will approve. If a change order is received for over $2,500.00 city council approval is required. The department cannot use the change order process to circumvent these purchasing regulations. Additionally, an available appropriation must exist for all change order amounts prior to approval occurring. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2013, art. III) 
Sec. 2-58. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Exceptions to the requirements and procedures of section 2-56 and 2-57 are as follows: 
(1)  Utility bills. 
(2)  Insurance premiums and bond payments. 
(3)  Postage expenses. 
(4)  Court fees. 
(5)  Professional services approved by the city council. 
(6)  Contracts approved by the city council. 
(7)  Offices supplies. 
(8)  Gift shop items. 
(9)  Petty cash purchases up to $100.00. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2013, art. III) 
Secs. 2-59—2-75. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Sale in incorporated area of city; license a privilege. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the incorporated area of the city under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions hereafter provided. 
(b)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and state law. 
(c)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any further ordinances which may be enacted." 
(d)  Any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the state before any sales commence. Additionally, city licensees are required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2001) 
Sec. 6-2. - Permitted sales. 
(a)  The city permits the sale of beer and wine by the package, as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  The city permits the sale of beer and wine for consumption only on the premises, as set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  The city permits the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption only on the premises, as set forth in this chapter. 
(d)  The city permits the sale of beer for consumption only on the premises and wine in a wine center, as set forth in this chapter. 
(e)  The city permits the sale of distilled spirits by the package, as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2010; Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 19, 2010, repealed the former § 6-2, and enacted a new § 6-2 as set out herein. The former § 6-2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 11-4-1996 and Ord. of 12-18-2006. 
Sec. 6-3. - Jurisdiction. 
The city grants jurisdiction to the recorder's court of the county to hear cases concerning alleged violations of this chapter, citations for which have been issued within the city. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2001.75) 
Sec. 6-4. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this chapter, the definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 regarding alcoholic beverages are adopted by reference in this section as if set out fully herein. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine as defined in this subsection. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. Also included are beverages known as "nonalcoholic beer" which is made by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or other products, and containing less than three percent, but more than one-tenth percent alcohol by volume. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Eating establishment means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full service kitchen (a full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments), prepared to serve food every hour they are open and deriving at least as much gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food as it derives from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made of fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Governing authority means the City Council of the City of Grayson. 
Hotel means any building or other structure providing sleeping accommodations for hire to the general public either transient, permanent or residential. Such hotels shall maintain a minimum of 50 rooms available for hire and have one or more public dining rooms with adequate kitchen. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of any licensed establishment herein and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of a hotel hereunder. 
Indoor commercial recreational establishment is limited to establishments: 
(1)  Regularly serving prepared food, with a full service kitchen (a full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments), prepared to serve food every hour they are open and deriving at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreation activities; and 
(2)  Wherein the sale of food and alcoholic beverages is incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises. 
The primary activity on the premises of the indoor commercial recreational establishment shall be family oriented in nature, generally to mean a use which attracts a range of individuals from all age groups. Uses may specifically include, but not be limited to, dinner theaters, bowling centers, and other similar uses. Outdoor commercial recreation is not included, nor shall concession sales of alcoholic beverages be permitted. Bingo parlors, dancehalls, nightclubs, taverns, billiard parlors, video arcades, skating arenas, adult entertainment and/or sexually related entertainment activities, and similar uses are specifically excluded from this definition of indoor commercial recreational establishments. Provided that no indoor commercial recreational establishment shall offer alcoholic beverages for sale during the time it is sponsoring events which primarily attract persons under the lawful drinking age in the state. 
Indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center is limited to publicly owned establishments: 
(1)  Regularly serving food, with a full service kitchen (a full service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments), prepared to serve food every hour they are open deriving at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreational, promotional or entertainment or operational activities; and 
(2)  Wherein the sale of food and alcoholic beverages are incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises. Indoor publicly owned civic and cultural centers may include renovated courthouses used as civic and cultural centers. 
License means an authorization granted by the city to operate as a retail consumption dealer, retail package dealer or wholesale dealer. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of said partnership or corporation. 
Liter means metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term "manufacturer" also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. The term "retail package alcoholic beverages" shall include all alcoholic beverages in their original container, sold at retail to the final consumer, and not for resale. 
Person means any individual, firm partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasipublic. 
Pouring permit means an authorization granted by the city to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages in establishments licensed as a retail consumption dealer. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail package dealer means any person who sells unbroken packages, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this subsection. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), §§ 7-2002, 7-2003) 
Sec. 6-5. - Sale or possession for sale without license or beyond boundaries of premises covered by license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage where the person does not have a license granted by the city to sell or possess for sale these alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. Violations of this section shall result in a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 plus costs, six months imprisonment or both, to be determined in the discretion of the presiding judge. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2004; Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Sec. 6-6. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale. 
Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses must be issued. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2005) 
Sec. 6-7. - Application forms. 
(a)  All persons, firms or corporations desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the city administrator. 
(b)  The application shall include, but not be limited to, the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names and residence address of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers, the names and address of the registered agent for service of process, the name of the manager, and the names of all shareholders holding more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the city administrator or designee the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish data, fingerprints, financial responsibility and other records as required by the city administrator or designee and ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. Failure to furnish data, pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(d)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(e)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least two years from the final date of such denial. 
(f)  The city administrator shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provision of this section. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2006) 
Sec. 6-8. - Licensing qualifications. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person unless that person is a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, and majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to all the partners owning at least ten percent of the partnership or if no partner owns ten percent of the partnership then the general partner, managing partner or the partner with the greatest ownership will be licensed. 
(c)  No person, firm or corporation shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city or designee that such person, partners in the firm, officers and directors of the corporation have not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere, and has been released from parole or probation, to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy or any sexual related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that the applicant, nor any of the other owners of the establishment, has been convicted or has pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere and has been released from parole or probation to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexually related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. An applicant's first time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a county ordinance shall not, by itself, make an applicant ineligible for an alcohol license. Should any applicant, partner, or officer used in the sale or dispensing of any alcoholic beverage, after a license has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime, the license shall be immediately suspended in accordance with the procedures as set forth in this chapter. 
(d)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, within ten years prior to the filing of application for such license. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any city employee directly involved in the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses under this chapter, to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(g)  The city administrator may decline to issue a license when any person having any ownership interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as herein set forth for the licensee. 
(h)  All licensed establishments shall have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent who may be served with any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner. The registered agent shall be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city administrator and shall be in such form as he or she may prescribe. 
(i)  All applicants for any alcoholic beverage license must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks or other employees shall be of like character. Corporate or firm applicants shall be of good business reputation. 
(j)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(k)  The city administrator, in her discretion, may consider any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If in her judgment circumstances are such that granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(l)  For purposes of this section, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which defendant who was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.). Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2007; Ord. of 11-21-2005(1)) 
Sec. 6-9. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No person may sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of a church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, schools grounds, or college campus, with the exception of those institutions which educate children ages five and younger, in which case no person may sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages within 20 feet of such institution. 
(b)  No person may sell or offer to sell any malt beverage or wine in or within 100 yards of any school building, schools grounds, or college campus, with the exception of those institutions which educate children ages five and younger, in which case no person may sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages within 20 feet of such institution. 
(c)  No person may sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages in or within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned or operated by the State of Georgia or any county or municipal government. 
(d)  The term "school building" or "educational building" as used herein shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common school and colleges of this state. These terms include only those structures in which instruction is offered. 
(e)  The term "church building" as used herein shall mean the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes of worship. 
(f)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be measured in a straight line from the main entrance of the school or church building in question to the main entrance of the establishment for the sale of alcoholic beverages in question. 
(g)  As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements herein are met at the time of issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibited herein shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2008; Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-10. - Fee scale. 
Before any license shall be granted under this chapter, the applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the scale as fixed, from time to time, by the city council contained in section 2-2 and kept on file in the office of the city administrator. This license fee shall be in addition to any application or administrative fees otherwise required by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2009; Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Sec. 6-11. - Display at place of business. 
The city alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view, to the public, at the place of business of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2010) 
Sec. 6-12. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(b)  In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur. Provided that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization with the city administrator. 
(c)  In the event that a license is surrendered, or a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined by the city administrator to be the date of severance. Provided no such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made, said application indicating that no change of ownership has occurred, except as excepted herein. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(d)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit the transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporation at the time of issuance of the license nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing his stock holdings to a total of ten percent or more of any class of stock. 
(f)  Except as provided above, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall be cause for immediate revocation as provided for in this chapter. 
(g)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used as provided for in this section and a fine on the new ownership and the old ownership of not more than $1,000.00 and/or 60 days in jail. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the city for one year from the date of the violation. 
(h)  Should a licensee make application to the city administrator for a transfer of location and should such a transfer of a location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the previous license shall be applied to the new location. Each applicant for a transfer of location shall pay a transfer fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2011) 
Sec. 6-13. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said three month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2012) 
Sec. 6-14. - Expiration; renewal. 
(a)  All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file application, with the requisite fee heretofore provided, with the city administrator on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal applications received after November 30 shall pay in addition to said annual fee a late charge of 20 percent. If the license application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If the license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs will be assessed. 
(b)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full license fee must be paid for a license application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full license fee shall be paid for a license application filed after July 1 of the license year except for applications for temporary licenses under article IV of this chapter which shall not be halved. 
(c)  Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1 shall, in addition to said annual fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2013) 
Sec. 6-15. - Advertising; location requirements; signs. 
(a)  Sign limitations. Retail package licensees shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers, or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the price of an alcoholic beverage exposed or offered for sale. 
(b)  Single units. In establishments permitted to sell beer, wine, or distilled spirits for consumption on the premises, alcoholic beverages may not be priced on signs, menus or any place else allowed by this chapter except as to single units. Wine centers, as defined in article XI, are exempt from this provision. 
(c)  Unbroken packages. In establishments permitted to sell package beer, wine, or distilled spirits, alcoholic beverages may not be priced on signs, menus or any such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. All premises for which an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense any alcoholic beverages from or at a drive-in, drive-thru, drive-up, or service bay, window or other facility. Further, curb service is expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2010; Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 19, 2010, repealed the former § 6-15, and enacted a new § 6-15 as set out herein. The former § 6-15 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 11-4-1996 and Ord. of 12-18-2006. 
Sec. 6-16. - Audits. 
(a)  In the event the city administrator deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, he shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. The city administrator may designate the city's auditor or other designated person to perform any audit authorized in this chapter. The licensee shall cooperate with the audit or forfeit any licenses issued hereunder. 
(b)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements. 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees). 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets. 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports. 
(5)  Federal income tax return with all Form 1099's. 
(6)  Wholesale invoices for all food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  The city administrator can waive all or some of the requirements of the foregoing sentence if the city administrator finds that no such records exist and it is not financially practical based on the net income of the licensed establishment to require them to keep such records. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2015) 
Sec. 6-17. - Collections of sums due. 
In the event any person, firm or corporation shall fail to pay the sum due under this chapter, the city administrator or designee shall issue an execution against the person, firm or corporation so delinquent, and his or its property, for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2016) 
Sec. 6-18. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. 
(a)  No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person, firm or corporation other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. 
(b)  The city administrator or designee may request, from time to time, information concerning purchases and sales of alcoholic beverages from retailers and wholesalers. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2017) 
Sec. 6-19. - Retail consumption dealers to store inventory only on premises. 
No retail consumption dealer licensed hereunder shall keep any beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. No retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to enter into any type of arrangement whereby alcoholic beverages ordered by a licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2018) 
Sec. 6-20. - No adding to contents. 
No one shall add to or permit the adding to any alcoholic beverage or refill any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's container in any manner. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2019) 
Sec. 6-21. - Poured alcohol to be transported by employees. 
Poured alcoholic beverages will be transported from point of dispensing to the customer by permitted employees only. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2020) 
Sec. 6-22. - Licensees to maintain a copy of this chapter; employees to be familiar with terms; licensee responsible for violations. 
Each licensed alcoholic beverage dealer hereunder shall keep a current copy of this chapter in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof; and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2021) 
Sec. 6-23. - Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his/her employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets or convenient stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed hereunder without written consent from parents or guardian. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2022) 
Sec. 6-24. - Failure to require and properly check identification. 
It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not sold, served or have in his possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. The term "identification" shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2023) 
Sec. 6-25. - Sales to underage person prohibited. 
(a)  No holder or employee of the holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  a.  Sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wines, malt beverages, or any other alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years. 
b.  The prohibition in subsection (a)(1)a of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages to a person when such person has furnished proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverages are being sold is 21 years of age or older. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a government agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph or both, and giving such person's date of birth, including but not limited to a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under an act to require the department of public safety to issue identification cards to persons who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(2)  Sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or who is of unsound mind, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to said licensee or his employees. 
(3)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(4)  No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall allow any minors to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises of the establishment or lounge unless such minors are accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or custodian, provided however, that such minors shall be permitted in eating establishments, indoor commercial recreational establishments or private clubs as defined in this chapter without being accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian and provided further that this section shall not apply to minors who are employees under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  The penalty for violation of this section by an individual shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, a minimum fine of $500.00. 
(2)  For the second offense and subsequent violations within one year, a minimum fine of $750.00. 
(c)  Any licensed establishment where three or more violations of this section, or O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 have occurred within any 36-month period shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the third offense within any 36-month period, suspension of licenses for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
(2)  For the fourth and any subsequent violation within any 36-month period, suspension of licenses for a period not to exceed one year. 
(d)  As to the penalties in subsection (c) of this section, if there is a change in a majority of the licensed establishment's owners, partners or shareholders, the violations under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners; however, a different corporation, partnership or other association will be charged with the violations of its predecessors if a majority of the owners, partners or shareholders are the same. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2024) 
Sec. 6-26. - Purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages by underage persons. 
(a)  No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  No person under the age of 21 years shall attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage or misrepresent his/her age in any manner whatsoever for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2025) 
Sec. 6-27. - Regulations for employees and managers. 
Regulations apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages, including beer, wine, or distilled spirits on the premises: 
(1)  No persons shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or mix alcoholic beverages, or be employed in any managerial position by an establishment holding a license under this chapter until such person has been fingerprinted and a background check on said person has been performed by the county police department and the county police department has provided the city clerk with a letter indicating that the person is eligible to hold a pouring permit. 
(2)  This section shall not construed to include employees whose duties are limited to solely of busboy, cook, or dishwasher and are never allowed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, mix alcoholic beverages or in any way be associated with the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  A pouring permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the county police department and the appropriate fee which has been established by the county police department has been paid. A search of the criminal record of the person completing the application shall be conducted by the county police department. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the person though the fact of an arrest shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall not give rise to any presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential, and shall not be produced for public inspection unless required by state law or court order. 
(4)  The county police department or its designee shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person submitting the application for a pouring license. In the event that the person is eligible for a pouring license under this chapter, the county police department shall issue a letter to the city administrator that the permit has been issued to the person, and stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for the pouring permit, the county police department shall notify the city administrator that the person is not eligible, and the reasons why the person is not eligible, and the city administrator shall notify the person in writing that they are not eligible for the permit, the cause for the denial of the permit, and the person's right to appeal the denial. 
(5)  No person shall be granted a pouring permit unless it appears to the satisfaction of the county police department and the city administrator that such person has not been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, illegal possession or sale of controlled substances, illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any other sexually related crime within a period of five years of the date of the application. No person shall be granted a pouring permit who has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any federal, state or local law which constitutes a felony within five years of the date the application. For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the defendant was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act as amended, however, any such offense shall not be ignored if the defendant violated any terms of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(6)  A pouring permit shall be issued for a period of one year from the date of the original application. The pouring permit must be in the possession of the employee while the employee is working at the licensed establishment, and must be available for inspection by members of the county police department or the city administrator or their designee. 
(7)  No person shall be issued a pouring permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed, or covered up any material facts by any device, trick, or scheme while making application for the pouring permit. If a permit is denied or revoked under the provisions of this section, no application from the same person shall be accepted for a period of at least six months. 
(8)  All pouring permits issued through administrative error are considered void and may be terminated and seized by the city administrator, the county police department or their designee. 
(9)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon demand by any county police officer or the city administrator or their designee. New employees shall receive a receipt issued by the city administrator or county police department which may be used for a maximum of 30 days from the date of its issue. Replacement permits will be issued within 30 days of the original date of issuance upon payment of one-half of the normal fee for a pouring permit. After 30 days from the original issuance date, a new application and fee must be submitted in order to obtain a replacement permit. 
(10)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license under the terms of this chapter to file with the city administrator the names of all employees working on the premises and connected with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages along with the employee's date of birth, home address, home phone number and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees must be filed with the city administrator upon the hiring of a new employee. Copies of these filings shall be provided to the county police department for use in random inspections. 
(11)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license under this chapter to inspect and verified that each employee has obtained a valid pouring permit and that the permit is in their possession at all times while working at the licensed establishment. Allowing an employee to work in the licensed establishment without possession of a valid pouring permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and both the employee and the licensee shall be subject to penalty for such violation. 
(12)  Any person or licensee convicted of a violation of the section shall received a minimum fine of $500.00. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2027; Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Sec. 6-28. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the city administrator. 
(b)  The requirement for approval is that the patio/open area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. 
(c)  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of 3.5 feet above ground level. It does not have to be solid nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. It must be permitted and approved by the city's building inspection department and the county's fire department as required by their governing regulations or codes. 
(d)  The only exit from this type of area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through an approved fire exit (not for general public use unless an emergency exists). The fire exit should be of the type that sounds an alarm so that the establishment will be alerted in the event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists. 
(e)  In the event that a licensee desires a patio/open sales area inside an existing structure, plans will be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by the city administrator or designee. Interior type patio/open sales areas must also meet the requirements of the city's development and fire codes. 
(f)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas of such hotel or motel provided such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel. The term "patio areas," as that term is used herein, do not have to conform to the standards in this section. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2028) 
Sec. 6-29. - No outside consumption. 
(a)  It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises with open alcoholic beverages and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open beverages are sold and carried out. However, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the carrying out of wine or malt beverages for consumption at a publicly owned or privately owned golf course. 
(b)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2029) 
Sec. 6-30. - Specifications of premises. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license for the sale of any alcoholic beverage shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application, except as modified in paragraph (b). The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, and regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the building inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building, or a contractual right to purchase the land/building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. All premises for which an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverage license for the retail sale of package distilled spirits shall be issued to any person unless the completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, and regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to issuance of final inspection and approval when completed by the building inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership or a contractual right to purchase the land and/or the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. With respect to the retail sale of package distilled spirits, the applicant shall attach to the license application a copy of the site plan, survey stamped by a registered surveyor with all distances appropriately marked and a rendering of the proposed building. Interior plans, floor plans and detailed plans of the building are not required or requested at the time of application. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. All premises for which an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense any alcoholic beverages from or at a drive-in, drive-thru, drive-up, or service bay, window or other facility. Further, curb service is expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2030; Ord. of 12-19-2011) 
Sec. 6-31. - Solicitation prohibited. 
No retail consumption dealers licensed hereunder shall require, permit, suffer, encourage or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for herself/himself, or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink; whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his/her establishment or to his/her agent or manager to solicit for herself/himself or for others, the purchase by the patron of any drink; whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage or money with which to purchase the same. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2031) 
Sec. 6-32. - Noise from establishments prohibited. 
Noise will not be allowed that can be heard outside the physical boundaries of establishments licensed under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2032) 
Sec. 6-33. - Types of entertainment, attire and conduct prohibited. 
(a)  Chapter 10, article II of this Code, adult entertainment establishments, is incorporated herein as if set forth verbatim. 
(b)  No licensee under this chapter shall allow on the premises any gambling, lottery, video poker machines, pusher machines, and other similar machines or games that simulate casino, blackjack, poker, slot and other games of skill or chance. This provision shall not be interpreted to prevent any games officially sanctioned by the Georgia Lottery Corporation. Further, this provision shall not be interpreted to prevent any vending machines, juke boxes, or video arcade games (ex. Ms. Pacman, Galaga, Donkey Kong). 
(c)  No licensee under this chapter shall allow on the premises any billiard table or pool table unless said licensee meets the limitations and requirements related to the percentage of total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or services other than from the sale of alcoholic beverages as established by the Georgia General Assembly in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2, as said code section exists now or hereafter may be amended. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2033; Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-34. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the city administrator or designee. 
Sworn officers of the city administrator or designee shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other county or city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of city ordinances. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2034) 
Sec. 6-35. - Establishment can be closed in cases of emergency. 
The city administrator or designee may immediately close an establishment licensed under this chapter in case of emergency, for the safety of the public or to investigate a crime, for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2035) 
Sec. 6-36. - Sale on election days. 
Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to this governing authority by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b)(2)(B), the sale by wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2036) 
Sec. 6-37. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  A license may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures outlined in this chapter by the city administrator where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license and for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The city administrator or designee shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease. 
(c)  Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of sections 6-31, 6-33 and/or 6-36 shall be subject to immediate license revocation in accordance with the procedures outlined in this chapter. 
(d)  The city administrator shall revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period in accordance with the procedures outlined in this chapter. 
(e)  The city administrator shall revoke the license for any premises as outlined in this chapter where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(f)  The city administrator may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter any time such knowledge becomes known in accordance with the procedures outlined in this chapter. 
(g)  An act or omission of a licensee, owner of more than ten percent interest in the licensed establishment, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this chapter will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of its license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when the city administrator determines that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues. Provided, however, in the case of an employee, the city administrator or designee must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee, were condoned by the licensee, or where the licensee has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(h)  Whenever it can be shown that a licensee hereunder no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned or whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever lawfully owning to the city, such license may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures in this chapter. 
(i)  Wherever this chapter permits the city administrator to suspend any license issued hereunder but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised within the guidelines of this subsection. 
(1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such license. 
(2)  The following factors shall be considered on any revocation or suspension as set out above: 
a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this chapter and those set by the city administrator. 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing. 
c.  Impact of the offense on the community. 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by the licensee. 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the licensee to take remedial or corrective steps. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2037) 
Sec. 6-38. - Hearings. 
(a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. This provision does apply to pouring permits for employees. 
(b)  The city administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of the order to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city administrator may have a review thereof by appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city administrator within 15 days after the final order or action of the city administrator, and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $250.00. The city administrator, at her discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if its determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing said appeal. The city council may, at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee by a majority vote. 
(c)  Should the city council be unable to reach a decision by majority vote, the action taken by the city administrator shall be upheld automatically. Any three members constitute a quorum. 
(d)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the city administrator unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city administrator. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. Before hearing an appeal, each member of the city council shall sign an affidavit to be part of the record that the member is not related to or personal friends with any owner of the licensed establishment in question in the appeal being considered and that such member has no financial interest in the outcome of the appeal. Should any member be unable to sign such an affidavit, that member shall not serve on that appeal and the case shall be heard by the remaining members of the city council. 
(e)  The findings of the city council shall be forwarded to the city administrator within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city administrator to notify the appellant of the action of the city council. 
(f)  The findings of the city council shall not be set aside unless found to be contrary to law or ordinances, unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole, or unreasonable. 
(g)  The findings of the city council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2038) 
Sec. 6-39. - Notice. 
For the purpose of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served by certified mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2039) 
Sec. 6-40. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 plus costs, imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both at the discretion of the presiding judge, unless a different penalty is set out herein. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2040; Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Sec. 6-41. - Withdrawal of application. 
Any license application made pursuant to this chapter may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the application is withdrawn before the license is issued, any sums deposited as license fees shall not be refunded. After issuance of the license, no refunds will be made. No refunds shall be made under any circumstances for investigative and administrative expenses required herein. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2041) 
Secs. 6-42—6-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BEER AND WINE CONSUMPTION LICENSING AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-71. - Type of retail establishments. 
(a)  No beer or wine shall be sold for consumption on the premises where sold except: 
(1)  In eating establishments having a full service kitchen (a full service kitchen will consist of a three compartment sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments). Additionally, any such eating establishment must be prepared to serve food every hour it is open and must derive a minimum of 60 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food; 
(2)  In indoor commercial recreation establishments; 
(3)  In an indoor publicly owned civil and cultural center capable of serving prepared food, with a full service kitchen (a full service kitchen will consist of a three compartment sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments), prepared to serve food every hour they are open and deriving at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food and recreation activities; or 
(4)  At a publicly owned a golf course. 
(b)  These eating establishments must be located in zoning districts which permit restaurants as conforming uses or where these eating establishments are incidental to a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2050; Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Sec. 6-72. - License fee and amount to defray investigative and administrative costs to accompany application. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of $500.00 to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded; but the $500.00 cost paid for investigation shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. Any applicant for a license under this article who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this article shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2051) 
Sec. 6-73. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Beer and/or wine shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday. 
(1)  As provided in section 516 of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance of 2005, no business shall be open between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5 a.m. In order to serve beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 1:55 a.m. Tuesday through Sunday, the licensee shall meet the requirements of section 516 of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance of 2005 and shall obtain a special use permit in accordance with section 1807 of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance of 2005. 
(b)  No beer and/or wine shall be sold for consumption at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the governing authority. 
(c)  The sale of beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives a minimum of 60 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food and in any licensed establishment which derives at least as much of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(d)  Beer and/or wine may be sold for consumption on the premises from 12:00 midnight to 1:55 a.m. on any Monday which is New Year's Day, January 1, of any year if granted a special use permit as required by subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. of 11-06-2018, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 6, 2018, repealed the former § 6-73, and enacted a new § 6-73 as set out herein. The former § 6-73 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of Ord. of 1-15-2007. 
Sec. 6-74. - Applicability of other articles of this chapter. 
All sections included in articles I, V, and IX of this chapter shall apply to the licenses and authorizations granted by this article. Any inconsistencies between the sections included in this article and articles I, V, and IX of this chapter shall be resolved by the language of this article taking precedence over the language of articles I, V, and IX. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Secs. 6-75—6-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE CLUB LICENSING AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for him by club members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include a commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this article; 
(2)  Has at least 30 regular dues paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with: 
a.  Suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  A sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Sports club means an association or corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state, organized and operated primarily to provide a location for the patrons thereof to engage in sporting events. To qualify for an alcoholic beverage consumption dealer's license, a sports club must have been actively in operation within the city at least two years prior to an application for a license hereunder. Provided, however the two-year operational requirement shall not apply to golf club associations or golf club corporations where the selling or the serving of alcoholic beverages is to take place on the golf course premises. A sports club organized or operated primarily for the serving of alcoholic beverages shall not qualify for licensing under this article, and accordingly shall not be permitted to serve alcoholic beverages at any time. Unless otherwise indicated, a sports club licensee shall comply with all other requirements imposed upon retail consumption dealers. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2053) 
Sec. 6-102. - Regulation of sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2054) 
Sec. 6-103. - Certain organizations exempt from food establishment. 
Veterans organizations, fraternal organizations and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the Georgia Income Tax Law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food. However, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2055) 
Sec. 6-104. - Investigative and administrative costs. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of $500.00 for beer and/or wine to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded; but the $500.00 cost paid for investigation and administrative cost shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this chapter. Any applicant for a license under this article who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this article shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2056) 
Sec. 6-105. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday. 
(1)  As provided in section 516 of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance of 2005, no business shall be open between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5 a.m. In order to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 1:55 a.m. Tuesday through Sunday, the licensee shall meet the requirements of section 516 of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance of 2005 and shall obtain a special use permit in accordance with section 1807 of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance of 2005. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the governing authority. 
(c)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives a minimum of 60 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food and in any licensed establishment which derives at least as much of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises from 12:00 midnight to 1:55 a.m. on any Monday which is New Year's Day, January 1, of any year if granted a special use permit as required by subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. of 11-06-2018, § 2) 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 6, 2018, repealed the former § 6-105, and enacted a new § 6-105 as set out herein. The former § 6-105 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 1-15-2007. 
Sec. 6-106. - Applicability of other articles of this chapter. 
All sections included in articles I, V, and IX of this chapter shall apply to the licenses and authorizations granted by this article. Any inconsistencies between the sections included in this article and articles I, V, and IX of this chapter shall be resolved by the language of this article taking precedence over the language of articles I, V, and IX. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Secs. 6-107—6-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TEMPORARY AND SPECIAL EVENT LICENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 19, 2010, repealed the former article IV, § 6-131, and enacted a new article IV as set out herein. The former article pertained to nonprofit organizations temporary permit and derived from Ord. of 11-4-1996(3). 

Sec. 6-131. - Eligible for issuance of temporary license. 
Any nonprofit organization may be issued a temporary permit for a period not to exceed ten days in any one year. The nonprofit organization must make application and pay the fee that may be required by ordinance. Such organizations shall be required to comply with all the general ordinances and the licensing and regulations for consumption on the premises establishment with the exception of the full service kitchen requirement. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 6-132. - Special event licenses. 
(a)  Nonprofit civic groups may be granted a special event license (hereinafter "special event license") permitting the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. The nonprofit civic group applicant for and/or holder of a special event license shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 6-8(h) (registered agent), 6-19 (inventory on premises), 6-27 (regulations for employees and managers), 6-28 (Open area and patio sales), 6-30 (specifications of premises) and shall not be required to have or have access to a full service kitchen. As used in this section, nonprofit civic groups shall mean entities that have obtained 501(c)(3) statues from the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") and are listed in IRS Publication 78 or are a governmental entity, board, or agency (ex. a municipality, downtown development authority, etc.). 
(b)  A special event license shall be limited to no more than a two-day license; shall be limited to one special event license per nonprofit civic group per year; shall only permit the sale of malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises; and shall permit sales only at locations in Grayson Community Park approved at the discretion of the city administrator and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  A special event license shall be granted to nonprofit civic groups in conjunction with a person or business possessing a current alcoholic beverage license permitting consumption of malt beverages and wine on the premises ("for-profit licensee") from the City of Grayson or another local jurisdiction in the State of Georgia. If the for-profit licensee has an alcoholic beverage license permitting consumption of malt beverages and wine on the premises from another jurisdiction, said for-profit licensee shall submit an application fee of $50.00. The for-profit licensee or the licensee's employees shall supervise all aspects of the special event pertaining to the handling and storage of alcoholic beverages and the distribution of alcoholic beverages to consumers. Both the nonprofit licensee and the for-profit licensee shall be responsible for compliance with all aspects of this article and state law and shall be liable for infractions thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 6-133. - Outside temporary events. 
(a)  A special event licensee or a city sanctioned/sponsored event shall be eligible to sell malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises in approved temporary outdoor areas if an application is submitted to and approved by the city administrator and the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The only entrance and exit to the event must be through a controlled entry point which allows for easy monitoring of patrons entering and leaving the event. 
(2)  The outside event must be enclosed by a temporary fence or an enclosed tent. The fence shall be a minimum of three and one-half feet in height. 
(3)  The temporary fence or tent must have two emergency exits with an alarm that sounds so that the licensee will be alerted of unauthorized use of an emergency exist when no emergency exists. A uniformed off duty police officer or security guard may be stationed at each emergency exit instead of a gate and alarm. 
(4)  The temporary fence or tent must be installed and inspected at least one day prior to the event. Should the event fall on a Sunday, the installation of the fence must be completed no later than noon (12:00 p.m.) on the Friday prior to the event. Alcohol sales will not be approved for the event without inspection and approval of the temporary fence or tent by the city. 
(5)  A site plan must be submitted to the city administrator's office for approval. If the site plan provides for an area to accommodate more than 25 persons, a crowd control and security plan must be submitted to the city for approval. The department of planning and development must approve any temporary structures, such as tents, within the fenced area. 
(6)  A signed and notarized letter from the property owner must be submitted to the city administrator's office authorizing the use of the property for the event. 
(7)  All points/locations of sale of beer or wine must be licensed and the required fees, if any, paid. The outside event shall not exceed two days. 
(8)  A nonrefundable fee of $50.00 per event must be paid at the time of filing of the application. 
(9)  Completed application must be submitted to the city administrator's office 15 days prior to the scheduled event. 
(10)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to waive or repeal any other requirements ordained under this article. 
(b)  Any event sanctioned by the city through official action of the governing authority and held in the Grayson Community Park shall only be subject to the requirements set forth in subsection (a) above, and all statutes, laws, rules, regulations and licensing requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 6-134. - Applicability of other articles of this chapter. 
All sections included in articles I, V, and IX of this chapter shall apply to the licenses and authorizations granted by this article. Any inconsistencies between the sections included in this article and articles I, V, and IX of this chapter shall be resolved by the language of this article taking precedence over the language of articles I, V, and IX. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Secs. 6-135—6-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BROWNBAGGING 

Sec. 6-161. - Bring your own bottle "brown bagging" prohibited. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring in his own alcoholic beverage (brown bag) in any establishment either licensed or unlicensed to serve alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2059) 
Secs. 6-162—6-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PACKAGE BEER AND WINE LICENSING AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-191. - Type of retail establishment. 
No beer and/or wine shall be sold at retail except in establishments located in zoning districts in which these establishments are permitted as a conforming use or in districts where an existing establishment exists as a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2060) 
Sec. 6-192. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of beer and/or wine except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. The hours within which business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale thereof 
(b)  Retail package beer and/or wine shall not be sold at any time in violation of state law, local ordinance or regulation, or special order of the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2061; Ord. of 8-15-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 6-193. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices. 
Retailers shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed the prices of all beer and wine exposed or offered for sale. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2062) 
Sec. 6-194. - Quantity sales. 
Single cans or bottles or other containers of alcoholic beverages may be sold. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2063) 
Sec. 6-195. - License fee and amount to defray investigative costs to accompany application. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of $500.00 to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded; but the $500.00 cost paid for investigation and administrative cost shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. As to any applicant for a license under this article who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this article, there shall be no investigative and administrative fee. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2064) 
Sec. 6-196. - Applicability of other articles of this chapter. 
All sections included in articles I, V, and VIII of this chapter shall apply to the licenses and authorizations granted by this article. Any inconsistencies between the sections included in this article and articles I, V, and VIII of this chapter shall be resolved by the language of this article taking precedence over the language of articles I, V, and VIII. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-197. - Wine/beer tasting license. 
(a)  A wine/beer tasting license for the purposes of this section shall be limited to entities possessing a duly issued and valid retail wine license, retail beer license or both. Those entities shall be eligible to apply for a wine/beer tasting license to provide samples of wine and/or beer offered for sale at retail in the establishment to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. A license may only be granted for the specific type or types of samples (wine only, beer only, wine and beer) for which the applicant holds a valid retail license from the city. 
(b)  Wine and/or beer sampling shall be on limited occasions, shall not be part of the core operations of the establishment, and shall be offered in conjunction with education classes and sampling designed to promote wine or beer appreciation and education. 
(c)  Samples shall not exceed two ounces and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. 
(d)  The educational classes shall not exceed two consecutive hours. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes. 
(e)  Wine and beer bottles shall be opened by the licensee or an employee only, and samples shall be poured only by the licensee or an employee. 
(f)  No open containers of wine or beer shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(g)  Such sampling and tasting is permitted within the enclosed portion of the premises only. 
(h)  The annual fee for a wine/beer tasting license shall be $200.00. Said tasting license need only be applied for once and shall automatically renew when said retail wine license or retail beer license is renewed, provided, however, that the city may revoke or suspend such tasting license and/or impose such conditions on its operation at the city's discretion for violations of this Code or in furtherance of the health, safety, and welfare of the city's inhabitants. 
(i)  Wine and beer tastings on Sundays are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 4-20-2015(1)) 
Secs. 6-198—6-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DISTILLED SPIRITS, BEER AND/OR WINE WHOLESALER LICENSING AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-221. - Special provisions applicable to wholesale purchases. 
(a)  Any person desiring to sell at wholesale any alcoholic beverages in the incorporated areas of the city shall make application to the city administrator for a license to do so, which application shall be in writing on the prescribed forms, and pay any license as set by the city council. 
(b)  No person who has any direct financial interest in any license for the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages in the city shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale alcoholic beverage license issued by the city. 
(c)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesaler/distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2065) 
Sec. 6-222. - Excise tax and bond required on wholesalers. 
(a)  In addition to all other taxes or license fees heretofore or hereafter imposed upon retailers, dealers, or wholesalers engaged in the city and the business of selling alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine, there is imposed and levied upon all here and after described retailers, dealers, or wholesalers within the city an excise tax to be computed and collected as hereinafter set forth. The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to the following: 
(1)  Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only; 
(2)  Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state under the Constitution of the United States; 
(3)  Wine sold to persons outside this state for resale or consumption outside of the state; 
(4)  Wines which contain less than one-half of one percent by volume. 
(b)  There is levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter or $0.0065 per ounce which shall be paid to the governing authority on all distilled spirits or wine sold by wholesalers to retailers in the city. Such tax shall be paid to the city administrator by the wholesale distributor on all distilled spirits or wine sold to the licensees for the sale of distilled spirits or wine in the city as follows: Each wholesaler selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits or wine to any licensees hereunder shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each licensee on or before the tenth day of the month following. Excise taxes received by the city administrator after the twentieth day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. The $0.22 per liter or $0.0065 per ounce shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits or wine shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter or $0.0065 per ounce. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any wholesaler to sell, ship, or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits or wine to any retail dealer or licensee without collecting said tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any retail dealer or licensee to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any distilled spirits or wine on which such tax has not been paid. Wholesalers collecting the tax authorized herein shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be at the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, and any amendment thereto. 
(c)  There is levied an excise tax on all beer and malt beverages sold by wholesalers to retailers in the city at the rate of $0.05 per 12-ounce container and $6.00 for each container of tap or draft beer or malt beverage of 15½ gallons and in similar proportion for bottles, cans, and containers of various sizes as follows: 

 
The $0.05 per 12-ounce container and $6.00 per container of tap or draft beer or malt beverage of 15½ gallons shall be prorated so that all containers of beer or malt beverages shall be taxed on the basis of $0.05 per 12-ounce container and $6.00 per container of tap or draft beer or malt beverage of 15½ gallons. All provisions as to excise tax in this section shall apply to this tax on beer and malt beverages except the tax rate which is set at in this subsection and the reimbursement of three percent of taxes collected which shall not apply to beer and malt beverage wholesalers. 
(d)  Each wholesale dealer prior to commencement of any business operation within the city shall post a performance bond with the city administrator equal to one and one-half times the estimated highest monthly payment to be made in a calendar year of the excise tax based on sales collected by the wholesale dealer from the retailers to secure the payment for the tax imposed herein. These bonds shall be secured by cash which shall bear no interest or a surety bond executed by a surety company licensed to do business in this state and approved by the city administrator. 
(e)  A wholesaler may be excused from posting the performance bond as provided herein after demonstrating full and satisfactory compliance with the provisions herein for a period of 12 months subsequent to the commencement of business operations within the city. Continued exemption from the requirement of posting the performance bond shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the terms of this article and the payments of all sums as required by the provisions herein. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2066; Ord. of 12-18-2006; Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 6-223. - Hours and days of sale. 
Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. There shall be no sales of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2067) 
Sec. 6-224. - Audit and penalties. 
(a)  In the event the city administrator deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, the city administrator shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(b)  Any licensee who violates any provisions of this article may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 for each offense and/or 60 days in the common jail of the county and the license may be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2068) 
Secs. 6-225—6-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HOTEL-MOTEL IN-ROOM SERVICE 

Sec. 6-251. - In-room service license. 
(a)  The term "in-room service" is the provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel-motel guestroom which contains beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits. In-room service shall only be provided upon written request of the guest and shall be accessible by lock and key only to the guest. 
(b)  Any hotel-motel that acquires this in-room service shall also be required to obtain a consumption on the premises license and meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  No hotel-motel shall be authorized to provide in-room service until it has been issued a special license to do so. A license fee of $500.00 shall be imposed to provide only beer and/or wine by in-room service. A license fee of $1,500.00 shall be imposed to provide beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits by in-room service. 
(d)  The sale of beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits by in-room service shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations relative to the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages, except as provided otherwise in this article. 
(e)  Keys for in-room service shall only be sold to guests between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2069; Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Secs. 6-252—6-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - HAPPY HOUR 

Sec. 6-281. - Promotion and sales. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons; 
(2)  Deliver more than one alcoholic beverage to one person at a time; 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(6)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, in any container which holds more than 32 fluid ounces (0.947 liters), except to two or more persons at any one time; 
(7)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week; 
(8)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the price charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day-to-day or from hour-to-hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner in view of the paying public and said schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, or to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person. 
(e)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour" or similarly designated promotions. 
(f)  The city administrator or designee shall have responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(g)  No licensee may require the purchase of any alcoholic beverage as a part of or prerequisite to the purchase of any other product or service. If alcoholic beverages are included as part of a package of other goods and/or services, the alcoholic beverages must be priced separately and all customers must be allowed to purchase the remaining goods and services without the alcoholic beverages at a price from which the full price of the alcoholic beverages has been deducted. 
(h)  Any person deemed guilty of violating this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in the common jail of the county. Licensees may further be subject to revocation proceedings. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(3), § 7-2071) 
Secs. 6-282—6-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - DISTILLED SPIRITS FOR CONSUMPTION ONLY ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 6-300. - Permitted locations. 
(a)  No distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises except where sold in eating establishments regularly serving prepared food with a full service kitchen. A full service kitchen shall consist of a three compartment sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, a refrigerator, all of which shall be approved by the health and fire departments. Additionally, any such eating establishment must be prepared to serve food every hour it is open and must derive a minimum of 60 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. Any eating establishment that sells distilled spirits by the drink for consumption only on the premises must have a seating capacity, at tables, of at least 50 persons. 
(b)  These eating establishments must be located in zoning districts which permit restaurants as conforming uses or where these eating establishments are incidental to a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Sec. 6-301. - License, administrative, and investigative fee. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of $500.00 to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded; but the $500.00 cost paid for investigation shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fees shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. Any applicant for license under this article who has been in existence at the time of making the new application and has an existing valid license under this article shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Sec. 6-302. - Package sales prohibited. 
Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption only on the premises shall be prohibited from selling distilled spirits or liquor by the package or bottle. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Sec. 6-303. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  No one holding a license under this article shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any distilled spirits for consumption only on the premises at any time except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday. 
(1)  As provided in section 516 of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance of 2005, no business shall be open between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5 a.m. In order to serve distilled spirits for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 1:55 a.m. Tuesday through Sunday, the licensee shall meet the requirements of section 516 of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance of 2005 and shall obtain a special use permit in accordance with section 1807 of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance of 2005. 
(b)  No license holder shall serve distilled spirits for consumption only on the premises at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulations or of any special order of the governing authority. 
(c)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives a minimum of 60 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food and in any licensed establishment which derives at least as much of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(d)  Distilled spirits for consumption only on the premises may be sold from 12:00 midnight to 1:55 a.m. on any Monday which is New Year's Day, January 1, of any year if granted a special use permit as required by subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. of 11-06-2018, § 3) 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 6, 2018, repealed the former § 6-303, and enacted a new § 6-303 as set out herein. The former § 6-303 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of Ord. of 1-15-2007. 
Sec. 6-304. - Bring your own bottle prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring his own alcoholic beverage (brown bag) in any establishment either licensed or unlicensed to be consumed in said establishment. Further, it shall be unlawful to any establishment to serve or allow to be served any alcoholic beverage brought into the establishment by a patron. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Sec. 6-305. - Promotion and sales (happy hour). 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons; 
(2)  Deliver more than one alcoholic beverage to any person at a time; 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week, except that private functions not open to the public; 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged to the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(6)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, in any container which holds more than 32 fluid ounces (0.947 liters), except to two or more persons at any one time; 
(7)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week; 
(8)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the price charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day-to-day or from hour-to-hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner in view of the paying public and said schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, or to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person. 
(e)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour" or similarly designated promotions. 
(f)  No licensee may require the purchase of any alcoholic beverage as a part of or prerequisite to the purchase of any other product or service. If alcoholic beverages are included as part of a package of other goods and/or services, the alcoholic beverages must be priced separately and all customers must be allowed to purchase the remaining goods and services without the alcoholic beverages at a price from which the full price of the alcoholic beverages has been deducted. 
(g)  Any person that deemed a guilty of violating of this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or by imprisonment not to exceed six months days in the common jail of the county. Licensees may further be subject to suspension or revocation proceedings. 
(h)  The city administrator or designee shall have responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Sec. 6-306. - Excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the sale of distilled spirits by the drink there is imposed an excise tax upon the sale of said drinks in the amount of three percent of the total cost of such drink which is charged to the public. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee under this chapter and any such licensees shall remit the same to the city administrator on or before the tenth day of the succeeding month along with the appropriate returns showing a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales and those sales shall be reported and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the city administrator to the same extent as required of cash sales. It shall be duty of each licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levied hereunder to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable under this section, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax due. It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three years and to provide such returns and reports as may be required by the city administrator. Licensees collecting the tax provided for in this section shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent a the time of payment. The rate of deduction should be the same rate authorized for deductions from sale tax under Chapter 8 of Title 48 as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-4-133. The city administrator is hereby authorized to create such reports and returns as may be necessary to adequately provide for the collection of the excise tax provided in this section. 
(b)  In the event the city administrator deems it necessary to verify the excise tax submitted to the city administrator pursuant to this section, for any month, he or she shall notify the licensee of such need for verification and the licensee shall submit a verified comprehensive report to the city administrator, prepared by an auditor, reflecting all sales under this section by the licensee and the taxes submitted to the city. The licensee shall have 30 days to submit such a report to the city administrator following such a request. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Sec. 6-307. - Applicability of general provisions of this chapter. 
All sections included in article I of this chapter shall apply to the licenses and authorizations granted by this article. Any inconsistencies between the sections included in this article and article I of this chapter shall be resolved by the language of this article taking precedent over the language of article I. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2006) 
Sec. 6-308. - Distilled spirits tasting license. 
(a)  A distilled spirits tasting license for purpose of this section shall be limited to entities possessing a duly issued and valid state license for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  No distilled spirits tasting shall be conducted at any location where distilled spirits are sold by the package. If the tasting location is located adjacent to an establishment with a license for the retail sale of package distilled spirits, there shall be no means of internal ingress/egress between the two establishments. The two establishments must have separate and distinct entrances and exits. 
(c)  An eligible licensee may petition the city for a distilled spirits tasting license under the provisions of this section. A distilled spirits tasting license shall allow the license holder to offer or sell distilled spirits samples only if offered or sold in connection with an instructional or educational promotion and subject to all conditions set forth in this section and other provisions of Chapter 6 of the Code. 
(d)  A distilled spirits tasting license is intended to allow such activity on a limited basis and shall not occur more often than one time per calendar week. A distilled spirits tasting license shall be subjected to all other laws, rules and regulations of the city and state, including rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue and is subject to license revocation for violation thereof. 
(e)  Samples shall not exceed one ounce and no customer shall consume more than four ounces in any two-hour period. No customer shall be allowed to attend more than one tasting (wine, beer and/or distilled spirits) within a consecutive 24 hour period. 
(f)  The appreciation and education classes shall not exceed two consecutive hours. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes. 
(g)  Bottles shall be opened by the licensee or an employee only, and samples shall be poured only by the licensee or an employee. 
(h)  No open containers of any alcoholic beverage of any kind shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(i)  The annual fee for a distilled spirits tasting license shall be $200.00. Said distilled spirits tasting license shall be subject to annual renewal. The city may revoke or suspend such distilled spirits tasting license and/or impose such conditions on its operation at the city's discretion for violations of this Code or in furtherance of the health, safety, and welfare of the city's inhabitants. 
(j)  Distilled spirits tastings on Sundays are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2017) 
Secs. 6-309—6-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - WINE CENTER 

Sec. 6-331. - Wine center permitted locations; requirements. 
(a)  A wine center may be established and granted a license to sale beer for consumption only on the premises, to sale wine for consumption on the premises, to sale wine by the package for carryout purposes, and to operate a wine tasting room ("wine center license") if the wine center meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Is located in a permissible zoning classification and has obtained the necessary special use and other permits required under the city's zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Has a full service kitchen consisting of a three compartment sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, a refrigerator, all of which shall be approved by the health and fire departments; 
(3)  Is prepared to serve food every hour it is open; 
(4)  Derives a minimum of 60 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of goods/services other than from beer and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises; and 
(5)  Has actual seating of at least 60 persons. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 6-332. - Wine tasting room. 
(a)  A wine tasting room shall be limited to entities possessing a duly issued and valid wine center license and a valid current wine license issued by the state. 
(b)  No wine tasting shall be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in the unbroken container. 
(c)  Wine tastings may only be conducted in connection with an instructional or educational promotion. 
(d)  An eligible licensee may petition the city for a wine tasting room license provided it meets all present requirements of the city's alcohol beverage ordinance and presently maintains a valid license as required above. A wine tasting room license shall be subjected to all other laws, rules and regulations of the city and state, including Rule 560-2-5-05 of the Georgia Department of Revenue, Alcohol and Tobacco Division, and is subject to license revocation for violation thereof. 
(e)  Said tasting room license need only be applied for once and shall automatically renew when said wine center license is renewed, provided, however, that the city may revoke or suspend such tasting room license and/or impose such conditions on its operation at the city's discretion for violations of this code or in furtherance of the health, safety, and welfare of the city's inhabitants. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 6-333. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices. 
The prices of all wine exposed or offered for sale shall be indicated plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the bottles or containers are placed. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 6-334. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Beer and wine shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday. 
(1)  As provided in section 516 of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance of 2005, no business shall be open between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. In order to serve beer and wine for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 1:55 a.m. Tuesday through Sunday, the licensee shall meet the requirements of section 516 of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance of 2005 and shall obtain a special use permit in accordance with section 1807 of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance of 2005. 
(b)  Retail packages of wine shall not be sold except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(c)  Retail packages of wine shall not be sold at any time in violation of state law, local ordinance or regulation, or special order of the governing authority. 
(d)  The sale of beer and wine for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed wine center which derives a minimum of 60 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
(e)  Beer and wine may be sold for consumption on the premises from 12:00 midnight to 1:55 a.m. on Monday which is New Year's Day, January 1, of any year, if granted a special use permit as required by subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. of 11-06-2018, § 4) 
Editor's note— Ord. of November 6, 2018, repealed the former § 6-334, and enacted a new § 6-334 as set out herein. The former § 6-334 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of Ord. of 4-19-2010 and Ord of 8-15-2011, § 2. 
Sec. 6-335. - Prohibition on package sales. 
(a)  A wine center shall not sell wine by the package for carryout purposes at any time when the sale of package wine is otherwise prohibited by law. 
(b)  A wine center shall not sell wine by the package for carryout purposes at any location which is within distances to grounds or buildings where the sale of package wine for carryout purposes is otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2010; Ord. of 8-15-2011, § 3) 
Sec. 6-336. - License, administrative, and investigative fee. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee established in section 6-10, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of $500.00 to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded; but the $500.00 cost paid for investigation shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fees shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this code. Any applicant for a license under this article who is in existence at the time of making the new application and has an existing valid license under this chapter shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 6-337. - Applicability of other articles of this chapter. 
All sections included in articles I, V, and IX of this chapter shall apply to the licenses and authorizations granted by this article. Any inconsistencies between the sections included in this article and articles I, V, and IX of this chapter shall be resolved by the language of this article taking precedence over the language of articles I, V, and IX. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2010) 
Secs. 6-338—6-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - PACKAGE DISTILLED SPIRITS LICENSING AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-351. - License for retail sale of package distilled spirits. 
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, a license for the retail sale of package distilled spirits upon the terms and conditions provided in this chapter shall be granted by the city council and evidenced by a written approval executed by the majority of the members of the city council. Upon the compliance with the foregoing provision and at the direction of the city council, the city administrator shall issue a license. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-352. - Location of retail establishment. 
No distilled spirits shall be sold at retail except in establishments located in the following zoning classification: Light industry (M-1). 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-353. - Package store limit. 
(a)  At no time shall the number of licenses issued by the city permitting the retail sale of package distilled spirits within the city limits of the city exceed the number found as a result of dividing the total population of the city, as found in the most recent population estimates published by the United States Bureau of the Census, by the whole number 10,000. 
(b)  If the number resulting from the division required by subsection (a) above is a number other than a whole number (for example 1.75) then said number will be adjusted downward to the next whole number where it will remain until the population increases to such an extent which would cause said number to equal or exceed the next higher whole number. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the number of licenses permitted by this section shall never be less than one. 
(c)  The language contained in subsections (a) and (b) of this section can be expressed in the mathematical formula, as follows: 
Y ÷ 10,000 = X. 
Y is the total population (as defined in subsection (a) above) of the City of Grayson. X is the total number of licenses that can be issued (this number, if not whole, is adjusted downward in accordance with subsection (b) above). 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-354. - Both retail sale of package malt beverages and wine and package distilled spirits. 
For licensees who wish to operate a business which conducts both the retail sale of package distilled spirits and the retail sale of package malt beverages and wine, in the case of conflict, the provisions of this article regulating the retail sale of package distilled spirits shall prevail, and compliance with those provisions, rather than the provisions applicable to the license permitting the retail sale of package malt beverages and wine, is required. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-355. - License, administrative, and investigative fee. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee established in section 6-10, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of $500.00 to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded; but the $500.00 cost paid for investigation shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fees shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this code. Any applicant for a license under this article who is in existence at the time of making the new application and has an existing valid license under this chapter shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-356. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of distilled spirits except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. The hours within which business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale thereof. 
(b)  Retail package distilled spirits shall not be sold at any time in violation of state law, local ordinance or regulation, or special order of the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011; Ord. of 9-17-2012) 
Sec. 6-357. - Consumption prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on a premises licensed for the sale of package distilled spirits. For the purpose of this section "premises" shall include the parking area immediately adjoining the premises licensed for the sale of package distilled spirits and available for the use of the customers of the licensed premises, whether or not the same are owned or leased by the licensed holder. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises or to sell unsealed (broken) package distilled spirits. If such licensee shall also have a license to sell malt beverages or wine, it shall likewise be unlawful for any such items to be consumed on the premises or to sell unsealed (broken) malt beverages or wine. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-358. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices. 
Retailers shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed the prices of all distilled spirits exposed or offered for sale. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-359. - Window obstruction. 
All glass surfaces forming the exterior walls of the premises shall remain unobstructed and shall provide a clear line of sight into the interior of the premises that is licensed to sell package distilled spirits and no signs, window coverings, or other material shall be placed on or within ten feet of any exterior glass surfaces, except as follows: 
(1)  One sign, which may be illuminated, not to exceed 4.5 square feet in area; and 
(2)  The sign permitted in paragraph (1) above and any additional signs on the property and premises shall also comply with all applicable provisions of article XIV of the Grayson Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-360. - Excise taxes. 
(a)  In addition to all other taxes or license fees heretofore or hereafter imposed upon retailers, dealers, or wholesalers engaged in the city and the business of selling distilled spirits, there is imposed and levied upon all here and after described retailers, dealers, or wholesalers within the city an excise tax to be computed and collected as hereinafter set forth. The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to fortified wine. 
(b)  There is levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter or $0.0065 per ounce which shall be paid to the governing authority on all distilled spirits sold by wholesalers to retailers in the city. Such tax shall be paid to the city administrator by the wholesale distributor on all distilled spirits sold to those licensed to sale package distilled spirits in the city as follows: Each wholesaler selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits to any licensees hereunder shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each licensee on or before the tenth day of the month following. Excise taxes received by the city administrator after the twentieth day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. The $0.22 per liter or $0.0065 per ounce shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter or $0.0065 per ounce. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any wholesaler to sell, ship, or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits to any retail dealer or licensee without collecting said tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any retail dealer or licensee to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any distilled spirits on which such tax has not been paid. Wholesalers collecting the tax authorized herein shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be at the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, and any amendment thereto. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-361. - Applicability of other articles of this chapter. 
All sections included in articles I, V, and VIII of this chapter shall apply to the licenses and authorizations granted by this article. Any inconsistencies between the sections included in this article and articles I, V, and VIII of this chapter shall be resolved by the language of this article taking precedence over the language of articles I, V, and VIII. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2011) 
Sec. 6-362. - Wine/beer tasting license. 
(a)  A wine/beer tasting license for purpose of this section shall be limited to entities possessing a duly issued and valid retail wine license, retail beer license or both. Those entities shall be eligible to apply for a wine/beer tasting license to provide samples of wine and/or beer offered for sale at retail in the establishment to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. A license may only be granted for the specific type or types of sample (wine only, beer only, wine and beer) for which the applicant holds a valid retail license from the city. 
(b)  No wine and/or beer tasting shall be conducted at any location where distilled spirits are sold by the package. Any wine and/or beer tasting occurring on the premises of a business possessing a retail wine license or retail beer license shall be limited to a confined area with single means of ingress and egress into such area. The applicant's proposed measures to segregate the wine/beer tasting area along with proposed staffing and oversight shall be submitted to and approved by the city clerk. 
(c)  An eligible licensee may petition the city for a wine/beer tasting license provided it meets all present requirements of the city's alcohol beverage ordinance and presently maintains a valid retail wine license or retail beer license or both. A wine/beer tasting license shall allow the license holder to offer or sell wine and/or beer samples only if offered or sold in connection with an instructional or educational promotion. 
(d)  A wine/beer tasting license is intended to allow such activity on a limited basis and shall not be part of the core operations of such establishment or occur on a daily basis. A wine/beer tasting license shall be subjected to all other laws, rules and regulations of the city and state, including wine tasting rules of the Georgia Department of Revenue and is subject to license revocation for violation thereof. 
(e)  Samples shall not exceed two ounces and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. 
(f)  The appreciation and education classes shall not exceed two consecutive hours. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes. 
(g)  Wine and beer bottles shall be opened by the licensee or an employee only, and samples shall be poured only by the licensee or an employee. 
(h)  No open containers of wine or beer shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(i)  Such sampling and tasting is permitted within the enclosed and separate portion of the premises only. 
(j)  The annual fee for a wine/beer tasting license shall be $200.00. Said tasting license need only be applied for once and shall automatically renew when said retail wine license or retail beer license is renewed, provided, however, that the city may revoke or suspend such tasting license and/or impose such conditions on its operation at the city's discretion for violations of this Code or in furtherance of the health, safety, and welfare of the city's inhabitants. 
(k)  Wine and beer tastings on Sundays are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 4-20-2015(1)) 
Secs. 6-363—6-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - CATERER 

Sec. 6-381. - Alcoholic beverages caterer permit. 
(a)  Licenses may be obtained for the purpose of selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages by the drink on premises at which authorized catered functions are to be held. 
(1)  Such licenses may be obtained only by those persons, firms, or corporations with a valid local beverage alcohol license and a valid state retail dealer license. 
(2)  Such licenses shall only authorize the caterer to sell those alcoholic beverages for which he/she is licensed. 
(3)  Such licenses shall only be valid for the specific event, date, time and location stated on the permit issued in accordance with this article. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first obtaining a permit as provided in this article. 
(b)  Before a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at any authorized catered function, such caterer shall obtain a permit from the city administrator or designee at least ten business days prior to the event. 
(1)  The application for a permit shall include the name of the alcoholic beverage caterer; the caterer's license number; the date, address, time and name of the event; and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event. 
(2)  No permit fee shall be charged for a caterer's license if the applicant has a current, valid alcohol license issued by the city. 
(3)  For caterers licensed by jurisdictions other than the city, a permit fee of $50.00 per event shall be charged. 
(4)  The permit shall be good only for the specific event at the specific address, date and times set forth in the application. 
(5)  As a condition of the permit, alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by jurisdictions other than the city shall be provided a copy of the city's alcoholic beverages ordinances and acknowledge the applicability of such ordinances to their operations. 
(6)  The permit and a copy of the state license shall be kept in the vehicle used to transport alcoholic beverages to the event at all times during which the permit is in effect. 
(7)  Caterers licensed by the city or any other jurisdiction shall maintain records of alcoholic beverages transported for each event as may be required by state law. 
(c)  The hours and days of sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages under this section shall be the same as section 6-73 of this chapter. 
(d)  Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages in the amounts set forth in article VII and section 6-360 of this chapter. 
(e)  No licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall employ any person under 21 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or handle alcoholic beverages at authorized catered functions. 
(f)  Except as set forth above in the section, an alcohol beverages caterer permit holder must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2015(1)) 
Secs. 6-382—6-400. - Reserved. 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 10-30 "Findings," the introductory language of the city's adult entertainment ordinance of November 4, 1996, is included here at the request of the city. 

Sec. 10-30. - Findings. 
(a)  The mayor and council find that adult entertainment facilities, if unregulated, may lead to an increase in prostitution, venereal and other sexually transmitted disease, drug and alcohol offenses and other criminal activity. 
(b)  The law enforcement resources available for responding to problems associated with or created by adult entertainment facilities are limited and are conserved by regulating the location of adult entertainment facilities. 
(c)  Based upon the experiences of other urban counties and municipalities, including but not limited to Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia; City of Smyrna, Georgia; Seattle and Renton, Washington; New York, New York; Los Angeles, California; Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach Florida; and South Bend, Indiana, which experiences the mayor and council believe are relevant to the problems faced by the city and based upon the evidence and testimony of the citizens and experts who have appeared before such other bodies, the mayor and council take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. 
(d)  It is the finding of the mayor and council that based on subsections (a)—(c) of this section public nudity and seminudity, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances relating to the sale of and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment," "adult entertainment," or "erotic entertainment" begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. 
(e)  The mayor and council have reviewed or caused to be reviewed certain decisions of the appellate courts, including but not limited to Paramount Pictures Corporation v. Busbee, et al. , 252 Ga. 250 (1982); Harris v. Entertainment Systems, Inc. , 259 Ga. 701 (1989); Yarbrough v. City of Carrollton , 262 Ga. 444 (1992); Pel Asso., Inc. v. Joseph , 262 Ga. 904 (1993); and Gravely v. Bacon , 263 Ga. 203 (1993); World Famous Dudley's Food and Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park , 265 Ga. 618 (1995) and Parker v. Whitfield Co. , 265 Ga. 829 (1995). 
(f)  The public health, safety, welfare and convenience require that the location of adult entertainment facilities shall be regulated in order to reduce the potential for harm, and in order to preserve the quality of urban life in residential and business areas of the community. 
(g)  The location of an adult entertainment facility and like or associated businesses in the same neighborhood or in close proximity of the same tend to attract an undesirable quantity and quality of transients, adversely affecting property values, cause an increase in crime and encourage residents and businesses therein to move elsewhere. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(1), intro. ¶) 
Sec. 10-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(1), § 1; Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 1) 
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment facility means any establishment which offers for commercial purposes on its premises: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment which provides or features nude or seminude or erotic dancing or the performance of obscene acts or acts which stimulate: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttock, anus or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The showing of any film, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual reproductions depicting any of the acts described in subsection (2) above which are obscene under state law. 
(4)  The holding, promotion or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the prohibited conduct in this section. 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction service means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character describes a person who has not been convicted of a felony or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means, for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified anatomical areas means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: 
a.  Analingus; 
b.  Buggery; 
c.  Coprophagy; 
d.  Coprophilia; 
e.  Cunnilingus; 
f.  Fellatio; 
g.  Necrophilia; 
h.  Pederasty; 
i.  Pedophilia; 
j.  Piquerism; 
k.  Sapphism; or 
l.  Zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(1), § 2; Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 2) 
Sec. 10-33. - Sale of alcoholic beverages and controlled substances prohibited. 
No adult entertainment facility shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon its premises. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(1), § 2) 
Sec. 10-34. - Mainstream activity excluded. 
Notwithstanding the prohibitions in section 10-33, nothing in this article shall or is intended to apply to theatrical or motion picture performances houses, museums, or the like where the consumption or service of alcohol is not a primary purpose or mainstream activity of such establishment. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(1), § 3; Ord. of 8-21-2006(2)) 
Sec. 10-35. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall operate, advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the city clerk showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 12:00 noon and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 12:00 noon through 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on Christmas Day. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage, intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths foot candles per square foot. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 3; Ord. of 8-21-2006(2)) 
Sec. 10-36. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 4) 
Sec. 10-37. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments as defined in this article without a permit so to do. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 5) 
Sec. 10-38. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article; such license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 6) 
Sec. 10-39. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 7) 
Sec. 10-40. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 8) 
Sec. 10-41. - Location. 
No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage; or 
(6)  On a parcel of land other than one zoned to allow adult businesses pursuant to the city zoning ordinance. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from the property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 9) 
Sec. 10-42. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city manager or designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable application fee of $1,000.00 shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city manager at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 10) 
Sec. 10-43. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualification. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character, as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include, as well, work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the city clerk of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall receive approval of such employment from the city clerk. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city clerk requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the city clerk for a hearing. The decision of the city clerk after a hearing may be appealed to the city council, which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $200.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice if filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licenses of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 11) 
Sec. 10-44. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the county police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, and of the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners of any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant, if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any; 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers, or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city clerk shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If a partnership, the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 12) 
Sec. 10-45. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee of $1,000.00 has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 13) 
Sec. 10-46. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city clerk may grant the permit if the clerk finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct, convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(9)  The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)  On the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  The proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; 
(12)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the state, or the United States; 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 14) 
Sec. 10-47. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United Sates, the state, or the city. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. , 427 U.S. 50, 81. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 15) 
Sec. 10-48. - Permit—Refusal; appeal. 
If the city clerk, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, he shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 16) 
Sec. 10-49. - Same—Renewal. 
Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be $5,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 17) 
Sec. 10-50. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 18) 
Sec. 10-51. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee of $1,000.00 has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city manager. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the city ordinance have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 19) 
Sec. 10-52. - Appeal—Procedure. 
(a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or request, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and council, and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five or more than 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal for council action. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 20) 
Sec. 10-53. - Same—Council determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 21) 
Sec. 10-54. - City council. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties, and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action of which a complaint has been made. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 22) 
Sec. 10-55. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath, and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 23) 
Sec. 10-56. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 24) 
Sec. 10-57. - Hearing officer—Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished the city manager and chief of police. 
(b)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than 30 days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 25) 
Sec. 10-58. - Same—Action by council. 
The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; or 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 26) 
Sec. 10-59. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provision of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. In addition to such fine, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 27) 
Sec. 10-60. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions or proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 28) 
Sec. 10-61. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 29) 
Sec. 10-62. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record findings on a form supplied by the city clerk. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 30) 
Sec. 10-63. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the city manager on the city manager's finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city manager shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city manager may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city manager. The city manager shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 31) 
Sec. 10-64. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. of 11-4-1996(2), § 32) 
Secs. 10-65—10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FORTUNETELLING 

Sec. 10-91. - Applications. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, where a charge is made, a donation accepted, or a purchase of any other article of merchandise is made in connection therewith, to engage in any capacity, directly or indirectly, in the practice of fortunetelling, phrenology, clairvoyance, palmistry, astrology, numerology or other kindred practices, business or professions. 
(b)  No application for license whatsoever shall be accepted or granted for any of the practices, business or professions listed in subsection (a) hereinabove. 
(Ord. of 3-21-1985, § 102) 
Secs. 10-92—10-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-150. - Authority. 
The legal authority for these rules is Section 16-5-71, Section 16-5-71.1, Section 16-12-5, Section 31-3-4, and Chapters 5 and 40 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-151. - Purpose. 
The body art studios and body artists rules are adopted for the purpose of establishing reasonable standards for individuals performing body art procedures and the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards are designed to promote the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving body art services. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-152. - Exemptions. 
These rules shall not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or a technician acting under the direct on-site supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-153. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to these rules. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in these rules shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
(1)  "Antibacterial solution" means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria which is approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by FDA. 
(2)  "Biohazard" means any infections agents or parts thereof presenting a real or potential risk to the wellbeing of human or other species, directly through infection or indirectly through disruption of the environment. 
(3)  "Body art" means the practice of physical body adornment by the following techniques: Body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. This definition does not include for the purposes of these rules, piercing of the outer perimeter or lube of the ear with pre-sterilized single-use stud and clasp ear piercing systems. 
(4)  "Body artist permit" means the authorization granted by the board of health to the body artist to perform body art. Such permit is the property of the Gwinnett County Board of Health. 
(5)  "Body art studio" means any permanent building, structure, or suite located in a planned commercial center on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business permit or license, wherein a body artist performs body art. 
(6)  "Body artist" means any person who performs body art. 
(7)  "Body piercing" means puncturing or penetration the skin or mucosa of a person with any sharp instrument and/or the insertion jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening. 
(8)  "Cosmetic tattooing" means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa. Cosmetic tattooing shall include permanent cosmetics, micro-pigmentation, permanent color technology, and micro-pigment implantation. 
(9)  "Board of health" means the Gwinnett County Board of Health or its duly authorized representatives. 
(10)  "Currently licensed health care professional" includes but is not limited to licensed physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
(11)  "Department" means the Department of Human Resources in the State of Georgia. 
(12)  "Owner" means a partnership, corporation, association, business entity, or person or group of persons which/who own, maintain, and control the body art studio and who are legally responsible for the operation of the body art studio. 
(13)  "Parlor" means the actual room of the body art studio where the body artist performs procedures. 
(14)  "Body art studio permit" means the authorization granted by the board of health to the owner to operate a body art studio. Such permit is the property of the Gwinnett County Board of Health. 
(15)  "Sanitary" means clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
(16)  "Sanitized" means effective antibacterial treatment by a process that provides a sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacteria count including pathogens to a safe level on equipment. 
(17)  "Sharps" means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts to the skin. 
(18)  "Standard precautions" means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Center for Disease Control (CDC) as "Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, NO. S-6; "Recommendation for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures," in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8; and "Recommendations for Prevention and Control of HCV Infection and HCV Related Chronic Disease" in MMWR, October 16, 1998, Vol. 47, No. RR-19. These methods of infection control require the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and other blood borne pathogens. Precautions included, but are not limited to, hand washing, gloving, personal protective equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood and body fluid contaminated products. Standard precautions include Universal Precautions. In the event that the CDC or other primary reference or regulatory authority publishes materials or amends regulations applicable to this definition shall be deemed amended to include the latest versions of these documents, regulations and recommendations. 
(19)  "Sterilization" means holding in instrument in an autoclave for 15 minutes at 15 pounds pressure at a temperature of 273° Fahrenheit or 121° Celsius. 
(20)  "Sterilizer" means an autoclave certified to meet medical standards. 
(21)  "Sterilizer indicator" means a tape, strip, or other device designed to change color to indicate that sterilization temperature has been achieved during the sterilization procedure. 
(22)  "Tattoo" means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa and includes the definition of tattoo as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1(1) and as many there after be amended. The term "tattoo" also includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. 
(23)  "Wash" means the cleansing the skin with warm water and antibacterial soap and drying with single-use towels. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-154. - Scope of rules. 
(a)  All permits issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the City of Grayson, the board of health, the department, and state law. 
(b)  The requirements of these rules shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, regulatory provisions of local, state, or federal law and shall not authorize violations of said other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-155. - Body art studio owner. 
The owner shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in Chapter 40 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and with the applicable rules of the Gwinnett County Board of Health, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes and rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(1)  No person under 18 shall perform body art procedures on individuals unless under the direct on-site supervision of a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(2)  Body artists shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. 
(3)  No person shall perform body art procedures on an individual who is or reasonably appears to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other stimulants or depressants or is of unsound mind or body. 
(4)  No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art studio except service animals used by persons with legally recognized disabilities. 
(5)  No tattoo procedure shall be performed on a person under the age of 18 except by a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such physician or osteopath with the written consent of a parent or guardian. 
(6)  No body piercing procedure shall be preformed on a person under the age of 18 without the written consent of a parent or guardian. The parent or guardian must be present when the piercing procedure is performed. 
(7)  No tattoo procedure shall be performed on any person within one inch of any part of the eye socket of such person. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-156. - Body art studio permit. 
(a)  The owner of each body art studio shall obtain a valid body art studio permit from the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section prior to beginning operation. Body art studios shall renew their permit annually in accordance with section 10-158 herein. 
(b)  The permit is the property of the Gwinnett County Board of Health. 
(c)  To be eligible for a new body art studio permit or a renewal permit, a body art studio must be in compliance with all of the requirements of these rules. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to practice body art procedures unless such procedures are performed in a body art studio operating under a valid body art studio permit issued by the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section. 
(e)  The body art studio permit shall be displayed on the premises in a conspicuous place in public view at all times. Permits shall not be defaced or altered in any manner. A body art studio shall not post a reproduction of a permit unless the board of health has marked it "duplicate." 
(f)  All body art studio permits issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable. 
(g)  A body art studio permit shall be returned to the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section if it is suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-157. - Application for body art studio permit. 
(a)  The application for a body art studio or for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall be made on forms provided by the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section. 
(b)  Any application for a new body art studio permit or for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall be sworn to by the applicant as true, correct, and complete before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(c)  Applications for a new permit: 
(1)  At least 30 days prior to the anticipated date of opening, the owner of a new body art studio shall submit an application to the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section for a body art studio permit to operate under these rules. 
(2)  The application for a new body art studio permit shall include: 
a.  A quarter inch per foot scale drawing of the floor plan of the body art studio and a drawing of associated details shown at one and a half inch per foot scale, signed by a registered engineer or architect. Such drawing shall show the accurate placement of each of the following: 
1.  Hand-sinks. 
2.  Bathroom(s). 
3.  First-aid kits. 
4.  Waiting area(s). 
5.  Windows. 
6.  Doors. 
7.  Tables. 
8.  Chairs. 
9.  Room measurements. 
10.  Equipment. 
b.  A zoning certification obtained from the appropriate jurisdiction. The applicant shall comply with all applicable zoning, building, safety, fire, and other local codes and requirements; 
c.  A copy of the certificate of occupancy for the studio; 
d.  A complete description of all body art services which will be provided in the body art studio; 
e.  The full or legal name under which the body art studio is conducted; 
f.  The address of the body art studio; 
g.  If the owner leases the location, the name and current address of the landlord; 
h.  The name and home address of the owner; if the owner of body art studio is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the owner is a cooperation, the date and place of incorporation and the name and address of its registered agent in the state; of if the owner is any type of association, the names of the principals of the association; 
i.  A list containing the full names and home addresses of all employees and staff who will be working in a body art studio; 
j.  A copy of the written statement of policies and procedures of the body art studio in accordance with section 10-156 of these rules; 
k.  An acknowledgement signed by the owner acknowledging that the owner has read and understands these rules; and 
l.  Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the board of health. 
(3)  The applicant shall submit a non-refundable plan review fee as set by the Gwinnett County Board of Health and approved by the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners. 
(d)  Applications for renewal: 
(1)  At least 30 days prior to the expiration of a body art studio permit, the owner shall submit an application to the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section for renewal of the body art studio permit. 
(2)  The application for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall include: 
a.  A complete description of all body art services that will be provided at the studio; 
b.  The full or legal name under which the body art studio is operated; 
c.  The address of the body art studio; 
d.  If the owner leases the location, the name and current address of the landlord; 
e.  The name and current home address of the owner of the body art studio is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the owner is a corporation, the date and place of incorporation and the name and address of its registered agent in the state; or if the owner is any other type of association, the names of the principals of the association; 
f.  An updated list containing the full names and home addresses of all current employees and staff who will be working in the body art studio; 
g.  A copy of the written statement of policies and procedures of the body art studio in accordance with section 10-156 of these rules; 
h.  An acknowledgement signed by the owner acknowledging that the owner has read and understands these rules; and 
i.  Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the board of health. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-158. - Issuance of body art studio permits and fees. 
(a)  The Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section may issue a body art studio permit to an owner after determining that the studio is in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 40 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department of human resources, and with these rules. 
(b)  A body art studio shall submit an application for a new body art studio permit when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The studio is remodeled, renovated, or expanded; 
(2)  There is a change in the legal ownership of the body art studio; or 
(3)  An existing facility is moved or relocated. 
(c)  Body art studios permits shall automatically expire on June 30 of each year. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a body art studio permit, the owner must pay the applicable permit fee. Body art studio permit fees shall not be prorated except that an owner who submits an application for a body art studio permit on January 1 or later shall only be required to pay half of the body art studio permit fee. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-159. - Application to existing businesses. 
The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all body art studios whether the studios were established before or after the effective date of these rules. Any body art studio in business on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six months of the effective date. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-160. - Body art studio minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)  The body art studio shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained so as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers and staff. 
(b)  The body art studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the procedure adequate privacy from observes. The parlor shall be separate from the waiting area. 
(c)  Each parlor shall have a minimum of 45 square feet of floor space. 
(d)  Insects, vermin, and/or rodents shall not be present in any part of the body art studio. Effective measures shall be taken by the body art studio owner to prevent the breeding or presence on the premises of insects, vermin, and/or rodents. 
(e)  The body art studio shall have adequate mechanical ventilation in compliance with current state and local building codes. 
(f)  Walls and ceilings shall be painted or covered in a manner which allows for easy and effective cleaning. All paint and coverings shall be light in color. 
(g)  Parlor floors shall be constructed of nonabsorbent material which will allow for effective cleaning. Floors in the parlor areas shall not be covered with carpet or wood. 
(h)  A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility shall be made accessible to customers; however, it shall be separate from the parlor. 
(i)  Each parlor shall be equipped with at least one sink providing hot and cold water under pressure through mixing valve with not aerator, and with foot or wrist actuated controls, for the use of the body artists for washing their hands and preparing customers for the body art procedures. This area shall be provided with dispenses soap, an antibacterial solution, dispenses single-use towels, and an individual hand brushes for each body artist. 
(j)  An equipment washing sink shall be provided in the studio, distinct from the hand sinks and shall be located in the equipment handling and assembly area. This sink shall meet National Safety Foundation (NSF) standards. 
(k)  Each parlor shall be equipped with an artificial light source equivalent to at least 20 foot candles three feet off the floor. Body art procedure areas and equipment handling and assembly areas shall be provided with 100 foot candles at the level where the procedure is performed. 
(l)  Parlors shall not be used as corridors for access to other rooms. 
(m)  A water heater capable of heating water to 100° F shall be provided. The size and capacity of such water heater shall be subject to the approval of the board of health. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-161. - Body art studio furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishings of the body art studio shall be maintained in sanitary condition and shall be intact and functional. The studio shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Cabinets for the storage instruments, dyes, pigments, single-use articles, carbon, stencils, jewelry, studs, and other supplies shall be provided for each body artist and shall be designed, manufactured, and maintained in a sanitary manner so as to protect contents from contamination. 
(c)  Worktables and chairs shall be provided for each body artist. 
(1)  Surfaces of all worktables and chairs shall be constructed of material which is smooth, light colored, nonporous, nonabsorbent, corrosion resistant, and easily sanitized. 
(2)  Worktables and chairs shall be sanitized with a bactericidal solution after each procedure. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-162. - Body art studio supplies. 
(a)  Single-use supplies shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These supplies shall be stored in an area separate from chemical supplies and toilet facilities. 
(b)  All materials applied to human skin including, but not limited to, ink, stencils, and single-use piercing needles shall be from single-use containers and shall be disposed of after each use. 
(c)  Jewelry supplies used in a body art studio shall be made of implant grade high quality stainless steel, gold, platinum, titanium, niobium, or dense low porosity plastic. The jewelry shall also be smooth surfaced and scratch free. 
(d)  Only single-use sterile gauze and single use antibacterial ointment dispensers shall be used. 
(e)  Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for any reason. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-163. - Sterilization. 
(a)  Instrument cleaning. 
(1)  All non single-use, non-disposable instruments shall be properly cleaned and sterilized after each use by following the manufacture's recommendations prior to packaging and sterilization. 
(2)  Employees shall wear heavy-duty, multi-use, waterproof gloves while cleaning instruments. 
(3)  Used instruments shall be soaked in an EPA approved disinfectant until cleaning can be performed. The solution shall be changed as recommended by the solution manufacturer. 
(4)  Instruments shall be disassembled for cleaning. 
(5)  All instrument components shall be cleaned, either manually or in an ultrasonic cleaner, using the appropriate cleaning agent specified to the type of cleaning performed. 
(b)  Instrument packaging. 
(1)  Employees shall wear clean gloves while packaging or wrapping instruments. 
(2)  Instruments shall be wrapped or packaged with a sterilizer indicator on the package. 
(3)  All packages shall be labeled with the time and date of sterilization. Packages will no longer be considered sterile six months after the date or sterilization. 
(c)  Instrument sterilization. 
(1)  The sterilizer shall be designed and labeled as a medical instrument sterilizer. 
(2)  The operator's manual for the sterilizer shall be available on the premises, and the sterilizer shall be operated according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(3)  The sterilizer shall be cleaned and maintained according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(4)  A sterilizer load log shall be maintained for the studio and made available for inspection by properly identified representatives of the board of health during normal operation hours. The log shall be kept for a minimum of one year. The log shall contain the following documentation for each load. 
a.  Descriptions of instruments contained in the load; 
b.  Date of sterilization, and time if more than one load is processed in a single day; 
c.  Sterilizer cycle time and temperature; 
d.  Indication of proper sterilization of instruments, as indicated by the appropriate color change of the sterilizer indicator on each package. The indicator used shall be compatible with the sterilization process being used; and 
e.  Action taken when appropriate color indicator change did not occur. 
(d)  Sterilization monitoring. 
(1)  Sterilizer monitoring shall be performed at least once every two months (unless more frequent monitoring is specified by the manufacturer) by using a commercial biological monitoring (spore) system. 
(2)  All biological indicators shall be analyzed by a laboratory that operates under FDA guidelines and is independent of the studio with reports sent to the studio and the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section. 
(3)  Biological indicator test results shall be maintained in the premises for a minimum of one year and must be available for inspection by properly identified representatives for the board of health during normal operation hours. 
(4)  Upon notification of a positive microbiological monitoring report, the sterilizer shall be immediately checked for proper use and function. The studio will cease operations immediately upon receipt of a positive microbiological report. Three consecutive biological tests shall be performed before the studio is reopened. All three tests must be a negative. The studio shall have the option to purchase and install a new sterilizer in order to reopen prior to the receipt of the test result on the previous sterilizer. 
(e)  Instrument storage. 
(1)  Hands shall be washed and gloved prior to handling sterilized objects. 
(2)  After sterilization, the instruments shall be stored in a dry, clean area reserved for storage of sterilized instruments. 
(f)  Single-use items. If the body art studio operates using only pre-sterilized instruments and supplies, a sterilizer is not required. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-164. - Disinfection of workplace. 
(a)  Each body art studio shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
(b)  The owner shall develop the implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination, plus any tasks or procedures to be performed daily. This written schedule shall be based on the types of surfaces to be cleaned, the types of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the body art studio. The owner shall maintain a log of all scheduled cleaning. This log shall be available for review by properly identified representatives of the board of health during normal operation hours. Violation of proper maintenance and documentation thereof will be grounds for immediate closure and suspension of the owner's body art permit. 
(c)  All work surfaces shall be disinfected with an EPA approved disinfectant at the beginning of each work day, after completion of body art procedures on each individual, and at the end of each work day. 
(d)  All protective coverings such as plastic wrap and aluminum foil shall be removes after each body art procedure and replaced with unused protective coverings. 
(e)  Reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have the likelihood of becoming contaminated shall be decontaminated on a daily basis with a current EPA approval disinfectant. When contamination is visible, receptacles shall be cleaned and decontaminates immediately. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-165. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)  All disposable instruments are considered biohazardous and must be disposed of as biohazardous material. All biohazardous waste must be disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and ordinances regarding biohazardous waste. Needles, razors, and other sharp instruments shall be placed in puncture restraint, closed containers immediately after use and shall be stored in closed cabinets or drawers at the end of each workday. 
(b)  Needles shall not be purposely bent, broken, or otherwise manipulated. 
(c)  Sharps waste shall be safely discarded in a rigid and puncture restraint waste container that is leak proof on the sides and bottom with a self-closing lid. These containers shall be labeled with the international biohazard symbol and the word "BIOHAZARD." Sharps waste shall be removed and disposed of by a company that will dispose of it in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules and ordinances regarding biohazardous waste. 
(d)  Biohazardous non-sharps waste shall be discarded in a biohazard bag. Waste shall be removed and disposed of by a company that will dispose of it in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules and ordinances regarding biohazardous waste. 
(e)  Non-biohazardous disposable wastes shall be placed in lined, easily cleanable containers with tight fitting lids to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(f)  Non-biohazardous disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of so as to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(g)  Self-closing waste containers lined with plastic bags manufactured specifically for waste containers shall be located within each parlor and restroom and shall be emptied at least once per day into a commercially approved dumpster. This dumpster must be picked up and emptied by a commercial contractor to least once per week. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-166. - Client files. 
(a)  The owner shall maintain a detailed client file of the body art procedures administered to each client. 
(b)  The client file shall be created prior to any body art procedure being performed and shall reflect the clients name and signature, address, proof of age, body art procedure performed, date, design, its precise location upon the body, and the name of the body artist or body artists performing or assisting in the procedure. The client files shall also describe whether any complications or incidents arose during the procedure and detail what action was taken to resolve the incident. A copy of a valid state issued photo ID must be obtained from the client and maintained with the client's file. 
(c)  Each client shall be provided with an informed consent statement that fully explains the procedure and each client shall be required to sign the informed consent statement prior to receiving any body art procedure. The informed consent statement signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client file, with a copy given to the client. 
(d)  A "disclaimer of liability" from promulgated by the board shall also be signed by the client prior to receiving any body art procedure. A copy of the "disclaimer of liability" signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client file, with a copy given to the client. 
(e)  The client file shall contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs at the time of the body art procedure is performed. 
(f)  The client file shall contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she has received, read, and understood a copy of the after care procedures advising the client on proper subsequent care of the body art. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-167. - Body art studio inspections. 
(a)  The premises of any body art studio and all records required to be maintained under these regulations shall be available for review and examination by properly identified representatives of the board of health during normal operation hours for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with these rules. 
(b)  The owner shall be responsible for having an employee with knowledge of the studio's records on duty at the body art studio during all hours of operation. 
(c)  Studio inspections shall be performed at least two times annually. Additional studio inspections shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of these rules. Any violation of these rules will require a re-inspection of the body art studio to determine whether that violation has been corrected. Each re-inspection will carry a re-inspection fee. 
(d)  A copy of the most current inspection report shall be posted in public view, in an unobscured manner, at eye level (5 foot +/- 6 inches) within 15 feet of the main door. The inspection report shall be approachable to within one foot. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-168. - Body art studio personnel. 
(a)  Body artists shall obtain and maintain current certification in emergency first-aid, CPR, sterilization, blood borne pathogen, and sanitary procedures from currently licensed health care professional. All certification must be renewed at a minimum of every two years unless a more frequent time period is specifies by the licensing agencies. 
(b)  The above certifications must be obtained before each body artist's employment. 
(c)  Each body artist must obtain an examination by a current licensed physician within 12 months prior to the initial application for a body art permit. Each body artist must obtain from the physician a certificate certifying that the body artist is free of any communicable disease in a communicable state, including but not limited to, Syphilis, Hepatitis B and C, and HIV. 
(d)  The owner must maintain a file on all employees who perform body art procedures. Such files shall be available for inspection by properly identified representatives if the board of health during normal operation hours. The file shall include the following: 
(1)  Report of physical examination; 
(2)  Evidence of current emergency first-aid, CPR, sterilization, blood borne pathogen, and sanitation certification; and 
(3)  The home address and home telephone number of each employee. 
(e)  The owner of a body art studio shall only hire, employ, or use individuals who have complied with these rules. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-169. - Body artist permit. 
(a)  No person may perform body art without first obtaining a body artist permit. Body artists shall renew their permit annually. 
(b)  A body artist permit shall not be eligible for renewal unless all requirements of these rules are met. 
(c)  The body artist permit shall be displayed in the body artist parlor. 
(d)  All body artist permits issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable. 
(e)  All body artist permits shall be returned to the board of health if it is suspended or revoked. 
(f)  Proof of current certification in first-aid, CPR, blood borne pathogen training, sanitation, and sterilizer training shall be required prior to be issuance of a body artist permit and shall be maintained in good standing. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-170. - Application for a body artist permit. 
(a)  Each body artist shall submit to the board of health an application for a body artist permit. 
(b)  The application for a body artist permit shall be made on forms provided by the board of health. 
(c)  Application for a body artist permit shall include the following information concerning the body artist: 
(1)  Full legal name. 
(2)  All aliases. 
(3)  Home address. 
(4)  Gender. 
(5)  Mailing address. 
(6)  Home phone number. 
(7)  Training and/or experience. 
(8)  Evidence of current certification in CPR, first-aid, and blood borne pathogens training, sanitation, and sterilization training completion. 
(9)  Physician report of physical examination. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-171. - Issuance of body artist permit and fees. 
(a)  The Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section may issue a body artist permit to an individual after determining that the individual is in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 40 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, with any applicable rules and regulations of the department, and with these rules. 
(b)  A body artist permit shall automatically expire on June 30 of each year. 
(c)  At least 30 days prior to the expiration of the body artist permit, the body artist shall submit an application for renewal to the Gwinnett County Board of Health Environmental Health Section and pay the applicable permit fee. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a body artist permit, the body artist shall pay the applicable permit fee. 
(e)  A body artist fee shall not be prorated except that an individual who submits an application for a body artist permit on January 1 or later shall only be required to pay half the body artist permit fee. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-172. - Application to existing body artist. 
The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all body artist, whether the body artist began performing body art before or after the effective date of these rules. Any body artist established on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six months of the effective date. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-173. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall tattoo the body of an individual who is under 18 years of age, unless the person performing the tattoo procedure is a physician or osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of the Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or a technician acting under the direct supervision if such licensed physician or osteopath in compliance with Chapter 9 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(b)  No person shall pierce the body, with the exception of ear lobes, of any person under the age of 18 for the purpose of allowing the insertion of earrings, jewelry, or similar objects to the body, unless the minor's legal parent, custodian, or guardian with the proper identification is present and signs a written consent form provided by the body art studio. The consent form must indicate the methods and part(s) of the minor's body upon which the body art procedure is performed. 
(c)  No person shall tattoo the body of any person within any area within one inch of the nearest part of the eye socket of such person. 
(d)  No person shall obtain the services provided in a body art studio by misrepresentation of age in any place where body art procedures are performed. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-174. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Body artists shall follow standard precautions. 
(b)  All hand and/or arm jewelry worn by body artist shall be removed prior to the start of the body art procedure. 
(c)  Prior to performing body art on each client, the fingernails and hands of body artist shall be thoroughly washed and scrubbed with warm water and antibacterial soap, using an individual, single-use scrub. Surgical scrubs are not to be reused. The hands shall then be dried using single-use towels. 
(d)  Prior to the start of the body art procedure the body artist should inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Fingernails shall be trimmed to insure that the gloves are not punctured. 
(e)  Single-use medical-surgical disposable examination gloves shall be worn during that body art procedure. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the procedure, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whatever their integrity has been compromised. 
(f)  Each body artist shall wear a clean outer garment, apron, or smock. These items shall be changed after each client. 
(g)  Body artists who are experiencing symptoms of illness including, but not limited to, diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, or skin infections shall refrain from performing body art. 
(h)  Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each body artist for the entire day and/or night operation. 
(i)  Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the ear where the body art procedure will be performed. 
(j)  All items that come in contact with the client's skin shall be single-use and disposed of after the procedure. 
(k)  All fixtures and equipment contaminated with blood shall be cleaned with an approved sanitize or with a ten percent bleach solution made fresh daily. 
(l)  Smoking, eating, or drinking by anyone is prohibited in a parlor where body art procedures are performed. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-175. - Dyes and pigments. 
(a)  Only single-use containers of dyes and pigments that are currently FDA approved for tattooing of human skin shall be used. 
(b)  All dyes and pigments shall be used according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
(c)  After tattooing each individual, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use container shall be discarded along with the container into a biohazard container. 
(d)  In preparing dyes and pigments to be used by a body artist, only nontoxic sterile single-use materials shall be used. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-176. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)  Prior to placing a tattoo design on the client's skin, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede that body art procedure shall be removed. 
(b)  The body artist shall apply an antibacterial solution to the skin in the involved areas. 
(c)  If a paper stencil is used by a body artist for transferring the design to the skin, the stencil shall be single-use and disposable. 
(d)  If the design is drawn directly onto the skin it shall be applied with a single-use article only. 
(e)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. 
(f)  After the area had dried, a thick layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied. 
(g)  After the application if the antibacterial ointment, a bandage shall be applied to the tattoo using sealed non-sticking pads. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-177. - Procedures specific to body piercing. 
(a)  Before piercing the skin of a client, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede the procedure shall be removed. 
(b)  The body artist shall apply an antibacterial solution to the skin in the involved area prior to the procedure being performed. 
(c)  The body artist shall apply an antibacterial ointment to the skin in the involved area after the procedure is performed. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-178. - Compliance. 
(a)  A body art studio shall operate in compliance with these rules and with a valid body art studio permit issued by the Gwinnett County Board of Health. 
(b)  A body artist shall perform body art procedures in compliance with these rules and with a valid body artist permit issued by the Gwinnett County Board of Health. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-179. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The board of health shall have the power and authority to deny, suspend, or revoke any permit issued under these rues for failure to comply with the provisions there of. When an application for a permit is denied or the permit previously granted is suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder thereof shall be afforded notice and hearing in accordance with Article 1 of Chapter 5 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and the Gwinnett County Board of Health Enforcement Rules. In lieu of a hearing and upon correction of all violations, the permit holder may request an inspection to reinstate the permit. 
(b)  These rules, upon adoption by the Mayor and Council of the City of Grayson, shall be enforced by the Gwinnett County Board of Health as a duly adopted ordinance of the City of Grayson in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any person violating any provision of these rules shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the City of Grayson, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, and/or by confinement in the county jail for a total term not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(c)  The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of these rules on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by the law. 
(d)  The board of health is also empowered to institute appropriate proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining a violation of any applicable provision of Chapter 40 of Title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, of the rules and regulations of the department, or the Rule of the Gwinnett County Board of Health. 
(e)  Any person, firm, or corporation operating a body art studio without a valid permit or performing body art outside of a permitted body art studio shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-180. - Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(a)  The permit of body art studio may be denied, suspended, or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the permit holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the permit; 
(2)  The owner allows or permits any person who does not have a valid body artist permit to perform a body art procedure in the body art studio; 
(3)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(4)  Failure of the owner to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the customers; or 
(5)  The owner or the owner's employees associated with the body art studio have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of these rules. 
(b)  The permit of a body artist may be denied, suspended, or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the body artist to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the body artist permit; 
(2)  The body artist has violated any of the provisions of these rules; or 
(3)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the body artist has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-181. - Conflict with other laws. 
Should any section or provision of these rules be in conflict with any other applicable ordinance, rule, regulation, provision, requirement, or law, then the more restrictive ordinance, rule, regulation, provision, requirement, or law shall control. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-182. - Severability. 
In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this resolution shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this resolution, which shall retain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The Gwinnett County Board of Health hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the resolution in it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 10-183. - Effective date. 
The provisions of these rules shall become effective immediately upon adoption by the City of Grayson. 
(Ord. of 2-19-2007) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 10-19-2015, art. II, adopted Oct. 19, 2015, repealed Art. II, §§ 14-26—14-48, and enacted a new article as set out herein. Former Art. II, pertained to similar subject matter. 

Sec. 14-26. - Adoption of Gwinnett County Animal Control Ordinance. 
The city council adopts and incorporates by reference the Animal Control Ordinance, chapter 10 of the Gwinnett County Code of Ordinances, as may be amended from time to time, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing animals, including dangerous dogs and responsible dog ownership, the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-19-2015(1), art. II) 
Sec. 14-27. - Enforcement and fees. 
The city has entered into agreements with Gwinnett County in accordance with the service delivery strategy statutes providing permission and authority to the county to provide animal control services within the corporate boundaries of the city. Additionally, the city hereby authorizes Gwinnett County and the Gwinnett County Animal Control unit to enforce the animal control ordinance, as adopted in section 14-26, to set and collect fees, retain any and all such fees, and to enforce the ordinance in the county's recorder's court or other such court as may have jurisdiction of the enforcement of said duly adopted ordinances. 
(Ord. of 10-19-2015(1), art. II) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Codes adopted by reference. 
The following regulations and standard minimum codes shall be in full force and effect within the boundaries of the city: 
(1)  International Building Code (ICC); 
(2)  National Electrical Code (NFPA); 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC); 
(4)  International Mechanical Code (ICC); 
(5)  International Plumbing Code (ICC); 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC); 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC); 
(8)  International Fire Code (ICC); 
(9)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code (SBCCI); 
(10)  Standard Swimming Pool Code (SBCCI). 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(5)) 
Secs. 18-2—18-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-23. - Water and sewer inspection. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in 1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1046), page 1632, § 3, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the city. 
(Ord. of 6-3-1996, § 1) 
Secs. 18-24—18-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-111. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum requirements and standards for premises and structures in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, order and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 2) 
Sec. 18-112. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to all existing structures and premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for existing structures and premises. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 3) 
Sec. 18-113. - Definitions. 
Terms not defined herein shall have their meanings as defined in the city zoning ordinance, the development regulations, and the construction code, or in the absence of such definition, words shall have their common dictionary definition. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "premises," "building," "roominghouse," "rooming unit," or "story" are stated in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Bathroom means a room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
Bedroom means any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Exterior property means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators or such premises. 
Garbage means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Habitable space means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
Junk vehicle means any vehicle, automobile, truck, van, trailer of any kind or type, contrivance or part thereof, which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, stripped, partially stripped, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. 
Maintenance means the act of keeping property, structures or vegetation in a proper condition to prevent their decline, failure or uncontrolled growth. 
Occupancy means the purpose for which a building is utilized or occupied. 
Occupant means any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state or county as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches or trunks, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
Toilet room means a room containing a water closest or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
Trash means combustible and noncombustible waste material, except garbage, including paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, cans, metals, bricks, lumber, concrete, mineral matter, glass crockery and including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material. 
Weeds means all rank vegetable growth including but not limited to kudzu, poison ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, plants of obnoxious odors or other similar unsightly vegetation growths; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers, fruit, vegetables and gardens. 
Yard trimmings means all leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees and vegetation matter resulting from landscaping or maintenance activities. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 5) 
Sec. 18-114. - Penalties. 
(a)  Fine and/or sentence of imprisonment. Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city and shall be punished either by a fine not less than $250.00 per day and not to exceed $1,000.00 per day, or by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in jail, or both a fine and jail or work alternate. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Powers of the court. The court shall have the power and authority to order the violation corrected in compliance with this article and the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(c)  Other legal remedies. In any case in which a violation of this article has occurred, the city, in addition to other remedies provided by the law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 6) 
Secs. 18-115—18-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY 

Sec. 18-142. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  Fences and walls shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and in good repair. 
(b)  Fences shall be free from loose or rotting materials and shall have braces and supports attached or fastened in accordance with common building practices. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 7) 
Sec. 18-143. - Grass, weeds and uncultivated vegetation. 
(a)  Height of vegetation. Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation in excess of 12 inches in height. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Property one acre or greater in size; 
(2)  Property zoned RA-200 (agriculture-residence district). 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 8) 
Sec. 18-144. - Junk vehicles. 
(a)  Storage. Junk vehicles shall not be kept, permitted, parked, stored or maintained on any premises or public street rights-of-way. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Junk vehicles, limited to a maximum of two, which are kept within a fully enclosed building on property in residential zoning districts provided the owner or occupant of the property is in the process of reconditioning the junk vehicles for personal use; 
(2)  Junk vehicles which are kept on property in zoning districts authorized by the zoning ordinance for repairing, reconditioning or remodeling junk vehicles and providing that such junk vehicles are not stored for the purpose of salvage of parts but is in the continual process of repair, reconditioning or remodeling; 
(3)  Junk vehicles which are kept on property in zoning districts are authorized by the zoning ordinance for a junkyard or salvage yard; 
(4)  Junk vehicles which are kept on residentially zoned property five acres or greater in size. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 9) 
Sec. 18-145. - Open or outdoor storage. 
(a)  Appliances and other materials. The open or outdoor storage of appliances, building materials or rubbish, equipment, garbage, goods, glass, materials, merchandise, trash, or similar items shall not be permitted, maintained or stored on any premises for more than 24 hours. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Property where outdoor storage is authorized by the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three feet for the personal use of the owner or occupant; 
(3)  Residentially zoned property five acres or greater in size. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 10) 
Sec. 18-146. - Trees. 
(a)  Hazardous trees. Dead, dying, damaged or diseased trees shall not be allowed to exist or to be maintained on any premises which are hazardous to persons on adjacent property or to adjacent property. A finding by a registered forester or certified arborist shall constitute prima facie evidence that a tree is in danger of falling upon adjacent lots or public streets due to the death or impending death of the tree, or due to damage by weather conditions or due to disease infestation. 
(b)  Tree stumps. 
(1)  Height. Tree stumps greater than 12 inches in height above the ground level shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises for more than 30 days after the tree has been cut down. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  Property is covered by a valid land disturbing permit; 
b.  Property one acre or greater in size; 
c.  Property zoned RA-200 (agriculture-residence district). 
(c)  Tree debris. 
(1)  Fallen trees or parts of trees. Fallen trees, slash, removed tree limbs or other portions of any tree shall not be permitted or maintained on the ground on any premises for more than 30 days. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  Property is covered by a valid land disturbing permit; 
b.  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three feet; 
c.  Property one acre or greater in size; 
d.  Property zoned RA-200 (agriculture-residence district). 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 11) 
Sec. 18-147. - Swimming pools. 
Stagnant water in swimming pools conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises. A finding by a health official of the county environmental health department shall constitute prima facie evidence that stagnant water in a swimming pool is conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 12) 
Secs. 18-148—18-177. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-178. - Exterior surface treatment. 
All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches and trim, shall be maintained in good repair. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints shall be maintained weather-resistant and watertight. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 13) 
Sec. 18-179. - Exterior walls. 
Exterior walls of buildings shall be maintained free from holes, breaks, loose or rotting materials; and shall be maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated as needed to prevent deterioration. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 14) 
Sec. 18-180. - Roofs. 
Roofs of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound and in a safe condition and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the interior portions of a building. All portions, additions or sections of a roof, including, but not limited to, the fascia, eave, soffit, sheathing, rafter tail, barge rafter, vent screening, gutter, downspout, roof jack, lead or metal flashing, shall be complete with all trim strips, moldings, brackets, braces and supports attached or fastened in accordance with common building practices. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 15) 
Sec. 18-181. - Exterior stairways, decks, porches, and balconies. 
Exterior stairways, decks, porches, balconies, and all appurtenances attached thereto of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 16) 
Sec. 18-182. - Windows. 
Windows of buildings shall be fully supplied and maintained with glass window panes or with a substitute approved by the director of the department of planning and development, which are without open cracks or holes. Screens, if provided, shall be securely fastened to the window. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 17) 
Sec. 18-183. - Exterior doors and frames. 
Exterior doors of buildings shall be maintained so that they fit reasonably well within their frames to substantially prevent rain and wind from entering a building. Exterior doorjambs, stops, headers and moldings shall be securely attached to the structure and maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration. Additionally, exterior doors shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in proper working condition. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 18) 
Sec. 18-184. - Decorative features. 
Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 19) 
Secs. 18-185—18-206. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 18-207. - Privacy. 
Dwelling units, hotel units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 20) 
Sec. 18-208. - Minimum room widths. 
A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than 7.5 feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 21) 
Sec. 18-209. - Minimum ceiling heights. 
(a)  Clear ceiling height. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  In one-family or two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four feet on the center and projecting not more than six inches below the required ceiling height; 
(2)  Basement rooms in one-family and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreational purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches with not less than six feet four inches of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions; 
(3)  Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least 7.5 feet over not less than 50 percent of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet or more shall be included. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 22) 
Sec. 18-210. - Minimum bedroom requirements. 
(a)  Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
(b)  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and inhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 23) 
Sec. 18-211. - Overcrowding. 
(a)  Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of the table of minimum occupancy area requirements as follows: 
Table of Minimum Occupancy Area Requirements 

 
Notes: 
a See subsection (c) of this section for combined living room/dining room spaces. 
;sup\sup; See subsection (b) of this section for limitations on determining minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. 
(b)  Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by the table in subsection (a) of this section shall not be included as sleeping area in determining minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with section 18-210. 
(c)  Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of the table in subsection (a) of this section if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 24) 
Sec. 18-212. - Efficiency unit. 
Nothing in this division shall prohibit an efficiency dwelling unit meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  An efficiency unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 220 square feet. An efficiency unit occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet. These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by subsections (2) and (3) of this section. 
(2)  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliances and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches in front. 
(3)  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
(4)  The maximum number of occupants shall be three. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 25) 
Sec. 18-213. - Shortterm occupancy. 
This division shall not apply to any occupancy which has not lasted, or is not intended to last, more than one week. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 26) 
Secs. 18-214—18-234. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT, UNLAWFUL ACTS AND NOTICE OF VIOLATION 

Sec. 18-235. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by the mayor, city administrator, code enforcement officer or designee. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 27) 
Sec. 18-236. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with, or in violation of, this article. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 28) 
Sec. 18-237. - Notice of violation. 
Enforcement shall begin with a written notice of violation provided to the owner and occupant. The notice may be delivered personally or sent by first class mail. The notice shall contain a deadline for compliance which may be extended by the mayor or city administrator. If the violation continues past the deadline, the mayor, city administrator, code enforcement officer or designee shall institute legal proceedings charging the person or persons, firm, corporation or agent with a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(2), § 29) 
Secs. 18-238—18-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-251. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Hereinafter, the State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes". 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-252. - Code remedial. 
(a)  General. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof - which are public safety, health, and general welfare - through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection/no warranty. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The city, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. This article and the construction codes shall not create any duty or right of recovery against the city or any of its officials or employees. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-253. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. 
These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(8)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(9)  One- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(10)  Existing Building Code. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code, as approved and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall be enforced within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(11)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. The provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, as approved and amended, shall apply and be enforced within the corporate boundaries of the city. See section 18-265 below. 
(12)  Standard Swimming Pool Code. The provisions of the Standard Swimming Pool Code, as amended, shall apply to the protection of the health, safety and welfare by prescribing minimum standards for the design, construction, installation, repair or alterations of swimming pools, public or private, and equipment related thereto. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any Federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-254. - Department of planning and development shall be the building department. 
There shall be created within and as a part of the department of planning and development the building department. The city council shall appoint building official(s) to enforce this article and the construction codes. The governing body shall establish the qualifications for the building official(s) and other code enforcement personnel. 
(1)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by section 18-291, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(2)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(3)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(4)  Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He/she may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-255. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-256. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-257. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the construction codes is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the construction codes. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-258. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of violating this article and the construction codes. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. Any fine assessed by a court of competent jurisdiction for a violation of this article shall not be less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Secs. 18-259, 18-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 18-261. - In general. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-262. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Any owner, applicant or authorized agent, upon submitting a request for a permit or by accepting a permit issued pursuant to the construction codes or this article, shall be deemed to have agreed and consented to allowing the building official or his authorized representative to conduct an inspection to enforce any provides of the construction codes. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-263. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-264. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of the construction codes in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-265. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, do not provide adequate egress, constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, or are considered unsafe buildings or service systems, are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-266. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-267. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Secs. 18-268—18-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 18-271. - Permit application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
EXCEPTION: Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the construction codes; 
(5)  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kilograms) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 watts) or less. 
(b)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(c)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(e)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-272. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
EXCEPTION: Single family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(f)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-273. - Examination of documents. 
(a)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-274. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he/she proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in chapter 22 of the Standard Building Code. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-275. - Contractor responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-276. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the worked is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(b)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(c)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he/she shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-277. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, and the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-278. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by section 18-278(f). He/she may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the Technical Code: 
BUILDING 
(1)  Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
(2)  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, and all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
(3)  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
ELECTRICAL 
(1)  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(2)  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(3)  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
PLUMBING 
(1)  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(2)  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(3)  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(4)  Note: See Section 311 of the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests. 
MECHANICAL 
(1)  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(2)  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(3)  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
GAS 
(1)  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
(2)  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
(3)  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
ENERGY 
(1)  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place, and to verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
(2)  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
(3)  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy, to verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation, and to verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
SWIMMING POOL 
(1)  Site inspection: Required only for private swimming pools. 
(2)  Initial construction inspection: To inspect reinforcing steel or basket inspection and erosion control inspection. 
(3)  Final inspection: All swimming pool installations must be completed with all fences, gates, decks, plumbing equipment, filters, heaters and appliances in place. The pool shall be completely filled with water and in operation before final inspection. 
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-279. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorized disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-280. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes by a specific business when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Secs. 18-281—18-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TESTS 

Sec. 18-286. - Generally. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his/her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Secs. 18-287—18-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS 

Sec. 18-291. - Appointment. 
The zoning board of appeals shall act as the construction board of adjustment and appeals. The city planner shall be an ex-officio member of the zoning board of appeals, without voting privileges, when any matter concerning this article is heard by the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-292. - Powers. 
The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in section 18-293, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-293. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. The construction board of adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Condition of variances. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(c)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(d)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building officials, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Sec. 18-294. - Rules and regulations. 
The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(1)  Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2008(Att. A)) 
Chapter 22 - COURTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Intergovernmental agreement with the county. 
The mayor is authorized to sign any necessary intergovernmental agreement with the county to grant jurisdiction over citations issued by the city for violations of ordinances of the city to the county recorder's court and to authorize that any fines collected or such cases be retained by the county. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2002(1)) 
Secs. 22-2—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD 

Sec. 22-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by imposing administrative fines and noncriminal penalties for violations of the Code. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2004, § I(B)) 
Sec. 22-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Grayson, Georgia. 
City attorney means the city attorney and/or his designee. 
Code means zoning ordinances and resolutions, ordinances and resolutions enacting subdivision regulations, environmental ordinances and resolutions, state minimum standard codes provided for by state law, ordinances and resolutions enacted pursuant to other ordinances and resolutions regulating the development of real property, and ordinances and regulations providing for control of litter and debris, control of junked or abandoned vehicles, and control of overgrown vegetation. Notwithstanding the above, the term "code" shall not include: 
(1)  Those codes and ordinances requiring a permit, unless the alleged violator has failed to secure all necessary valid permits under said codes and ordinances; or 
(2)  Any local amendments to the state minimum standard codes provided for by state law that have not been adopted in conformity with state law. 
Code inspector means any authorized agent or employee of the city whose duty it is to ensure code compliance. 
Council means the mayor and council of the city. 
Enforcement board means the code enforcement board of the city. 
Solicitor means the chief prosecutor for the code enforcement board. 
Violation involving the health or safety of a third party means a violation that creates a legitimate concern for the health and safety of a third-party occupant of a dwelling place or that creates an immediate and substantial danger to the environment. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2004, § II; Ord. of 6-20-2011) 
Sec. 22-33. - Board. 
(a)  The enforcement board shall have three members and one alternate who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. The alternate shall serve on the enforcement board in the absence of a member. Members may be removed for cause by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The enforcement board members and alternate shall be permanent residents of the city. 
(c)  The initial members of the board shall serve as follows: 
(1)  One member shall serve a two-year term; 
(2)  Two members shall serve four-year terms; and 
(3)  One member shall serve as the alternate for a one-year term. 
Upon expiration of the initial terms of the members, the remaining terms shall be for three years for each member. 
(d)  The members of the enforcement board shall elect one member to serve as chairperson, one member to serve as vice-chairperson, and one member to serve as secretary. 
(e)  The members shall not receive compensation for service on the enforcement board; however, members may receive reimbursement for costs and expenses necessarily incurred by the members. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2004, § III) 
Sec. 22-34. - Powers. 
The enforcement board shall have the following powers and duties under the provisions of this article: 
(1)  To hear and decide cases alleging violations of the Code, to the maximum extent allowed by O.C.G.A. § 36-74-1 et seq.; 
(2)  To adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings, which rules shall, at a minimum, ensure that each side has an equal opportunity to present evidence and argument in support of its case; 
(3)  To subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings, with the approval of the Gwinnett County Recorder's Court or other court with jurisdiction over violations of the ordinances and Code of the City of Grayson, Georgia. Subpoenas may be served by the sheriff, marshal, or police department of Gwinnett County or by any other individual authorized by O.C.G.A. § 24-13-24 to serve subpoenas; 
(4)  To subpoena evidence to its hearings in the same way as provided in subsection (3) of this section; 
(5)  To take testimony under oath; 
(6)  To issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance; 
(7)  To impose fines upon violators and the real property of violators; and 
(8)  To exercise any and all other powers set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-74-1 et seq. and this article. 
(Ord. of 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 22-35. - Code inspector. 
(a)  The council shall appoint a code inspector to serve at the pleasure of the council for the purpose of performing investigations and ensuring code compliance. 
(b)  The code inspector may not perform investigations or inspections of rental property within the city unless there is a probable cause that a violation of applicable codes exists or did exist. 
(1)  Conditions which may appear in plain view may form the necessary basis for probable cause. 
(2)  If such probable cause exists and a violation is found, the code inspector is required to notify the violator and allow reasonable time to correct the violation. 
(3)  If the violation is not corrected within a prescribed period of time, the enforcement officer shall proceed by calling a hearing before the enforcement board. Repeat violators shall not be afforded with additional time to correct a continuing violation. 
(c)  If the code inspector has substantial reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and immediately notify the board and request a hearing. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2004, § IV; Ord. of 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. of 3-16-2015 added a new § 22-34, and in so doing renumbered §§ 22-34—22-37 as §§ 22-35—22-38, as set out herein. 
Sec. 22-36. - Hearings. 
(a)  The enforcement board shall meet on the fourth Monday of each month at a time and place determined by the board. Additional meetings may be initiated by the code inspector as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-74-1 et seq. The enforcement board shall not be required to meet in any month where there is no business to conduct. A quorum of the enforcement board shall be two members. The chairperson shall preside over hearings before the enforcement board. 
(b)  Notice of a schedule hearing shall be made via hand delivery by the sheriff, code inspector, or other person designated by the council, certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, or by leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with someone over 15 years old. 
(c)  Hearings shall be open to the public, and minutes shall be kept of all hearings. All testimony before the enforcement board shall be under oath and recorded. The enforcement board shall have the authority to issue subpoenas of witness and evidence. Transcripts of the hearings shall be made available upon request and the costs incurred by the city transcribing the hearing shall be assessed to the party making the request. All tapes of the hearings shall be maintained for six months following the date of the hearing. 
(1)  The city attorney, solicitor, code inspector or other member of the administrative staff of the City of Grayson, as designated by the council, shall present each case before the enforcement board. 
(2)  Violators may be represented by an attorney and provide witnesses. 
(d)  The state rules of civil procedure and formal rules of evidence shall not apply; however, fundamental right of due process shall be observed by the enforcement board. 
(e)  At the conclusion of a hearing, the enforcement board shall issue findings of fact and conclusions of law and an order with its ruling and any proper relief as provided by law. The findings and conclusions shall be made by motion and approved by of a majority of present members. The secretary of the enforcement board shall certify the order. The certified copy of an order of the board may include notice of a specific date to perfect compliance and any applicable fine imposed. The order shall be recorded with the county clerk of superior court so as to constitute notice to subsequent purchasers. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2004, § V; Ord. of 6-20-2011; Ord. of 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 22-35. 
Sec. 22-37. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  The enforcement board may impose a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day if the violation involves the health or safety of a third party. 
(b)  The enforcement board may impose a fine not to exceed a total of $1,000.00 if the violation does not involve the health or safety of a third party. 
(c)  The enforcement board may order the violation corrected by a date certain and waive or suspend all or a portion of the fine if compliance is obtained by the specified date. 
(d)  In determining the amount of administrative fine, the enforcement board shall consider: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation; 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(e)  The enforcement board may record a certified copy of an order imposing an administrative fine with the Clerk of Superior Court of Gwinnett County. Such order shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any real or personal property owned by the violator. Three months from the filing of an order constituting a lien, the enforcement board may request that council to foreclose on the lien. No liens shall continue for more than 20 years after the recording of the order with the clerk of court. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2004, § VI; Ord. of 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 22-35. 
Sec. 22-38. - Appeal. 
An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal an order of the enforcement board within 30 days following the issuance of the order to the county superior court. Such an appeal shall be de novo. (Ord. of 4-19-2004, § VII; Ord. of 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to § 22-35. 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 26-31. - Purpose and intent; applicability. 
(a)  It is the intention of the mayor and council of the city by this article to provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property, to thereby prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city, and to prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare of its citizens. 
(b)  This article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(1), §§ 1.1, 1.1) 
Sec. 26-32. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(1), § 1.2) 
Sec. 26-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway, any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof, any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area, timberlands or forests, and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(1), § 2) 
Sec. 26-34. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  Such property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  Such litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-35. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(1), § 4) 
Sec. 26-36. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(1), § 5.1) 
Sec. 26-37. - Evidence. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(1), § 5.2) 
Sec. 26-38. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) of this section, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the court in which the conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to: 
a.  Pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  Pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or, with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pickup and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(b)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(1), § 5.3) 
Sec. 26-39. - Enforcement. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 9-19-2005(1), § 5.4) 
Secs. 26-40—26-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION, AND POLLUTION CONTROL ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 12-18-2017, repealed art. III, §§ 26-61—26-70, and enacted a new article as set out herein. Former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance dated June 21, 2010. 

Sec. 26-61. - Intent. 
Grayson intends that developers shall be required to provide, install and maintain all necessary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, latest edition and any amendments thereto. The subsections that follow within this section are to be interpreted consistent with the foregoing statement of intent. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-62. - Purpose. 
It is hereby declared to be public policy in this section to: 
(1)  Minimize the removal of vegetation and trees during the development process; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of bare earth to precipitation by encouraging the scheduling of land development in increments of workable size which can be completed within a single construction season or within a time period compatible with the type and size of the project; 
(3)  Provide for the re-establishment of vegetation within a reasonable period following completion of final grading and utility installation; 
(4)  Give priority to the paving of streets, parking lots, and other areas within a reasonable time following completion of final grading; and 
(5)  Encourage the use of erosion control and sedimentation techniques found in "Manual for Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control in Georgia" as published by the state soil and water conservation commission and as amended from time. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-63. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Gwinnett County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 26-65(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final Stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 26-64(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et. seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Gwinnett County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of [O.C.G.A.] 12-5-30. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-64. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the City of Grayson; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of Section 26-65(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the City of Grayson from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.l; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the City of Grayson, the City of Grayson shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the City of Grayson shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-65. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 26-65(b), (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPS. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in section 26-65(b), (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a City of Grayson or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a City of Grayson or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of [O.C.G.A.] § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in section 26-65(c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1, et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 26-65(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to [O.C.G.A.] § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to [O.C.G.A.] § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the Division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
e.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any City of Grayson from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 26-65(b), (c) of this article. 
f.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-66. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General . The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The City of Grayson shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Grayson. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Grayson without first obtaining a permit from the City of Grayson to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Grayson and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 26-66(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 26-65(b), (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
A fee shall be charged for land disturbing activities within the City of Grayson in accordance with the city's adopted fee schedule, which may be amended from time to time. 
(1)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the Division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(2)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the City of Grayson shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the City of Grayson. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 26-65(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 26-66(b)(7), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the City of Grayson and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the City of Grayson to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The City of Grayson with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(3)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the City of Grayson may deny the permit application. 
(4)  The City of Grayson may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the City of Grayson may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the City of Grayson with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements . 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Section 26-65(b), (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits . 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the City of Grayson of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the City of Grayson unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the City of Grayson has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 26-65(c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per Section 26-66(b)(7) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Grayson are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by the City of Grayson shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the City of Grayson. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the City of Grayson, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-67. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The City of Grayson will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the City of Grayson shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The City of Grayson must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The City of Grayson shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the City of Grayson, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to [O.C.G.A.] 12-7-8 (a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a City of Grayson. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(g)  Construction site operators must control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-68. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Grayson. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the City of Grayson shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the City of Grayson shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the City of Grayson shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the City of Grayson shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the City of Grayson or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the City of Grayson or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 26-66(b)(7). The City of Grayson may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-69. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-70. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the City of Grayson upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Grayson City Council within 30 days after receipt by the city of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the City of Grayson, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-71. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This amendment shall become effective on the 18 th day of December, 2017. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the City of Grayson or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2017) 
Secs. 26-72—26-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 6-15-2009, repealed the former art. IV, §§ 26-91—26-103, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 11-21-2005(3), §§ 1.2—1.8 and §§ 2—8. 

Sec. 26-91. - Findings. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The municipal separate storm sewer system was designed and installed to manage stormwater so as to prevent localized flooding, damage to property and risk to public safety; 
(2)  Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(3)  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments; 
(4)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters; 
(5)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(6)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(7)  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(8)  Therefore, the mayor and city council as the governing authority of the city adopts this article to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2009) 
Sec. 26-92. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Comply with state and federal laws, statutes, regulations and requirements; 
(2)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(3)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(4)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(5)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2009) 
Sec. 26-93. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the corporate boundaries of the City of Grayson, Georgia (hereinafter "the city"). The city may enter into agreements with county or other municipalities to carry out the purpose of this article. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, and cooperative monitoring and management of the separate storm sewer system and management programs. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2009) 
Sec. 26-94. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. of 6-15-09) 
Sec. 26-95. - Responsibility for administration. 
The mayor or his designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article (hereinafter "appropriate official/department"). 
(Ord. of 6-15-09) 
Sec. 26-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.) or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in sections 26-97 and 26-98 of this article. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the (municipal/county) separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, 122.26 (b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the state EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid; solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. of 6-15-09) 
Sec. 26-97. - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the appropriate official/department as being necessary to protect public health and safety; or 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the State and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. of 6-15-09) 
Sec. 26-98. - Prohibition of illegal connections. 
The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of county water resources. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the appropriate official/department requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the appropriate official/department. 
(Ord. of 6-15-09) 
Sec. 26-99. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the appropriate official/department prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. of 6-15-09) 
Sec. 26-100. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The appropriate official/department shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the appropriate official/department ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The appropriate official/department shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the appropriate official/department to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The appropriate official/department may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the appropriate official/department. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the appropriate official/department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the appropriate official/department access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the appropriate official/department has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the appropriate official/department is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the appropriate official/department may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 6-15-09) 
Sec. 26-101. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone with facsimile no later than within 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the appropriate official/department within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-15-09) 
Sec. 26-102. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the appropriate official/department is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The appropriate official/department is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the appropriate official/department finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the appropriate official/department may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
1.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the appropriate official/department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
2.  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the appropriate official/department. A written notice of appeal should be submitted to the city administrator and must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. A hearing on the appeal before the appropriate board or court (hereinafter "city's appeal designee") shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the written notice of appeal. The decision of the city's appeal designee shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five days of the decision of the city's appeal designee upholding the decision of the appropriate official/department, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within ten days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within the ten days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the appropriate official/department shall deem appropriate, after the appropriate official/department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the appropriate official/department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the appropriate official/department may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear before the city's appeal designee or county record's court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the appropriate official/department may seek cumulative remedies. 
(j)  Fees and costs. The appropriate official/department may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. of 6-15-09) 
Secs. 26-103—26-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 26-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of a stream in its existing or enhanced state of vegetation. 
Department means the city. 
Director means the mayor of the city or designee. 
Impervious cover or impervious surface means any paved, hardened or structural surface, including, but not limited to, buildings, dams, decks, driveways, parking areas, patios, streets, swimming pools, tennis courts, walkways, and other structures. 
Floodplain means those lands subject to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Land development means: 
(1)  All activities associated with the conversion of land or the expansion or replacement of an existing use to any new use intended for human operation, occupancy or habitation, other than for agricultural purposes devoted strictly to the cultivation of the land, dairying or animal husbandry. Such activities include land disturbance (clearing and grubbing the land of vegetation and stumps, and grading) and the construction of improvements such as, but not limited to, streets, driveways or parking areas, water or sewer mains, stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks or other structures permanently placed on or in the property. 
(2)  Where appropriate to the context, the term "development" also may be used to denote a specific subdivision or project which is a single entity or intended to be constructed as in interrelated whole, whether simultaneously or in phases. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, clearing and grubbing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Lot or parcel means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Perennial stream means a watercourse having a source, terminus, banks and channel through which water flows on a continuous basis as depicted on the most recent United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute quadrangle map (scale 1:24,000). 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking land development activity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 26-123(a)(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location where the normal stream flow has wrested the vegetation. The normal stream flow is any flow that consists solely of base flow or consists of both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. Base flow results from the groundwater that enters the stream channel through the soil. This includes spring flows into streams. Direct runoff is the water entering stream channels promptly after rainfall or snowmelts; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 20 acres or more. 
Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 20 acres, the department may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the confining cut of a stream channel. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Trail, multiuse means a hard surface (concrete, asphalt, boardwalk, etc.) transportation structure specifically constructed for alternative transportation such as walking, biking, roller blading, etc., and not intended to transport motorized vehicles such as cars, trucks, motorcycles, etc. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by the county. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial waterway, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently, having a definite channel, bed and bank, and included any area adjacent thereto which is subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(4), art. 2) 
Sec. 26-122. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 26-121. These requirements are in addition to and do not replace or supersede any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law, and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, this article shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair, maintenance or replacement within the same disturbed area of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
b.  Existing development and ongoing land disturbance activities, including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any lawful land development activity that is under construction, has a valid permit, or has submitted a valid and complete application for a permit as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived provided that the permit is or can be issued within 90 calendar days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and all timeframes associated with said permit are observed. 
d.  Any lawful land development activity that has not been submitted for approval but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as a house in a subdivision or a building in an office park or other phased development that has a valid preliminary plat permit per subsection (1)c of this section, or approved concept plan, or has submitted a valid and complete application for approval of a concept plan and receives approval within 90 calendar days as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, provided that the future permit is or can be issued within two calendar years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and all timeframes associated with said permit are observed. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article; however, any activity within a state waters' buffer must meet state requirements: 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route, including, but not limited to, bike paths and pedestrian trails, or utility line; 
2.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.  Land development necessary to provide access to a property; 
4.  Public access facilities that must be on the water, including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
6.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality, and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
b.  Public sewer line installation in easements running parallel with the stream, where necessary, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance within a state waters' buffer must meet state requirements. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (2)a of this section. 
c.  Land development activities within a dedicated transportation right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. 
e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this subsection, the person performing it shall report such work to the city on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten business days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural, or agricultural uses and that are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
g.  Multiuse trails no more than 12 feet in width and activities related to construction of a multiuse trail no more than 12 feet in width, provided the trail complies with the requirements of the article III of this chapter. 
h.  Detention/water quality ponds, provided said ponds comply with all other local, state and federal requirements including but not limited to articles III and VI of this chapter and the U.S Army Corps of Engineers wetlands regulations. 
Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(4), art. III) 
Sec. 26-123. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. The land forming the bank is also considered part of the buffer for purposes of this article. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  The location of septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall comply with the county board of health environmental health section regulations. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Variance procedures. Variance requests from the requirements of this article shall be submitted on an application form as prescribed by the director or the director's designee, along with such fees as shall be established by the city council. The director or the director's designee shall coordinate the review of each variance request with all other affected city departments and shall summarize such comments or recommendations as may be received by the zoning board of appeals for action in its normal course of business. The review must include a recommendation from the department. This subsection describes how to apply for a variance from this article; however, any activity within a state waters' buffer must meet state requirements. Variances may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and it is not specifically exempted from this article, its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the department determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the zoning board of appeals may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the zoning board of appeals shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the zoning board of appeals. The department shall follow the public hearing, or "notice," requirements for a variance to be heard by the zoning board of appeals as provided in the city zoning ordinance. Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  The applicant provides evidence that impacts to the buffer have been avoided or minimized to the fullest extent practicable; 
b.  The project involves the construction or repair of a structure which, by its nature, must be located within the buffer. Such structures include dams and detention/retention ponds; 
c.  Paved recreational foot trails and viewing areas, providing that impacts to the buffer are minimal; 
d.  The proposed land disturbing activity within the buffer will receive a permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, 33 USC 1344, and the Corps of Engineers has received a mitigation plan to be implemented as a condition of such a permit. In addition, land disturbing activities in the buffer that are outside the USACE's jurisdiction must be mitigated; 
e.  The buffer intrusion is mitigated using the procedure established in the county stormwater design manual; 
f.  A valid and complete application for rezoning of the property is submitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and approval of the rezoning by the city council occurs after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and the variance request is consistent with the intent of this article, factoring into account the property owner's reliance on standards in effect at the time of the rezoning; or 
g.  The property is part of a larger master development that has a concept plan previously approved by the city council through the rezoning process, but does not meet the requirements of section 26-122(1)d as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and the variance request is consistent with the intent of this article, factoring into account the property owner's reliance on standards in effect at the time of the rezoning. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A dated site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation that impacts to the buffer have been avoided or minimized to the fullest extent practicable; 
e.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
f.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; 
g.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed; 
h.  A description of the project, with details of the buffer disturbance, including estimated length of time for the disturbance and justification for why the disturbance is necessary; 
i.  Any other reasonable information related to the project that the department may deem necessary to effectively evaluate the variance request; 
j.  A copy of the permit application, supporting documentation, and proposed mitigation plan as submitted to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, 33 USC 1344, if applicable; 
k.  A copy of the permit application, supporting documentation, and proposed mitigation plan as submitted to the state environmental protection division for a variance from the state waters' buffer; and 
l.  A buffer mitigation plan in accordance with the procedure outlined in the county stormwater design manual. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries as determined from field inspection; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The longterm and construction water quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment; and 
g.  The value of mitigation activities as calculated in accordance with the county stormwater design manual. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(4), art. IV) 
Sec. 26-124. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than two-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the department of public utilities may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(4), art. V) 
Sec. 26-125. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof or with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city or its officers or employees for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(4), art. VI) 
Sec. 26-126. - Inspection. 
(a)  The department may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist representatives of the department in making such inspections. The director or the director's designee shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as the director may reasonably deem necessary to carry out the duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose, to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(4), art. VII) 
Sec. 26-127. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction that violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved plan or permit shall be subject to the enforcement actions or penalties outlined herein. Any such action or inaction that is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and also may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the enforcement actions or penalties described in this section shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Enforcement procedures. The following are the enforcement procedures authorized by this article. In the event the owner or responsible person fails to correct the violations after the deadline contained in the notice of violation, the director or the director's designee is authorized to take or impose any one or more of the additional actions contained herein. 
a.  Notices of violation. Enforcement shall begin with the issuance of a written notice of violation to the owner or responsible person by the director or the director's designee. The notice may be delivered personally or sent by first class mail. The notice of violation shall contain at least the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the owner or responsible person; 
2.  The location or address of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
3.  A description of the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial actions or measures necessary to bring an action or inaction into compliance with a permit, approved plan, or this article; 
5.  The deadline or completion date of any such remedial actions or measures; 
6.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the owner or responsible person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
b.  Stop work orders. The director or the director's designee is authorized to issue stop work orders to an owner or responsible person. Stop work orders are effective immediately and shall remain in effect until the necessary corrective actions or remedial measures, as set forth in the notice of violation, have occurred. Stop work orders may be withdrawn or modified by the director or the director's designee in order to enable an owner or responsible person to take necessary remedial actions or measures to correct the violations. 
c.  Refusal to issue certificates of occupancy or completion. The director or the director's designee is authorized to refuse to issue certificates of occupancy or completion for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on a site until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures, as set forth in the notice of violation, or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. 
d.  Suspension, revocation, or modification of permit. The director or the director's designee is authorized to suspend, revoke, or modify a permit that was issued authorizing land disturbing activities or development. The director or the director's designee is authorized to reinstate a suspended, revoked or modified permit after the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures stated in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. The director or the director's designee is also authorized to reinstate such permit, which may include conditions as the director or the director's designee may deem necessary, to enable the owner or responsible person to take the necessary remedial actions or measures to correct the violations. 
e.  Refusal to approve final subdivision plats. The director or the director's designee is authorized to refuse to approve final plats until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. 
f.  Issuance of citations or summons to court. The director or the director's designee is authorized to issue a citation or summons to the owner or responsible person requiring such person to appear in a court of competent jurisdiction to answer charges for violations of this article. 
(2)  Legal penalties and/or remedies. 
a.  Fine and/or sentence. Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city and shall be punished either by a fine not less than $100.00 per day and not greater than $1,000.00 per day, or by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in jail, or by both a fine and jail or work alternate. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
b.  Other legal remedies. In any case in which a violation of this article has occurred, the city, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, or abatement or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(3)  Petition. In any case in which any land is or is proposed to be used or in which activities are undertaken in violation of this article or any amendment thereto adopted by the city council, the city, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, or abatement or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(4), art. VIII) 
Sec. 26-128. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administration. This article shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by the director or the director's designee. 
(b)  Administrative appeal. Appeals of the interpretation by the director or the director's designee of the requirements of this article shall first be submitted in writing (on a form provided by the department) to the director, who shall review the request in a timely manner and receive comments from other affected departments. Such appeal shall be made within 15 days after the decision to be appealed. The appeal thereupon shall be forwarded to the zoning board of appeals for action in its normal course of business. 
(c)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the director or the director's designee, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(4), art. IX) 
Sec. 26-129. - Adoption and amendment. 
(a)  Effective date. 
(1)  This article shall be in full force and effect upon the date of adoption by the city council and shall apply to any land disturbance permit for which an application is received after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect the validity of any building permit lawfully issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Amendments. 
(1)  This article may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. Such amendments shall be effective as of their date of adoption unless otherwise stated in the adopting resolution. 
(2)  Any subdivision or other project for which a valid and complete application for a development permit that shall have been received prior to the adoption of an amendment to this article may, at the developer's option, proceed to completion, and building permits may be issued as though no amendment had been approved, provided that the development permit is or can be issued within 90 calendar days of said amendment and all timeframes associated with said permit are observed. 
(3)  Any subdivision or other project for which a development permit has been issued prior to the adoption of an amendment to this article may, at the developer's option, proceed to completion, and building permits may be issued as though no amendment had been approved. 
(4)  Any subdivision or other project for which only a clearing, clearing and grubbing, or grading permit shall have been issued prior to adoption of an amendment to this article shall be brought into conformance with the amendment (if applicable) prior to issuance of a development permit. 
(5)  No amendment to this article shall be construed to affect the validity of any building permit lawfully issued prior to the adoption of said amendment. 
(Ord. of 11-21-2005(4), art. X) 
Secs. 26-130—26-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 5-18-2015, repealed art. VI in its entirety and enacted a new article as set out herein. Former art. VI pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by an ordinance adopted Sept. 18, 2006. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of amendment. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-151. - Findings. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Grayson, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(3)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can (a) protect human life and health; (b) minimize damage to private property; (c) minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and (d) minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council of the City of Grayson, Georgia, do ordain this chapter and establish this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-152. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-153. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the corporate boundaries of the City of Grayson, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-154. - Basis for area of special flood hazard, areas of future conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics—Flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated March 4, 2013, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for unincorporated Gwinnett County, dated March 4, 2013, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Grayson, Georgia; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the mayor of the city or his designee. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Grayson, Georgia; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia, which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the mayor of the city or his designee. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at city hall. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-155. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Grayson, Georgia or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-156. - Definitions. 
Accessory structure of facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the mayor or his designee's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-change flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other flood prone areas as referenced in section 26-154. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 22, 1997. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 22, 1997. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter the term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after July 22, 1997 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 22, 1997. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the mayor of the city or his designee to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals, or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes repetitive loss. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during a 10-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the structure means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. The term does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-157. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-158. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Secs. 26-159—26-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 26-180. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The Mayor of the City of Grayson, Georgia or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-181. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the ordinance administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the mayor of the city or his designee shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of divisions 3 and 4 of this chapter; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
(6)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the mayor of the city or his designee shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the mayor of the city or his designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the mayor of the city or his designee and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the City of Grayson Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-182. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the mayor of the city or his designee a permit application on a form provided by the mayor of the city or his designee for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-183. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 26-221(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 26-220(5); 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-184. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the mayor of the city or his designee a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The mayor of the city or his designee shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Secs. 26-185—26-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 26-200. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied A zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the Mayor of the city or his designee. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the mayor of the city or his designee, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the mayor of the city or his designee. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-201. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
(a)  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the mayor of the city or his designee. If floodway data is not available from the mayor of the city or his designee, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the mayor of the city or his designee. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-202. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under (a) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of Section 26-203; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the Mayor of the city or his designee using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-203. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 26-223 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently licensed professional engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the mayor of the city or his designee prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the mayor of the city or his designee. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-204. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the mayor of the city or his designee until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the mayor of the city or his designee. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-205. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The mayor of the city or his designee may direct the property owner (at no cost to the City of Grayson, Georgia) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the mayor of the city or his designee. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Secs. 26-206—26-219. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 26-220. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings and substantial improvements of structures (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 26-202, 26-203 and 26-204 have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of Grayson, Georgia to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(9)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(10)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(11)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; and 
(12)  Other public utilities, such as gas and electric systems, shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or public safety hazards from them during flooding; 
(13)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
(14)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
(15)  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this chapter; 
(16)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-221. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
The following provisions, in addition to those in section 26-220, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings . 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 26-202, 26-203 and 26-204 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 26-202, 26-203 and 26-204 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-220(5). 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-220(5). 
(2)  Non-residential buildings . 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 26-202, 26-203 and 26-204 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 26-202, 26-203, and 26-204 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-220(5)(a). New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 26-202, 26-203 and 26-204 may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the mayor of the city or his designee using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation / maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in Al-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the mayor of the city or his designee to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-220(5)(a). The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the mayor of the city or his designee using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities . Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with section 26-220(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings-substantial improvements (section 26-221(1)(b)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 26-202, 26-203 and 26-204 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 26-202, 26-203 and 26-204 have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-220(5)(a). 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
i.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
ii.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 26-220(7). 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-222. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings . For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-220(5)(a). 
(b)  Non-residential buildings . For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-220(5)(a). Non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-223. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones). 
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), the mayor of the city or his designee shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with section 26-220(5). 
Sec. 26-224. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-220(5). 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and shall provide such certification to the mayor of the city of his designee using the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and; 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-225. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 26-183. 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and 
(6)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Secs. 26-226—26-239. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 26-240. - Appeals and variance. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the mayor of the city or his designee, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to mayor of the city or his designee. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the mayor of the city or his designee. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the mayor or his designee shall have the right to appeal such decision to the zoning board of appeals as established by the mayor and council of the City of Grayson, Georgia in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the zoning board of appeals. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County, Georgia, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the mayor of the city or his designee and zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(8)  Conditions for variances. 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
i.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
ii.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The mayor of the city of his designee shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the mayor of the city or his designee and zoning board of appeals shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the mayor of the city or his designee and the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Secs. 26-241—26-249. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 26-250. - Generally. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-251. - Notice of violation. 
If the mayor of the city or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Mayor of the city or his designee by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 26-252. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the mayor of the city or his designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Mayor of the city or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order . The mayor of the city or his designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy . The mayor of the city or his designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit . The mayor of the city or his designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the mayor of the city or his designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties . In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the mayor of the city or his designee shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the mayor of the city or his designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the mayor of the city or his designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties . For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the mayor of the city or his designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear before the code enforcement board of the City of Grayson, Georgia, to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(6)  Other remedies . In any case in which a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2015) 
Secs. 26-253—26-269. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 26-270. - Loud, unnecessary or unusual noise - prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city, and which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability more than 50 feet from the point of origin of this sound or noise. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 26-271. - Same—Enumeration. 
The following acts among others are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary sounds or noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city, except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of this signaling device and the sounding of this device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of this signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up is prohibited. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is reasonably necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which this machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of the set, instrument, phonograph machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the room, building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure is prohibited. Announcements over loudspeakers shall only be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, and the like. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity, is prohibited. 
(5)  Noisy animals or birds. Anyone who keeps or maintains an animal or bird that unreasonably disturbs the comfort or repose of any person, because the animal or bird is emitting frequent or long continued sound or noise, and who continues to keep, maintain or allow any animal or bird to so disturb the comfort or repose of any person or persons shall be deemed in violation of this section, provided that the person keeping or maintaining the animal or bird has been first notified in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the complaining party that this animal or bird being kept by the addressee is unreasonably disturbing his or her comfort or repose. This section shall be liberally construed to accomplish the objective of the section, and the person making this written notification need not use the exact words of this section to the addressee so long as the notification sufficiently informs the addressee of the nature of the disturbing noise emitted by the animal or bird. Upon receipt of a certified letter notifying the person keeping or maintaining such animal or bird, such person shall be required to immediately comply with this section. This section shall not apply to horses, livestock, poultry or other farm animals, provided they are maintained in accordance with city zoning regulations or ordinances. 
(6)  Construction or repair of buildings. The erection, excavating, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays is hereby prohibited, except that the building inspector may determine when the loss or inconvenience that would result to any party in interest is of such a nature as to warrant special consideration, then the building inspector may grant a permit for a period not to exceed ten days or less for this work to be done between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(7)  Transportation of metal rails, similar materials. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any manner so loaded as to cause unreasonably loud noises or as to unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of those streets or other public places is prohibited. 
(8)  Pile drivers, hammers, similar equipment. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by unreasonably loud or unusual sounds or noises is prohibited. 
(9)  Blowers and motors. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noises due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids is prohibited, unless the noise from this blower or fan is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler device reasonably sufficient to deaden the noise. 
(10)  Sound trucks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes is prohibited. The use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during such hours, and with such unreasonable volume as would constitute a public nuisance is prohibited. 
(11)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler is prohibited, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger upon request of proper authorities. 
(12)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, or motor boat is prohibited, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(13)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create unreasonably loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises is prohibited. 
(14)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of unreasonably loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers is prohibited. 
(15)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any unreasonably excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of the institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospitals is prohibited, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets indicating that it is a school, hospital or court street. 
(16)  Hawkers, peddlers, vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood is prohibited. 
(17)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale is prohibited. 
(18)  Operation of motor vehicles. The operation of motor vehicles, including cars, trucks, motorcycles, upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle access or pedestrian walkway, or street, public or private, so as to create unreasonable noise and to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the inhabitants of the neighborhood is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 26-272. - Same—Exceptions. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city, county or state while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform this work during the day. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2012) 
Sec. 26-273. - Same—Enforcement and jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by any authorized law enforcement officer, including but not limited to personnel with the Gwinnett County Police and Gwinnett County Sheriff, and any alleged violations of this article shall be returned to and subject to the jurisdiction of the Recorder's Court of Gwinnett County. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2012) 
Chapter 30 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Prohibiting the use of public property for personal purposes. 
(a)  Property of the city shall be used only for those public purposes which are allowed by ordinance and law. No elected official, employee or agent of the city shall be authorized to use any property of the city for personal purposes. Any personal use of property of the city shall be an ultra vires act and shall subject the elected official, employee or agent to personal responsibility for those acts in addition to any other penalties that may be provided by ordinance, state or federal law. 
(b)  A copy of this section shall be provided to all elected officials, employees and agents of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1990) 
Sec. 30-2. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Graffiti shall mean any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any public or private buildings, structures, places or property without prior authorization, in accordance with all ordinances of the city, by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, chalk, dye, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark. 
(2)  Graffiti abatement shall mean the abatement procedure that identifies graffiti, issues notices to the landowner to abate the graffiti, and cures or removes such graffiti in absence of a response. 
(3)  Gum label shall mean any substance consisting of a material such as, but not limited to, paper, fabric, cloth, plastic, vinyl and/or any other similar material, where the material also contains one or more surfaces containing a substance such as, but not limited to, any material commonly known as an adhesive or glue, which cannot be removed from the surface in an intact condition and with minimal efforts, including, but not limited to, decals, stickers, patches, stamps, or labels. 
(4)  Paint stick shall mean any device which contains any substance, solid or liquid, including, but not limited to, any form of any substance commonly known as paint, stain, ink, chalk, way, epoxy, and/or any other similar substance which can be applied to any surface by such means as applying pressure to and/or contacting any surface in such a way as to leave any visible mark. 
(5)  Private contractor shall mean any person with whom the city shall have contracted to remove graffiti. 
(b)  Findings; nuisance. The city council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and is destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. Unless the city acts quickly to require the removal of graffiti from public and private property, the graffiti tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti, entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the city and its residents. Further, the city finds that rapid or prompt removal (less than 72 hours) serves as a deterrent to future defacement and such defacement is less likely to reappear. The city finds that graffiti and other defacement of public and private property, including walls, rocks, bridges, buildings, fences, gates, signage, other structures, trees, and other real and personal property within the city constitutes a nuisance. 
(c)  Graffiti prohibited. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to write, paint, draw, crave, scratch, erect, or place upon any wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate, signage, other structure, tree or other real or personal property, either publicly or privately owned, any drawing inscription, figure, or mark of the type which is commonly known or referred to as "graffiti." Any such "graffiti" shall be removed or eradicated within 72 hours of its first appearance. 
(d)  Violation. A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by fine, restitution, or other penalty as the city's code enforcement board deems just and reasonable. 
(e)  Notice to remove . 
(1)  Whenever the city's code enforcement officer or his designee determines that graffiti exists on any private property which is visible to any person utilizing any public road, parkway, alley, sidewalk, or other right of way or any public park or property, the code enforcement officer shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall be given three days from the date of the notice to remove the graffiti or the same will be subject to abatement by the city. 
(2)  The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this section shall be a written notice and shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected property, as such owner(s) name and address appears on the last property tax assessment rolls of Gwinnett County, Georgia. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent to the property address. The notice may be served in any of the following manners: 
a.  By personal service on the owner, occupant or manager of the property; 
b.  By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner; or 
c.  By posting a copy on the property. 
(f)  Removal by city; lien. Upon failure of the owner(s) to comply with the notice to remove, the code enforcement officer shall issue a notice to appear before the code enforcement board. The code enforcement board shall be permitted to allow the city or a private contractor to remove the graffiti and charge any costs associated with removal to the owner of the property. The code enforcement board shall not be limited to removal by the city or a private contractor and may allow any fines, restitution or other penalty to become a lien against the property. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2011) 
Sec. 30-3. - Park hours. 
The Grayson Community Park shall be open to the public each day from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. It shall be illegal for anyone to remain in the park between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. without specific permission from the city of Grayson. 
On the days in which the city conducts a city sponsored event, including but not limited to, Grayson Day, Brew and Que, Gimme Shelter, and Christmas in Grayson, the park shall be open for these specified activities, and other activities may be limited. On these days, the park shall close 30 minutes following the announced closing time of the event. The city shall erect proper signage to notify the public of the hours of the event and the closing time of the park. 
(Ord. of 3-18-2019) 
Secs. 30-4—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR 

Sec. 30-31. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Grayson Clean Indoor Air Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 2-17-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 30-32. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Numerous studies, including those published by the Surgeon General of the United States and recent reports, of the Environmental Protection Agency, have shown that secondhand smoke is: 
(1)  A cause of disease, including lung cancer, in healthy nonsmokers; 
(2)  A major contributor to indoor air pollution; and 
(3)  Particularly harmful to children, elderly people and allergic individuals. 
(b)  Accordingly, the mayor and council find and declare that the purpose of this article is to protect the public health and welfare by regulating smoking in public places and places of employment. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2003, § 2) 
Sec. 30-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Designated smoking area , in all other areas, means any enclosed indoor area in which smoking is permitted. Such smoking area shall be clearly designated and separate from any area in which smoking is not permitted. In a place of employment, the designated smoking area shall be separate from a smoke-free work area by floor to ceiling walls or ventilation technology effective in reducing the effects of smoke on the smoke-free area other than portable air cleaning devices provided, however, that no restrooms or employee lounges, shall be designated smoking areas. 
Dining area means any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which food is served. 
Employer means any person, partnership, associate, corporation or nonprofit entity which employs one or more persons, including the legislative, executive and judicial branches of the city government. 
Food service establishment means any establishment for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term includes, restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places which manufacture retail-sandwiches, soda fountains, institutional cafeterias (both public and private), food carts, industrial cafeterias, catering establishments, food vending vehicles, and operations connected therewith, and similar facilities by whatever name called. The term food service establishment shall not mean an establishment which does not provide seating or facilities for consumption of food on premises. The term food service establishment shall not include any dining area located within a health care, educational, or child care facility. Food courts within enclosed shopping malls shall be treated as food service establishments under this article. When determining food service establishment seating capacity, outdoor seating will not be included in the total number. 
Health department means the county health department. 
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, employee lounges, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. 
(1)  A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a childcare facility or a health care facility. 
(2)  The dining area of a food service establishment shall not be treated as a place of employment under this article. 
Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted including, but not limited to, restaurants, stores, offices, waiting rooms, lobbies, public transit, restrooms, enclosed shopping malls, educational recreational and health care facilities, child care facilities, auditoriums, theaters, sports arenas, service lines, airports, and meeting rooms. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a childcare facility or a health care facility. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store in which the sale of tobacco products designed for smoking comprises more than 50 percent of its receipts. 
Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other smoking equipment in any manner or form. 
Sports arena means enclosed sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events. 
Tobacco business means a sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, or other enterprise, in which the primary activity is the sale, manufacture, or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products, or accessories, and in which the sale, manufacture or promotion of other products is merely incidental. 
Work area means an area in a place of employment where one or more employees are routinely assigned and perform services for their employer. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2003, § 3) 
Sec. 30-34. - Regulation of smoking. 
(a)  Smoking in public places. Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in all public places, including food service establishments, within all of the city. 
(b)  Smoking in places of employment. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking in all places of employment is prohibited in the following manner: 
a.  Smoking shall be prohibited in auditoriums, gymnasiums/restrooms, elevators, classrooms, hallways, employee medical facilities and rooms or areas which contain photocopying equipment or other office equipment used in common, and in company vehicles occupied by more than one person unless the occupants of such vehicle agree that smoking may be permitted; 
b.  Smoking shall be prohibited in conference rooms and meeting rooms, unless everyone in that room agrees that smoking may be permitted. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the above prohibitions, employers in places of employment shall: 
a.  Provide nonsmoking employees with a smoke-free work area. 
b.  Provide for contiguous nonsmoking areas in employee cafeterias and lunchrooms, the contiguous nonsmoking areas in employee cafeterias and lunchrooms shall be sufficient to meet employee demand. An employer may not determine that no such demand exists. 
c.  Not be required to make any expenditures or structural changes to create a smoke-free work area. In the event an employer cannot, after using its best efforts, comply with an employee's request for smoke-free work area, the employer shall designate that employee's work area as a smoke-free work area. 
(c)  Smoking near entrances to public places and food service establishments. Smoking is prohibited within 20 feet of any entrance or door to a public place or food service establishment, except that smoking shall be permitted within an outdoor patio area of a food service establishment that is within 20 feet of an entrance or door. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2003, § 4; Ord. of 3-3-2003; Ord. of 1-25-2010) 
Sec. 30-35. - Exceptions. 
The regulation of smoking pursuant to this article shall not apply in the following areas: 
(1)  Private homes, private residences and private automobiles. 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests, except for those rooms designated by such hotels and motels as no smoking rooms. 
(3)  Retail tobacco stores and tobacco businesses. 
(4)  A designated smoking area in a place of employment, except that no designated smoking area shall be permitted in any health care or childcare facility. 
(5)  Work areas in any place of employment so long as: 
a.  The work area is exclusively occupied by smokers; 
b.  Everyone in the work area reaches an agreement that smoking may be permitted; 
c.  The work area is not subject to regular entrance by the public or nonsmokers; and 
d.  The work area is separated from a smoke-free work area by floor to ceiling walls or some other means, equally effective in reducing the effects of smoke on the smoke-free work area, other than portable air cleaning devices. 
(6)  A designated smoking area in a public place. 
(7)  Banquet or meeting rooms when these rooms are being used for private functions. 
(8)  Persons residing within longterm care facilities, as that term is defined by state law, so long as the resident does not interfere with the rights of others or unless prior to admission the resident, guardian, or representative is informed of written admission policies which limit or ban smoking. 
(9)  Jails, prisons, and county places of incarceration wherein persons who are charged with the commission of criminal offenses or have been convicted of criminal offenses are housed. 
(10)  Wholly or partially enclosed private boxes in indoor sports arenas and in such designated smoking areas of the sports arena. 
(11)  Limousines under private hire by an individual or corporation. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2003, § 5) 
Sec. 30-36. - Declaration of smoke-free environment. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed, interpreted or construed to restrict or prohibit any person in charge of any public place or place of employment from designating that place a smoke-free facility and prohibiting smoking in areas which otherwise would be permitted by this article. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2003, § 6) 
Sec. 30-37. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  Because ordinances regulating smoking are primarily self-enforcing, adequate signage is important. 
(b)  "Smoking," "No Smoking," or the international symbol for "No Smoking," consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle, with a red bar across it, whichever are appropriate, shall be conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is regulated by this article by the person in charge of such facility. Such signs shall be configured as follows: a minimum size requirement of four inches by four inches and containing letters of not less than one inch in height. 
(c)  Every food service establishment shall have posted at each entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that the establishment is a non-smoking establishment. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2003, § 7) 
Sec. 30-38. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Although smoking ordinances are primarily self-regulating, enforcement of this article shall be the ultimate responsibility of the county department of health. 
(b)  The department of health may initiate any action to seek enforcement of this article on its own motion or upon information provided by any citizen. Any officer of the county police department also may initiate an action for violation of this article if a violation occurs in his/her presence. Any other police officer whose jurisdiction is located within the county may initiate an action for violation of this article if a violation occurs in his/her presence, provided that the violation occurs within that officer's jurisdiction. 
(c)  Any owner, operator or manager of any establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this chapter of this article's provisions. 
(d)  In any dispute arising under this article, the need to breathe smoke-free air shall be given precedence over the need to smoke. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2003, § 8) 
Sec. 30-39. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted or prohibited by other applicable laws, regulations or policies. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2003, § 9) 
Sec. 30-40. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who smokes or any person who allows smoking in violation of this article, or any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and every violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2003, § 11) 
Chapter 34 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 25, 2007, amended Ch. 34 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 34, §§ 34-1—34-20, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of 8-19-2002, intro. ¶ and §§ 2—20; Ord. of 1-16-2006. 

Sec. 34-1. - Determination. 
The city wishes to exercise its power under the law to provide to all persons in the city garbage and solid waste collection and disposal. Considerations of economy and efficiency show that the best way for the city to provide such service is by using a franchisee as an instrumentality. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, intro. ¶) 
Sec. 34-2. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Solid Waste Management Ordinance of the City of Grayson, Georgia." 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 34-3. - Definitions. 
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory not merely directory. 
"City" shall mean the City of Grayson, Georgia. 
"Franchisee" shall mean United Waste Service a/k/a Robertson Sanitation (hereinafter "United"). 
"Person" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
"Refuse" shall mean and include the terms garage, solid waste, recyclable materials, refuse, rubble, rubbish, trash, yard waste, yard trimmings, white goods and other similar forms of waste. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 2) 
Sec. 34-4. - Collection by franchisee. 
There is hereby granted by the city to United the right and privilege to operate and maintain a residential refuse collection service in, upon, along, across, above and over the streets, alleys, public ways, and public places in the City of Grayson, Georgia. 
All residential refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the franchisee. No other person, firm or corporation shall collect or convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of, any residential refuse accumulated in the city. 
Persons may become exempt from the provisions of this chapter by providing the City of Grayson with documentation certifying that the person disposes of their own refuse in a safe and lawful manner in compliance with all other laws, regulations and rules of the City of Grayson and the State of Georgia. Any such exemptions shall be solely for individual persons and no person shall be allowed to dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city by any other person. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 3) 
Sec. 34-5. - Collection supervised by franchisee. 
All residential refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the franchisee. The franchisee shall have the authority to recommend regulations concerning pre-collection practices, the days of collection, type and location of waste containers, and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal as it shall find necessary, and to recommend changes and modifications to the same, provided that such regulations are not valid without the consent of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 34-6. - Pre-collection practices. 
It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any residential premises to keep all refuse pending collection and disposal as follows: 
(1)  Each residence shall be provided with one 90-gallon roll-a-way poly-cart (hereinafter "cart"). All refuse shall be free from liquid and placed in water tight plastic bags and the top secured and placed within the cart provided for each residence. All carts shall be kept clean and free of accumulated refuse or wastes and shall be treated with an effective insecticide if necessary to prevent the creation of a nuisance. 
(2)  Each owner shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon the property occupied by him or public thoroughfares adjoining his property. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to place or cause to be placed in any refuse container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable product, toxic waste, medical or quarantined waste products or any other dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(4)  The disposal of wearing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed will be at additional expense to the resident. Such refuse should not be placed inside the cart for routine collection. The resident should contact the franchisee and arrange for special collection of these materials. 
(5)  Ashes shall be placed and maintained in separate containers. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to ascertain that all ashes are cool and that no hot coals remain. 
(6)  Yard waste or trimmings shall be placed inside proper lawn waste bags to ensure collection. Yard waste or trimmings shall consist of lawn and shrub trimmings, small branches and other such inert material that will fit inside paper lawn waste bags. However, if the yard waste consists of small branches or tree limbs, the branches or limbs may be tightly bundled in pieces not to exceed four feet in length and no bundle shall weight more than 50 lbs. It shall be a violation of this chapter to place or cause to be placed for collection any yard waste or trimmings that are not properly contained inside a paper lawn waste bag or branches and limbs that are not properly bundled. 
(7)  Carts shall be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on scheduled pick up days. Carts shall not be placed curbside more than 12 hours prior to the regularly scheduled pick up day and shall be removed within 12 hours following the regularly scheduled pick up day. Carts shall be placed within 15 feet of the curb or edge of the payment/asphalt of the street or alley and shall be accessible to the side of the street or alley from which the collection is made. However, carts shall not be placed in or on the surface of the roadway, street or alley. 
(8)  Yard waste and trimmings shall be placed at the curbside by 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled pick up day. All other conditions in subsection (7) above apply. 
(9)  Persons who are unable to place their cart at curbside due to physical handicaps may apply to the city for an exemption and, if approved, may receive pull house service from their residence. All persons residing within said residence must be physically handicapped and approved by the city before this service is provided. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 5) 
Sec. 34-7. - Storing refuse. 
No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley, or other public place, or upon any private property whether owned by such person or not, within the city except it be in proper containers for collection or under express approval granted by the franchisee. Nor shall any person throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water. 
Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
No person shall cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place or into any occupied premises within the city. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 6) 
Sec. 34-8. - Collection practices. 
(a)  Residential. 
(1)  Refuse accumulated by residents shall be collected at curbside once each week. The day of collection shall be established by mutual agreement of the city and the franchisee. The franchisee shall observe three annual holidays. They are as follows: New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. Should one of these holidays fall on a collection day, the collection day shall be the following day. 
(2)  There shall be no collections before 7:00 a.m. nor after sunset. 
(3)  The franchisee shall collect a reasonable accumulation of refuse from each household during a collection period for the standard charge but shall not be required to collect more than one 90-gallon cart and 15 bags or bundles of yard waste or trimmings per week. 
(b)  Commercial. 
(1)  Any business or commercial establishment whose refuse collection requirements may be satisfied by the use of the 90-gallon cart to be provided to residential customers may make use of the services of the franchisee under the same terms and conditions as a residential customer. 
(2)  Any business or commercial establishment whose refuse collection needs cannot be satisfied by use of the 90-gallon cart to be provided for residential customers shall be responsible for contracting for the safe and lawful disposal of their refuse. Each year, prior to payment of any occupation tax due to the city, the business or commercial establishment must provide certification to the city that sanitation service has been arranged for by the business. 
(3)  The franchise granted by this chapter is for residential refuse collection only and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require commercial or business customers to use the services of the franchisee. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 7) 
Sec. 34-9. - Fees. 
(a)  For all residences except multi-family buildings which come under subsection (b) below, the rate for refuse collection shall be $48.06 paid quarterly. 
(b)  Duplexes, triplexes and quadruplexes will be billed $48.06 per occupied unit in the building per month. No refuse collection shall be provided by the franchisee for multiple-family dwellings containing more than four dwelling units. These buildings shall be considered commercial or business customers. 
(c)  The rate for business customers eligible to use the residential collection services as provided in this chapter shall be $48.06 paid quarterly. 
(d)  The rate for citizens over age 65 or who qualify for tax exemptions as a result of medical disabilities shall be $32.85 paid quarterly. 
(e)  The franchisee will provide routine maintenance or replacement of carts due to reasonable wear and tear. The customer shall be responsible for payment for any cart which must be replaced as a result of abuse, neglect, loss, or theft. The cost of replacement of the cart shall be billed to the customer on the next regular bill. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 8) 
Sec. 34-10. - Delinquent accounts. 
(a)  A ten percent penalty shall be assessed on all accounts considered delinquent. 
(b)  All accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid by the 15th day of the month in which the monthly statement is issued. All delinquent accounts are subject to stoppage of service without notice. If a delinquent account is not paid within 30 days, the city may cease all refuse collection for that account. Service shall be resumed thereafter only on payment of the accumulated fees for the period of collection and of the period of non-collection plus penalties. 
(c)  The stoppage of services hereinbefore authorized for non-payment of collection charges shall be in addition to the right of the city to proceed for the collection of such unpaid charges in a manner provided by law for the collection of a municipal claim, including, but not limited to, issuance of an execution for the collection of said charges and the levy, advertisement and sale of real property in order to enforce payment of said execution. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 9) 
Sec. 34-11. - Duration and acceptance of franchise. 
(a)  This franchise and the rights, privileges, and authority granted shall continue in force until October 1, 2012, provided that within ten days after the passage of this chapter the franchisee shall file with the city administrator its unconditional acceptance of this franchise and promise to comply with and abide by all its provisions, terms, and conditions. Such acceptance and promise shall be in writing duly executed and sworn to, by or on behalf of the franchisee before a notary public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(b)  Should the franchisee fail to comply with subsection (a) above, it shall acquire no rights, privileges, or authority under the franchise whatever. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 10) 
Sec. 34-12. - Hold harmless and indemnification. 
(a)  The franchisee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, agents and employees as a result of the grant of this franchise. Such indemnification shall be for, but not limited to, negligence on the part of the franchisee in the maintenance and operation of its refuse collection services. 
(b)  The franchisee shall pay all expenses incurred by the city, its elected officials, officers, agents and employees in defending itself or themselves with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (a) above. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, such as attorney's fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the city attorney or his assistants or any employees of the city. 
(c)  A certificate showing that insurance coverage has been obtained and is currently in force and effect shall be filed with the city administrator prior to the commencement of service by the franchisee and within 30 days of the anniversary date of the policy in each and every year. 
(d)  The franchisee shall maintain insurance with a reputable company or companies licensed to do business in the State of Georgia to protect the city and the franchisee from any and all claims, injury or damage to the persons or property, both real and personal, caused directly or indirectly by the operation of the refuse collection service. The amount of such insurance shall not be less than $300,000.00 for property damage, per occurrence, $500,000.00 for personal injury, per person, and $1,000,000.00 for personal injury per occurrence. Workmen's Compensation Insurance shall also be maintained as required by the laws of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 11) 
Sec. 34-13. - Restriction on transfer or assignment. 
The franchisee may not transfer or assign this franchise without the prior express and written approval of the mayor and city council of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 12) 
Sec. 34-14. - Franchisee fee. 
(a)  The city shall pay the franchisee 85 percent of all revenues collected as a result of billings provided under this chapter. The city shall bill its residents on or about the first day of January, April, July and October. Payment by the city to the franchisee shall be submitted by the twenty-eighth day of February and the thirtieth day of May, August and November. 
(b)  The franchisee shall be bound by variances and special exceptions when granted by the mayor and city council. The franchisee shall receive the same pro rata share as a normal billing when a customer's bill is adjusted up or down. 
(c)  Rates provided in this chapter shall remain constant through September 30, 2010; thereafter, the franchisee may request a rate adjustment which shall become effective if approved by the mayor and council of the city. After the first rate adjustment is approved by the mayor and council of the city, applications for future rate adjustments may be considered no more frequently than every 24 months. 
(d)  The city shall bill customers directly. 
(e)  The city shall be entitled to retain 15 percent of all revenues collected as administrative costs for providing the billing service. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 13) 
Sec. 34-15. - Requests for variances and special exceptions. 
The city shall establish a written procedure whereby any person aggrieved by the regulation or a fee charged by the city shall have the right to appeal such regulation or fee and seek relief. 
Persons filing requests for variances or special exceptions on the form provided by the city shall have their requests heard and ruled on within 60 days by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 14) 
Sec. 34-16. - Amendments to chapter. 
This chapter may be amended, modified, revoked, or otherwise changed by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Grayson at any time and from time to time as said mayor and city council deem appropriate. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 15) 
Sec. 34-17. - Penalties for failure to comply. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 16) 
Sec. 34-18. - Termination of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the city by virtue of this franchise or otherwise, the city reserves the right to terminate or cancel this franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchisee hereunder in the event that the franchisee: 
(1)  Violates any provision of this franchise or any rule, order, or determination of the city or the mayor and city council made pursuant to this franchise, except where such violation is without fault or through excusable neglect. 
(2)  Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt; 
(3)  Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this franchise or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city; 
(4)  Franchisee has a change in the ownership of 50 percent or more of its stock, without the city's consent. 
(b)  Such termination and cancellation shall be by ordinance duly adopted after 30 days notice to the franchisee and shall in no way affect any of the city's rights under this franchise or any provision of law. In the event that such termination and cancellation depends upon a finding of fact, such findings of fact as made by the mayor and city council or its representative shall be conclusive. Provided however, that before this franchise may be terminated and canceled under this section, the franchisee must be provided with an opportunity to be heard before the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 17) 
Sec. 34-19. - Customer complaints. 
(a)  The city shall maintain a register of complaints it receives from customers and shall regularly notify franchisee of these complaints. 
(b)  The franchisee should attempt to handle missed pick ups on the same day, if reported by 2:00 p.m. All missed pick ups shall be corrected within 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 18) 
Sec. 34-20. - Recycling collection practices. 
(a)  Each residence shall receive, upon request, an 18 gallon recycling bin. 
(b)  For all residents desiring to voluntarily participate in recycling, franchisee shall collect recyclables curbside each week. 
(c)  The franchisee reserves the right to change the type and number of recovered items. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 19) 
Sec. 34-21. - Lien and delinquency enforcement. 
(a)  The city shall have the power, right and authority to assess, levy, collect and enforce monthly, quarterly or annually, a sanitation or garbage and solid waste collection and disposal assessment (hereinafter "sanitation assessment") in such amount or amounts provided for in a fee schedule duly adopted by the council of the city based on the type of property and not the amount of solid waste collected, which sanitation assessment shall be a charge and lien against the real property for which said sanitation assessment was charged and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except liens for taxes or other assessments. The city shall have the power and authority to enforce the collection of said sanitation assessment by execution to be issued by the city clerk against the real property and against the owner thereof for the amount so assessed, which execution shall be levied and the property advertised and sold in the same manner and with the same effect as tax executions are now levied and property sold thereunder by the city. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to discontinue sanitation or garbage and solid waste collection and disposal (hereinafter "sanitation collection") for any property whose assessment is past due 30 days or more. The city shall have the right to withhold sanitation collection to said property until such time as all past due amounts and penalties due thereon are paid in full, whether or not the owner of the property changes hands. Additionally, the city shall have the right to collect a deposit before reestablishing sanitation collection at any property on which sanitation collection was discontinued due to nonpayment or late payment of a sanitation assessment. 
(c)  The above-referenced enforcement and collection options of the city shall be in addition to the right of the city to proceed to collect the sanitation assessment in any lawful manner. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2007, § 20; Ord. of 4-21-2008) 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 21, 2008, repealed the former section 34-21, and enacted a new section 34-21 as set out herein. The former section 34-21 pertained to white goods collection practices. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Chapter 38 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 38-31. - Occupation tax required. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city whether with a location in the city, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or her deputies or to any police officer of said city upon his or their request. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 38-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable costs of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned exhibits, or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
Location or office means and includes any structure or vehicle in which a business, profession or occupation is conducted but shall not include: 
(1)  A temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project; or 
(2)  A vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entitles for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person , wherever used in this article, shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which direct 50 percent or more of their proceeds to charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. §36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 2; Ord. of 11-4-1996(4), §§ 1—4) 
Sec. 38-33. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  The city shall not charge an administrative fee on any business occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  The city shall not charge regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 3) 
Sec. 38-34. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  Levied. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. The number of employees shall be computed by utilizing the number of full time positions or full-time position equivalents, such full time position being defined as 40 hours per week. In addition, the weekly hours of each employee who works less than 40 hours per week shall be added and such sum divided by forty to produce full-time position equivalents. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule. 

 
(c)  Tax per location. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 4; Ord. of 11-4-1996(4), §§ 5, 6) 
Sec. 38-35. - Occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 5) 
Sec. 38-36. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city clerk and that line of business being noted by the city clerk upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 6) 
Sec. 38-37. - Number of businesses considered operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the levy of an occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 7) 
Sec. 38-38. - Classification of professionals. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(22) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on the number of employees as set forth in section 38-34. 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by March 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 8) 
Sec. 38-39. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 9) 
Sec. 38-40. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 10) 
Sec. 38-41. - Allocation of employees of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
For those businesses which have multiple locations inside and outside of the city, only employees who work in the city will be counted for taxing purposes. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 12) 
Sec. 38-42. - Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such charitable purpose. Such business shall also be exempt from administration fees. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 13; Ord. of 11-4-1996(4), § 7) 
Sec. 38-43. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-13-1 et seq., shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 14) 
Sec. 38-44. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 15) 
Sec. 38-45. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city any kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained said registration shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 16) 
Sec. 38-46. - Registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. There is imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before March 1 of each year, on March 2 of each year hereafter. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 38-47. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  Any persons, their managers, agents or employees, who do business in said city after the registration for said business has been revoked as above; any persons, their managers, agents or employees required to make returns, and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, or refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees or representatives of the city request such inspection during the city's business hours for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. For those practitioners of whom the local government cannot suspend the right to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent payment of occupation taxes. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 17) 
Sec. 38-47. - Penalty of article violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of the occupational tax ordinances of the city may be fined as provided in such ordinance or in the absence of such provision, in an amount not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, each day constituting a separate offense. To ensure compliance with the ordinances of the city that require the payment of special taxes, occupational taxes and business license fees, the city clerk is hereby empowered to cite violators of the various ordinances of the city providing for business license taxes, occupation taxes and special taxes related to certain businesses. Such citations shall state the provision of the specific ordinance allegedly violated by the individual cited by the city clerk. 
(b)  Any person failing to obtain a renewal between January 1 and March 31 of each year, or any person failing to obtain a business license prior to commencement of a new business, shall, after 90 days, be liable for an additional ten percent of the amount required to be paid as a penalty for failure to obtain the appropriate license or licenses; provided, however, that the minimum penalty shall be $1.00. 
(c)  Any person failing to obtain a renewal between January 1 and April 15 of each year, or any person failing to obtain a business license prior to commencement of a new business, after 90 days shall be liable for an additional charge of interest owed on all delinquent occupation taxes, regulatory fees and administrative fees at the rate of 1.5 percent per month. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 18; Ord. of 11-4-1996(4), § 8) 
Sec. 38-48. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses which purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal and hulls). 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 19) 
Sec. 38-49. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 20) 
Sec. 38-50. - When occupation tax due and payable. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the said city at the office of the city clerk on January 1 of each year and is delinquent if not paid on or before March 1 each year. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 21) 
Sec. 38-51. - Proration of fee for new business. 
No tax registration certificate shall be issued for less than the amount of one year where the same is issued during the first half of the year. Tax registration certificates applied for on or after July 1 of a calendar year shall be charged a fee equal to but not less than half of the applicable tax registration fee as established by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 22; Ord. of 11-4-1996(4), § 9) 
Sec. 38-52. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the number of employees of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and each different line of business will have the number of employees of that line of business identified on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 23) 
Sec. 38-53. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case, the city clerk, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the person or business for which the returns are made. The city clerk shall have the right to inspect the books or records of the business for which the return was made in the city and upon demand of the city clerk such books and records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city, for examination by the city clerk at his discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of ten percent of the amount deficient will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 24) 
Sec. 38-54. - Revocation for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided above, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business in the city for the current year shall be ipso facto revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with this. In the case of those practitioners of whom the local government cannot suspend the right to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the city in the case of delinquent payment of occupation taxes. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 25) 
Sec. 38-55. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 26) 
Sec. 38-56. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is the duty of the city clerk to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed. It is made the further duty of the city clerk and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 28) 
Sec. 38-57. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by council. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 29) 
Sec. 38-58. - Requirement of public hearing. 
The city council shall conduct at least one public hearing: 
(1)  Before adopting any resolution or ordinance regarding the occupation tax; and 
(2)  During the budgeting process of any year which follows any other year during which revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 1; Ord. of 11-4-1996(4), § 10) 
Sec. 38-59. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for improving economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 31) 
Sec. 38-60. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention thereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 32) 
Sec. 38-61. - Occupation tax registration certificates not transferable. 
Occupation tax registration certificates are not transferable, except in cases where the ownership is changed but the name and location are both maintained. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 33) 
Sec. 38-62. - City council to determine disputes. 
Where any question arises as to the amount of occupation tax due or regulatory fees if applicable, or both amounts thereof which may be applicable to any person, firm or corporation, the matter shall be presented and decided by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 34) 
Sec. 38-63. - Business shall comply with other ordinances. 
Each and every business located in the corporate limits of the city must comply with all applicable zoning, noise control, health and sanitation, and any and all other ordinances, resolutions, and/or regulations adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1994, § 35) 
Secs. 38-64—38-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURERS LICENSE FEES 

Sec. 38-91. - Insurers doing business within the city. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 38-92, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $40.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 12-4-1995, § 1; Ord. of 5-16-2011, § 1, eff. 1-1-2012) 
Sec. 38-92. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $14.00 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. of 12-4-1995, § 2; Ord. of 5-16-2011, § 2, eff. 1-1-2012) 
Sec. 38-93. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 38-91 of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-4-1995, § 3; Ord. of 5-16-2011, § 3, eff. 1-1-2012) 
Sec. 38-94. - Gross premiums tax imposed on all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 38-91 of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-4-1995, § 4; Ord. of 5-16-2011, § 4, eff. 1-1-2012) 
Sec. 38-95. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 38-91and 38-92 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 2012 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. of 12-4-1995, § 5; Ord. of 5-16-2011, § 5, eff. 1-1-2012) 
Chapter 42 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 

Sec. 42-1. - Speed limits adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-181 and 40-6-183 concerning maximum lawful vehicle speeds as established by law, and alteration of same by local authorities, the following sections regulating speed limits within the county are adopted. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2001) 
Sec. 42-2. - Speed zones established. 
The following speed zones, as shown on the list in section 42-7, are established based on a traffic engineering investigation as required by state law. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2001) 
Sec. 42-3. - Document legal and binding. 
This chapter is a legal and binding document and any unauthorized changes will cause it to be void in its entirety. This includes the removal, installation and/or relocation of signs erected on state rights-of-way or any written changes made to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2001) 
Sec. 42-4. - Radar detection devices. 
It is unlawful to use radar detection devices on any state route, county road or city street not listed in section 42-7. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2001) 
Sec. 42-5. - Construction/work zones. 
This chapter includes all construction/work zones on any state route, county road or city street, as posted when signed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-188. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2001) 
Sec. 42-6. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter can be punished to the maximum provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2001) 
Sec. 42-7. - Traffic schedule. 
Street Master Report #49P 
On and Off System for City 

 
(Ord. of 11-5-2001, exh. A; Ord. of 8-15-2005, exh. A) 
APPENDIX A - INMATE LABOR AGREEMENT 
APPENDIX: INMATE LABOR AGREEMENT 
STATE OF GEORGIA 
COUNTY OF GWINNETT 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT FOR THE PROVISION OF INMATE LABOR FOR THE REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY 
This agreement is made and entered into this 17th day of October 2005 by and between Gwinnett County, Georgia, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia headquartered at 75 Langley Drive, Lawrenceville, Georgia 30045 (hereinafter referred to as "County") and the City of Grayson, a municipal corporation chartered by the State of Georgia and headquartered at 475 Grayson Parkway, Grayson, Georgia 30017 (hereinafter referred to as "City"). By each party's signature to this Agreement, each party represents to the other that it has been duly authorized to enter into this Agreement. 
WITNESSETH: 
WHEREAS, during the 2003 Legislative Session, the Georgia General Assembly passed legislation which codified 2003 Georgia Laws Act 38 in Chapter 17-15A and Title 42 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; and 
WHEREAS, 2003 Georgia Laws Act 38 provides for the use of inmate labor to remove certain graffiti from private property as a form of compensation to innocent victims of criminal trespass or criminal damage to property; and 
WHEREAS, on October 7, 2003, the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners passed a Resolution to establish a policy for clearing graffiti from private property using inmate labor; and 
WHEREAS, on July 5, 2005, the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners passed a Resolution which extends its policy of using County-sentenced inmate labor so as to permit the removal of gang-related graffiti from private property located both in unincorporated and incorporated areas of the County; and 
WHEREAS, on September 20, 2005, the Board of Commissioners revised its policy of using inmate labor to remove graffiti so as to permit the removal of both gang-related and non-gang-related graffiti and so as to allow both County-sentenced and County-supervised inmate labor to remove such graffiti; and 
WHEREAS, the policies adopted by the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners provide for the use of County-sentenced and County-supervised inmate labor to clean or remove graffiti from private property located within both the unincorporated and incorporated areas of Gwinnett County pursuant to Intergovernmental Agreements; and 
WHEREAS, the City recognizes a need to remove graffiti from private property using inmate labor within its incorporated area; and 
WHEREAS, the use of inmate labor to remove graffiti located within the City will provide a material benefit to both the City and the County through the suppression of gang-related activity and damage to property; and 
WHEREAS, the County and the City have determined that it is in their best interests to enter into an Intergovernmental Agreement concerning the use of inmate labor to remove graffiti from private property; 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises and understandings herein made and for other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged, the parties hereto do consent and agree as follows: 
1. 
This Agreement shall commence on the date of execution and shall continue through and including September 30, 2006. The Agreement shall automatically renew for four successive one-year periods unless either party provides the other with at least sixty days written notice of the termination of this Agreement. 
2. 
The City shall designate an employee to act as the City's liaison to the County with regard to requests for graffiti removal within 30 days of the date of execution of this Agreement. 
3. 
Within 30 days of the execution of this Agreement, the County Administrator shall designate the County's staff liaison for the use of inmate labor to remove graffiti from private property. The County's staff liaison will use his or her best efforts to schedule the use of inmate labor to remove graffiti from private property within the City as soon as reasonably practical. Gwinnett County reserves the absolute right to decline a request for the use of inmate labor in the event that such manpower is necessary to perform Gwinnett County work, which shall always be a priority. Gwinnett County further reserves the right to decline a request for inmate labor in the event that the provision of such inmate labor would be contrary to Georgia law or outside the scope of this Agreement, the provision of inmate labor poses an unacceptable risk of harm to inmates or Gwinnett County personnel, the provision of inmate labor poses an unacceptable risk of escape, or for any other reason as determined by the Warden of the Gwinnett County Department of Corrections. 
4. 
The use of inmate labor for removal of graffiti from private property within the City shall be governed by the County's existing policies concerning the same. The County's policies are attached to this Agreement as Exhibit "A" and by this reference made a part hereof. 
5. 
The City's staff liaison shall be responsible for obtaining the property owner's consent to the removal of graffiti from his or her property and any and all fully executed documents required pursuant to the County's policies attached as Exhibit "A." 
6. 
This Agreement constitutes all of the understandings and agreements of every nature or kind existing between the parties with respect to the use of inmate labor for removal of graffiti from private property within the City. 
7. 
This Agreement may be terminated by either party upon sixty days prior written notice to the other. 
8. 
This Agreement shall not be changed or modified except by agreement in writing executed by the parties. 
9. 
This Agreement shall be deemed to have been made and shall be construed and interpreted in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia. 
10. 
It is agreed that the illegality or invalidity of any term or clause of this Agreement shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the Agreement, and the Agreement shall remain in full force and effect as if such illegal or invalid term or clause were not contained herein unless the elimination of such provision detrimentally reduces the consideration that any party is to receive under this Agreement or materially affects the continuing operation of this Agreement. 
11. 
Each party to this Agreement shall comply with all applicable local, State, and Federal statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
12. 
No consent or waiver, express or implied, by either party to this Agreement, to any breach of any covenant, condition, or duty of the other party shall be construed as a consent to or waiver of any future breach of the same. 
13. 
All notices, consents, or waivers provided for under this Agreement shall be deemed properly given if, and only if, delivered personally or sent by registered or certified United States mail, postage prepaid, as follows: 
a.  If to the City: 
City Manager 
City of ________ 
___________ 
___________ 
b.  If to the County: 
Jock Connell 
County Administrator 
75 Langley Drive 
Lawrenceville, Georgia 30045-6900 
Any party may at any time change the address where notices are to be sent or the person to whom such notices should be directed by the delivery or mailing to the above persons a notice stating the change. 
14. 
This Agreement may be executed in counterparts, each of which shall be an original and all of which shall constitute but one and the same instrument. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto acting through their duly authorized agents have caused this Agreement to be signed, sealed, and delivered on the date indicated herein. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Code of Ordinances included in the Code. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A). 

 