THE CODE OF THE CITY OF PEACHTREE CORNERS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2015 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: August 18, 2015  Effective: July 21, 2015 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS of the CITY OF PEACHTREE CORNERS, GEORGIA (2018) 
____________ 
Mike Mason 
Mayor 
____________ 
Phil Sadd 
Eric Christ 
Alex Wright 
Jeanne Aulbach 
Lorri Christopher 
Weare Gratwick 
City Council 
____________ 
Brian Johnson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Bill Riley 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kym Chereck 
City Clerk 
PEACHTREE CORNERS OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Mike Mason 
Mayor 
____________ 
Phil Sadd 
James Lowe III 
Alex Wright 
Jeanne Aulbach 
Lorri Christopher 
Weare Gratwick 
City Council 
____________ 
Julian Jackson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Bill Riley 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kym Chereck 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances and resolutions as adopted by the city council through May 20, 2014. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance or resolution as adopted by the city council through May 20, 2014, included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Kayla Mahnken, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Julian Jackson, City Manager, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 2015. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CODE OF THE CITY OF PEACHTREE CORNERS, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PEACHTREE CORNERS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 62, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 20, 2014, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after May 20, 2014 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective July 21, 2015. 
Passed and adopted by the City Council this 18 th day of August, 2015. 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City Council, held on the 18 th day of August, 2015 
SO ORDAINED AND EFFECTIVE , this 18 th day of August, 2015. 
Approved: 

;b0;ATTEST: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED AN ACT 
To incorporate the City of Peachtree Corners; to provide a charter; to provide for boundaries and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, vacancies, compensation, expenses, qualifications, prohibitions, conflicts of interest, and suspension and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for oaths, organization, meetings, quorum, voting, rules, and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for a mayor and mayor pro tempore and certain duties, powers, and other matters relative thereto; to provide for administrative affairs and responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, a city clerk, and other personnel and matters relating thereto; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof and other matters relative to those judges; to provide for the court's jurisdiction, powers, practices, and procedures; to provide for the right of certiorari; to provide for elections; to provide for taxation, licenses, and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for auditing, accounting, budgeting, and appropriations; to provide for city contracts and purchasing; to provide for the conveyance of property and interests therein; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for prior ordinances and rules, pending matters, and existing personnel; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to provide for effective dates; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2011 Ga. Laws (Act 90), p. 3729, approved by the General Assembly as the Charter of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. Amendments to the Act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
This Act shall constitute the charter of the City of Peachtree Corners. The city and the inhabitants thereof are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style "City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia," and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those set forth and described in Appendix A of this charter, and said Appendix A is incorporated into and made a part of this charter. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, this city shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(4)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(5)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(6)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(7)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(8)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(9)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(10)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(11)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(12)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(13)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(14)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(15)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(16)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(17)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(19)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(20)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of parks and playgrounds, public grounds, recreational facilities, public buildings, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, and sport institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to regulate the use of public improvements; 
(21)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(22)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of sheets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(23)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(24)  Roadways. To grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(25)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of any intoxicating liquors, alcoholic beverages, and the use of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(26)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(27)  Taxes, ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation subject to a maximum of 1 mill; 
(28)  Taxes, other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; and 
(29)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the city shall exercise the powers enumerated in subsection (a) of this section only for the purposes of planning and zoning, code adoption and enforcement, and solid waste management services and those items directly related to the provision of such services and for the general administration of the city in providing such services. 
(c)  In the event that the city desires to provide services in addition to those services enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, the city council shall pass a resolution specifically stating the services sought to be offered by the city and shall submit the approval of such resolution for ratification by the electors of the city in a referendum. If the electors of the city vote in favor of ratifying such resolution, then the city shall be authorized to exercise the powers enumerated in subsection (a) of this section for the purpose of providing such services stated in such resolution and those items directly related to the provision of such services and for the general administration of the city in providing such services. If the electors of the city disapprove such resolution, it shall immediately be null and void and of no force and effect. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the limitations of subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the city may, without the necessity of a referendum, enter into agreements with other governmental entities, including federal and state agencies and other local governments, to provide for any services not currently authorized by this charter but necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens. 
(2013 Ga. Laws (Act No. 139), § 1) 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in Article VIII of this charter for the initial terms of office, the members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. The term of office of each member of the city council shall begin on the first day of January immediately following the election of such member unless general law authorizes or requires the term to begin at the first organizational meeting in January or upon some other date. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the city council; each shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
(b)  The city council seats shall be designated Post 1, Post 2, Post 3, Post 4, Post 5, and Post 6. Candidates shall designate the post for which they are offering for election when qualifying for election. 
(c)  (1)  The members of the city council from Post 4, Post 5, and Post 6 shall be elected by the electors of the city at large by majority vote. 
(2)  For the purposes of electing members of the city council from Post 1, Post 2, and Post 3, the city is divided into three districts. One member of the board shall be elected from each such district by only the electors of such district by majority vote. Post 1, Post 2, and Post 3 shall be and correspond to those three numbered districts as described in the districting plan attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan Name: peachpropl-3dist Plan Type: Local User: Shantee Administrator: H051. 
(d)  When used in such attachment, the terms 'Tract" and "BG" (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a tract description which are underneath a 'BG' heading shall mean and describe individual blocks within a block group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the city which is not included in Post 1, Post 2, or Post 3 as described in that attachment describing Post 1, Post 2, and Post 3 shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the city which is described in that attachment describing Post 1, Post 2, and Post 3 as being in Post 1, Post 2, or Post 3 shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within the post that is contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any commissioner district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. If any area included within the descriptions of Post 1, Post 2, or Post 3 is on the effective date of this Act within the municipal boundaries of another municipality or within a county other than Gwinnett County, such area shall not be included within the district descriptions of such posts. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon such person's failing or ceasing to reside in the city or upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution, Title 45 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment if less than 12 months remain in the unexpired term, otherwise by an election as provided for in Section 5.14 of this charter and Titles 21 and 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(c)  Suspension. Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
(a)  The mayor shall receive an initial salary of $9,000.00 per year, paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of the municipality. Each councilmember shall receive an initial salary of $8,000.00 per year, paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of the municipality. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers may alter such compensation for their services as provided by law. 
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which that person is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of that person or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to that person's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which that person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which that person has a financial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that person shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(e)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(f)  Ineligibility of elected official. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which that person was elected. No former councilmember and no former mayor shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that person was elected. 
(g)  Political activities of certain officers and employees. No appointed officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon election to any public office in this city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the mayor and city council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit that person's office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
Sec. 2.17. - Organizational meetings. 
Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the first Tuesday in January of each even-numbered year. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America." 
Sec. 2.18. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public 
Sec. 2.19. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.20. - Quorum; voting. 
Four councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any councilmember shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of four councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. An abstention shall be counted as an affirmative vote. 
Sec. 2.21. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Peachtree Corners…" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 2.23 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2.22. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.23. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.24. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.21 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.25 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2.25. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 2.26. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation of the mayor's service. 
The mayor shall be elected and shall serve for a term of four years and until the mayor's successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be elected at-large by majority vote. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of the mayor's service. The mayor shall forfeit the office of mayor on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
Sec. 2.27. - Mayor pro tempore. 
By a majority vote, the councilmembers shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's physical or mental disability or absence. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the councilmembers. The mayor pro tempore shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in Section 2.14 of this charter. 
Sec. 2.28. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  Vote on matters before the city council and be counted toward a quorum as any other councilmember; 
(6)  Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; and 
(7)  Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all non-elective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(e)  All appointed officers and directors under the supervision of the mayor shall be nominated by the mayor with confirmation of appointment by the city council. All appointed officers and directors shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the mayor unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the mayor and council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All members of boards, commissions, or authorities of the city serve at will and may be removed at any time by the mayor and council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the mayor and council and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The mayor shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Peachtree Corners. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that such judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the judge's office to the best of the judge's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.19 of this charter. 
State Law reference— Qualifications of municipal court judges, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1.1. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing, as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
Except as otherwise provided in Article VIII of this charter for the initial elections, there shall be a municipal general election biennially in odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. There shall be elected the mayor and three councilmembers at one election and at every other election thereafter. The remaining councilmember seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by majority vote. 
The councilmembers from Post 1, Post 2, and Post 3 shall be elected by a majority vote of the electors of their respective districts. The mayor and councilmembers from Post 4, Post 5, and Post 6 shall be elected by a majority vote of the votes cast for each position by the electors of the city at large. 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant as provided in Section 2.12 of this charter, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, that, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  A councilmember, the mayor, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Peachtree Corners. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax which shall not exceed 1 mill, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the tune when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business in this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this chatter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6.20. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies, provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the O.C.G.A., or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.24. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. The city council shall also comply with the budgeting and auditing provisions of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
Sec. 6.25. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget provided for in Section 6.29 of this charter, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.26. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The councilmembers may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 15 of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.24 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.27. - Levy of taxes. 
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and budget. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.23 of this charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than December 15 of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, that the mayor may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.30. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.31. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.19 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.32. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale and lease of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
Sec. 6.34. - Apportionment of revenue. 
Except as otherwise agreed pursuant to Chapter 70 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the city is authorized to pay all revenues collected by Gwinnett County on behalf of the city to the county in exchange for continuation of services during the transition period provided in Section 8.11 of this charter and beyond, with the exception of the following revenues, which shall stay with the city: 
(1)  New revenues from utility franchise fees; 
(2)  Fines collected in municipal court; and 
(3)  Revenues generated from any additional millage of up to 1 mill above the millage rate imposed in the county special service district. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Construction and definitions. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REFERENDUM AND INITIAL ELECTIONS 

Sec. 8.10. - Referendum and initial election. 
(a)  Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of Gwinnett County shall call a special election for the purpose of submitting this Act to the qualified voters of the proposed City of Peachtree Corners for approval or rejection. The superintendent shall set the date of such election for the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 2011. The superintendent shall issue the call for such election at least 30 days prior to the date thereof. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Gwinnett County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 

 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, it shall become of full force and effect as provided in Section 8.11 of this charter, otherwise it shall be void and of no force and effect. 
The initial expense of such election shall be borne by Gwinnett County. Within two years after the elections if the incorporation is approved, the City of Peachtree Corners shall reimburse Gwinnett County for the actual cost of printing and personnel services for such election and for the initial election of the mayor and councilmembers pursuant to this charter. 
It shall be the duty of the superintendent to hold and conduct such election. It shall be his or her further duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
(b)  For the purposes of the referendum election provided for in subsection (a) of this section and for the purposes of the special election of the City of Peachtree Corners to be held on the date of the 2012 presidential preference primary, the qualified electors of the City of Peachtree Corners shall be those qualified electors of Gwinnett County residing within the corporate limits of the City of Peachtree Corners as described by Appendix A of this charter. At subsequent municipal elections, the qualified electors of the City of Peachtree Corners shall be determined pursuant to the authority of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)  Only for the purposes of holding and conducting the referendum election provided for in subsection (a) of this section and holding and conducting the special election of the City of Peachtree Corners to be held on the date of the 2012 presidential preference primary, the election superintendent of Gwinnett County is vested with the powers and duties of the election superintendent of the City of Peachtree Corners and the powers and duties of the governing authority of the City of Peachtree Corners. 
Sec. 8.11. - Effective dates and transition. 
(a)  The provisions of this Act necessary for the referendum election provided for in Section 8.10 of this charter shall become effective immediately upon this Act's approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
(b)  Those provisions of this Act necessary for the special election provided for in Section 8.13 of this charter shall be effective upon the certification of the results of the referendum election provided for by Section 8.10 of this charter if this Act is approved at such referendum election. 
(c)  Except as provided in Section 8.10 of this charter, the remaining provisions of this Act shall become of full force and effect for all purposes at 12:00 Midnight on June 30, 2012, except that the initial mayor and councilmembers shall take office immediately following their election and by action of a quorum may, prior to 12:00 Midnight on June 30, 2012, meet and take actions binding on the city. 
(d)  A period of time will be needed for an orderly transition of various government functions from Gwinnett County to the City of Peachtree Corners. Accordingly there shall be a transition period beginning on the date the initial mayor and councilmembers take office under this charter, and ending at 12:00 Midnight on December 31, 2013. During such transition period, all provisions of this charter shall be effective as law, but not all provisions of this charter shall be implemented. 
(e)  During such transition period, Gwinnett County shall continue to provide within the territorial limits of the city all government services and functions which Gwinnett County provided in that area during the years 2010 and 2011 and at the same actual cost, except to the extent otherwise provided in this section; provided, however, that upon at least 60 days' prior written notice to Gwinnett County by the City of Peachtree Corners, responsibility for any such service or function shall be transferred to the City of Peachtree Corners. During the transition period, the city shall remain within the Gwinnett County special services district, but shall be removed from such district at the conclusion of such period. Beginning December 1, 2012, the City of Peachtree Corners shall collect taxes, fees, assessments, fines and forfeitures, and other moneys within the territorial limits of the city in the same manner as authorized immediately prior to the effective date of this section; provided, however, that upon at least 60 days' prior written notice to Gwinnett County by the City of Peachtree Corners, the authority to collect any tax, fee, assessment, fine or forfeiture, or other moneys shall remain with Gwinnett County after December 1, 2012, until such time as Gwinnett County receives subsequent notice from the City of Peachtree Corners that such authority shall be transferred to the City of Peachtree Corners. 
(f)  During the transition period, the governing authority of the City of Peachtree Corners: 
(1)  Shall hold regular meetings and may hold special meetings as provided in this charter; 
(2)  May enact ordinances and resolutions as provided in this charter; 
(3)  May amend this charter by home rule action as provided by general law; 
(4)  May accept gifts and grants; 
(5)  May borrow money and incur indebtedness to the extent authorized by this charter and general law; 
(6)  May levy and collect an ad valorem tax for calendar years 2012 and 2013; 
(7)  May establish a fiscal year and budget; 
(8)  May create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city; appoint and remove officers and employees; and exercise all necessary or appropriate personnel and management functions; and 
(9)  May generally exercise any power granted by this charter or general law, except to the extent that a power is specifically and integrally related to the provision of a governmental service, function, or responsibility not yet provided or carried out by the city. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, during the transition period, the Municipal Court of the City of Peachtree Corners shall not exercise its jurisdiction. During the transition period, all ordinances of Gwinnett County shall remain applicable within the territorial limits of the city and the appropriate court or courts of Gwinnett County shall retain jurisdiction to enforce such ordinances. However, by mutual agreement and concurrent resolutions and ordinances if needed Gwinnett County and the City of Peachtree Corners may during the transition period transfer all or part of such regulatory authority and the appropriate court jurisdiction to the City of Peachtree Corners. Any transfer of jurisdiction to the City of Peachtree Corners during or at the end of the transition period shall not in and of itself abate any judicial proceeding pending in Gwinnett County or the pending prosecution of any violation of any ordinance of Gwinnett County. 
(h)  During the transition period, the governing authority of the City of Peachtree Corners may at any time, without the necessity of any agreement by Gwinnett County, commence to exercise its planning and zoning powers; provided, however, that the city shall give the county notice of the date on which the city will assume the exercise of such powers. Upon the governing authority of the City of Peachtree Corners commencing to exercise its planning and zoning powers, the Municipal Court of the City of Peachtree Corners shall immediately have jurisdiction to enforce the planning and zoning ordinances of the city. The provisions of this subsection shall control over any conflicting provisions of any other subsection of this section. 
(i)  Effective upon the termination of the transition period, subsections (b) through (h) of this section shall cease to apply except for the last sentence of subsection (g) [of this section] which shall remain effective. Effective upon the termination of the transition period, the City of Peachtree Corners shall be a full functioning municipal corporation and subject to all general laws of this state. 
(j)  (1)  At the conclusion of the transition period as defined herein, the City of Peachtree Corners shall be deemed to be a part of the existing special service district located in Gwinnett County known as the Police Service District. The participation of the City of Peachtree Corners in the Police Service District shall be subject to, and in accordance with, the existing terms and conditions of participation as established by Gwinnett County with other participating cities, including, but not limited to, those terms and conditions related to costs, funding, duration, and modification of services. Gwinnett County is expressly authorized to provide police services within the City of Peachtree Corners and, for the purpose of funding such services, to establish and levy a tax on property located within the City of Peachtree Corners at a millage rate that is uniform with property located in other cities and unincorporated areas participating in the Police Service District, but the millage rate shall not be counted against the 1 mill maximum imposed on taxes established and levied by the City of Peachtree Corners. 
(2)  At the conclusion of the transition period as defined herein, the City of Peachtree Corners shall be deemed to be a part of the existing special service district located in Gwinnett County known as the Fire and Emergency Medical Service District. The participation of the City of Peachtree Corners in the Fire and Emergency Medical Service District shall be subject to, and in accordance with, the existing terms and conditions of participation as established by Gwinnett County with other participating cities, including, but not limited to, those terms and conditions related to costs, funding, duration, and modification of services. Gwinnett County is expressly authorized to provide fire and emergency medical services within the City of Peachtree Corners and, for the purpose of funding such services, to establish and levy a tax on property located within the City of Peachtree Corners at a millage rate that is uniform with property located in other cities and unincorporated areas participating in the Fire and Emergency Medical Service District, but the millage rate shall not be counted against the 1 mill maximum imposed on taxes established and levied by the City of Peachtree Corners. 
(3)  At the conclusion of the transition period as defined herein, the City of Peachtree Corners shall be deemed to remain a part of the existing special service district known as the Gwinnett County Recreation District, approved and created by the electors of Gwinnett County by referendum held on November 4, 1986, for the purpose of establishing and maintaining a county-wide parks and recreation system. The participation of the City of Peachtree Corners in the Gwinnett County Recreation District shall be subject to, and in accordance with, the existing terms and conditions of participation as established by Gwinnett County. Gwinnett County is expressly authorized to provide recreational services within the City of Peachtree Corners and, for the purpose of funding such services, to establish and levy a tax on property located within the City of Peachtree Corners at a millage rate that is uniform with other property located in the Gwinnett County Recreation District, but the millage rate shall not be counted against the 1 mill maximum imposed on taxes established and levied by the City of Peachtree Corners. 
(4)  At the conclusion of the transition period as defined herein, the City of Peachtree Corners shall continue to be served by Gwinnett County's Emergency 9-1-1 System for the provision of emergency 9-1-1 services, including, but not limited to, call-taking and emergency dispatch services, and shall continue to be served by the existing public safety answering points established and operated by Gwinnett County, all pursuant to the authority of the Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 9-1-1 Service Act of 1977. The City of Peachtree Corners shall not create or operate its own Emergency 9-1-1 System or public safety answering point and shall not impose or collect a 9-1-1 charge from suppliers of telephone services, including local exchange telephone service or other telephone communication service, wireless service, prepaid wireless service, mobile telecommunications service, computer service, Voice over Internet Protocol service, or any technology that delivers or is required by law to deliver a call to a public safety answering point. 
(k)  Only for the purposes of holding and conducting municipal elections during the transition period, the election superintendent of Gwinnett County shall be vested with the powers and duties of the election superintendent of the City of Peachtree Corners. During the transition period, the election superintendent of Gwinnett County shall conduct all municipal elections for the City of Peachtree Corners during the 2013 election cycle. The expense of any such election, or necessary runoff, shall be borne by the City of Peachtree Corners and remitted to Gwinnett County within 60 days after any such election or runoff. It shall be the election superintendent's duty to certify the result of any election or runoff to the Secretary of State. 
(2013 Ga. Laws (Act No. 139), § 2) 
Sec. 8.12. - Directory nature of dates. 
It is the intention of the General Assembly that this Act be construed as directory rather than mandatory with respect to any date prescribed in this Act. If it is necessary to delay any action called for in this Act for providential cause, delay in securing approval under the federal Voting Rights Act, or any other reason, it is the intention of the General Assembly that the action be delayed rather than abandoned. Any delay in performing any action under this Act, whether for cause or otherwise, shall not operate to frustrate the overall intent of this Act. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing it is specifically provided that: 
(1)  If it is not possible to hold the referendum election provided for in Section 8.10 of this charter on the date specified in that section, then such referendum shall be held as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable; and 
(2)  If it is not possible to hold the first election provided for in Section 8.13 of this charter on the date specified in that section, then there shall be a special election for the initial members of the governing authority to be held as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable, and the commencement of the initial terms of office shall be delayed accordingly. 
Sec. 8.13. - Special election. 
(a)  The first election for mayor and councilmembers shall be a special election held on the date of the 2012 presidential preference primary. At such election, the first mayor and councilmembers shall be elected to serve for the initial terms of office specified in subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section. Thereafter, the time for holding regular municipal elections shall be on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year beginning in 2013. The successors to the first mayor and initial councilmembers and future successors shall take office at the first organizational meeting in January immediately following their election and shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  The members of the city council from Post 1, Post 2, and Post 3 shall be elected by majority vote of the electors of their respective districts. The members of the city council from Post 4, Post 5, and Post 6 shall be elected by the electors of the city at large by majority vote. The initial members elected from Post 2, Post 4, and Post 6 shall serve a term of office of two years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. The initial members elected from Post 1, Post 3, and Post 5 shall serve a term of office of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors to such initial members shall serve four-year terms of office and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)  The mayor of the City of Peachtree Corners shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the city at large. The mayor shall serve a term of four years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified and successors to the mayor shall serve four-year terms of office and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL REPEALER 

Sec. 9.10. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
APPENDIX A. - CITY BOUNDARIES 
Lying entirely within Gwinnett County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, and beginning at the point where the counties of Fulton, DeKalb and Gwinnett intersect; thence following the county line common between Fulton and Gwinnett counties in a generally northeasterly direction to the point where the Fulton/Gwinnett boundary line intersects the Chattahoochee River; thence running in a generally northeasterly direction following the Fulton/Gwinnett boundary line along the southern bank of the Chattahoochee River, following the meanderings thereof, to the point where the county boundary line intersects the southwestern boundary line of the City of Berkeley Lake; thence running in a generally southern direction following the municipal boundary line of the City of Berkeley Lake to a point where the said boundary line intersects with the City of Duluth municipal boundary; thence running along the municipal boundary of the City of Duluth until it intersects with the centerline of Buford Highway; thence running generally southwest along the centerline of Buford Highway to the point where said centerline intersects the municipal boundary line of the City of Norcross; thence following said municipal boundary in a generally southwesterly direction to the intersection of Buford Highway and Jimmy Carter Boulevard; thence continuing in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Buford Highway to the point where said centerline intersects the boundary line common between DeKalb and Gwinnett counties; thence in a generally northwest direction along the DeKalb/Gwinnett boundary line to the point of beginning. 
APPENDIX B. - REDEVELOPMENT AND OTHER POWERS[2] 
To authorize the City of Peachtree Corners to exercise all redevelopment and other powers under Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII of the Constitution and Chapter 44 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Redevelopment Powers Law," as amended; to provide for a referendum; to provide for related matters; to provide effective dates; to provide for automatic repeal under certain circumstances; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
ACT 166 
[HB 620, 5/6/2013] 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is House Bill 620 (Act No. 166), approved by the General Assembly on May 6, 2013, as the Charter of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. Amendments to the Act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. -   
The City of Peachtree Corners shall be and is authorized to exercise all redevelopment and other powers under Chapter 44 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Redevelopment Powers Law," as amended. The intention of this Act is to authorize the City of Peachtree Corners to undertake and carry out community redevelopment, to create tax allocation districts, to issue tax allocation bonds, and to incur other obligations within the meaning of and as fully permitted under the provisions of Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983, as amended, and to authorize the City of Peachtree Corners to exercise redevelopment powers as fully as the "Redevelopment Powers Law" may now or hereafter permit and not to limit any redevelopment powers permitted under the "Redevelopment Powers Law." 
Sec. 2. -   
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the governing authority of the City of Peachtree Corners may at any time direct the election superintendent of the City of Peachtree Corners to issue the call for a special election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of the City of Peachtree Corners for approval or rejection. The governing authority of the City of Peachtree Corners shall specify the date the special election is to be held, and the election superintendent shall issue the call for the special election at least 30 but not more than 60 days prior to the date thereof and conduct the election as provided by general law. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Gwinnett County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 

 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, then Section 1 of this Act shall become of full force and effect immediately. If Section 1 of this Act is not so approved, Section 1 of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following the election date. The expense of such election shall be borne by the City of Peachtree Corners. It shall be die election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
Sec. 3. -   
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 4. -   
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code is designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Peachtree Corners City Code" or the "City Code." 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  Construction. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
(b)  Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(c)  Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling; the specific controls over the general. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearing indicates a different meaning: 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 
City council, council. The term "city council" or "council" means the city council of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. The city council consists of six councilmembers and the mayor. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, then the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
Councilmember. The term "councilmember" means the individual members of the city council, excluding the mayor. 
County. The term "county" means Gwinnett County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Fire department. The term "fire department" shall refer to the county fire department, which provides services to the city. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the mayor and city council of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Judge. The term "judge" means the municipal judge. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. The singular and plural number includes the other, unless expressly excluded. 
O.C.G.A., state acts. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. A reference to a state act, whether by year and act number, year, act number and page, year and page or short title, is a reference to such act as amended. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city, or other political subdivision when acting under an intergovernmental agreement represents the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Police. The term "police" means the police department or police chief of the county which is serving as the police force for the city. 
Preceding; following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street or road. The term "street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the city, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, cross references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance before it expired or was repealed. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of The Code of Peachtree Corners, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered _____, that reads as follows: …." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" or "violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared a violation or a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" or "violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  All fines shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(e)  Community service may be substituted for the fine with the rate of hourly work set to that of the federal minimum wage. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(g)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 1-7) 
State Law reference— Additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum sentences and fines which may be imposed for violation of municipal ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Rates, charges, and fees established. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the city council, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the city council, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the city council by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by adoption of this Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any the following ordinances or portions of ordinances not in this Code, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract, established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(3)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(4)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(5)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)  Providing for salaries, employee benefits, and personnel policies and procedures not codified in this Code. 
(7)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(8)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(9)  Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(10)  Providing for or dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(11)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(12)  Rezoning property or otherwise pertaining to zoning. 
(13)  Prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, bus stops, taxi stands, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones, consistent with this Code. 
(14)  Describing or altering the boundaries of the city or annexing property to the city. 
(15)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(16)  Any agreement with another political subdivision. 
(17)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(18)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(19)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances, resolutions and actions are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-13. - Altering Code, ordinance or other public document. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions hereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, or in any other manner alter any other document or record of the municipal government. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 1-12) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Exercise of powers. 
The powers of the city may be exercised, as provided by the Charter, by the city, and by the parties with whom the city contracts for municipal services. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-1) 
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-21. - Subpoenas. 
(a)  The city council, when sitting as a judicial or quasi-judicial body pursuant to public law, its Charter, or its ordinances, shall compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena under the same rules as prevail in the superior courts, and any witness who shall fail to respond to the subpoena or who shall refuse to testify under oath, shall be guilty of contempt. 
(b)  The subpoenas authorized in subsection (a) of this section and section 2.15 of the Charter shall bear witness in the name of the mayor; shall be issued by the city clerk; and shall be served by the chief of police, any police officer, or by such other person as the mayor may designate. 
(c)  Should any person fail to respond to a subpoena of the city council, after having been lawfully served, without good cause, or should the person refuse to testify under oath, then the city council shall hold the person in contempt, and, in their discretion, punish the person by the imposition of a fine according to the maximum allowed by state law. Each of the failures or refusals herein described shall constitute a separate contempt. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-21) 
Sec. 2-22. - Reimbursement and travel. 
(a)  Travel outside the city. The mayor and councilmembers shall be reimbursed for their own reasonable travel expenses incurred in connection with city business related to travel outside the city, and those cities that share borders with the city. 
(b)  Overnight travel. The city shall reimburse the mayor or councilmembers for actual expenses of meals incurred in connection with overnight travel, lodging, ground transportation and incidental expenses incurred in connection with city business. 
(c)  Expense reports. Within 60 days after incurring the aforementioned expenditures, the mayor or councilmembers shall file with the city manager a signed travel expense form setting forth the reasonable expenses incurred for which city payment is sought. Original receipts documenting each expense must accompany the form, except for reasonable and customary out-of-pocket expenses, such as tolls, valet services, gratuities, and mileage. If a travel expense form has not been filed within 60 days after incurring an expenditure, the city shall not reimburse such expenses. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-22) 
Secs. 2-23—2-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS AND PUBLIC HEARINGS; RULES AND PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-48. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall meet at least once per month. Regular meetings shall be held pursuant to an annual meeting calendar adopted by the city council by ordinance. The annual meeting calendar for the following calendar year shall be adopted no later than the month of December for the then current calendar year. Regular meetings shall be held in the city council chambers. The city council may designate alternative meeting times, dates or locations so long as notice of such alternative time, date or location is provided as required by state law. 
(b)  If the regular meeting falls on a federal or city holiday, the city council may reschedule the meeting to another date certain and publish the date change as described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Special meetings may be called in accordance with section 2.18 of the Charter. 
(d)  Any meeting of the city council may be continued or adjourned from day to day or for more than one day, but no adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting thereafter. 
(e)  All meetings of the mayor and city council shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). The public shall be afforded access to meetings other than executive sessions, in compliance with state law. Only executive sessions held in accordance with state law may be closed to the public. 
(f)  Rules and procedures for city council meetings and public hearings may be further defined by adoption of a resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-49. - Compliance with state law. 
(a)  All meetings shall be held in accordance with the Georgia Open and Public Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). 
(b)  All city records subject to the Georgia Open Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.) shall be available to the public. The city clerk shall comply with any valid requests under the Georgia Open Records Act and prepare any materials requested. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-43) 
Secs. 2-50—2-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-72. - Personnel manual. 
The city manager shall establish a personnel manual for all municipal employees. In addition to the sections deemed necessary by the city manager, the manual shall include policies regarding equal employment opportunity, nondiscrimination, and sexual harassment. The manual will be updated from time to time as required by federal and state laws. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-62) 
Sec. 2-73. - Employees. 
(a)  Generally. Municipal employees shall be categorized as full-time, part-time or by terms decided by contract with the city. 
(b)  Municipal employees. Full-time employees will be paid an hourly salary, weekly salary or some other pay rate; part-time employees will work at irregular intervals on a short-term basis; and temporary workers will be hired to fill a temporary need for a specified period of time. 
(c)  Contract employees. The city manager shall have the authority to propose contractual employment relationships between the city and third parties. The terms of these third-party contracts will be established by the contract at the time of hiring. The city council must approve a contract worth more than $25,000.00. Issues of liability and scope of agency are to be defined by the contract. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-63) 
Sec. 2-74. - Job descriptions. 
The city shall maintain a job specification for each position held by a municipal employee. The city may provide a job specification for contracted positions. Such specification shall describe the duties of the position, the qualifications necessary, licenses required, to whom such employee reports, expected salary range, and such other information as is necessary to recruit for such position effectively. Such specifications may be amended from time to time by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-64) 
Sec. 2-75. - Benefits. 
It shall be the policy of the city to attract and retain a qualified workforce through the provision of a comprehensive package of benefits. To that end, the city shall be authorized to contract with benefits providers for the purpose of providing insurance, retirement, pension plans and other benefits deemed necessary by the city council upon approval of the benefit program by the city council. Eligibility for benefits and the cost to employees shall be specified in the personnel manual. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-65) 
Sec. 2-76. - Records. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-66) 
Sec. 2-77. - Salaries. 
(a)  The salary for mayor shall be set in Ordinance 2018-01-01 at $9,000.00 annually. 
(b)  The salary for council members shall be set in Ordinance 2018-01-01 at $8,000.00 annually. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01-111, 1-16-2018) 
Secs. 2-78—2-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-96. - Authorization. 
The following departments may be established by the city council: 
(1)  Administration. 
(2)  Finance. 
(3)  Community development. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-86) 
Sec. 2-97. - Right of contract. 
The city may contract with third parties to provide all or portions of the functions of any municipal department. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-87) 
Sec. 2-98. - Oversight. 
There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of the director's department or agency. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-88) 
Secs. 2-99—2-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND ADVISORY COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-125—2-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 2-147. - Creation. 
There may be created a board of zoning appeals, a design review board, a historic preservation board, a planning commission, a construction board of appeals, and an alcohol licensing and appeals board, which shall have the powers and duties, and be subject to and governed by, the regulations set forth in this division and Code. The duties of each board are defined in the corresponding section. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-127) 
Sec. 2-148. - Composition. 
Except as provided by intergovernmental agreement, all board members must be appointed by the mayor and the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-128) 
Sec. 2-149. - Membership. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the mayor and city council shall establish qualifications for members of each board. Each board member shall be appointed by the mayor and the city council, except as provided by intergovernmental agreement. The mayor and city council shall determine if and at what amount board members will be compensated. 
(b)  Except as provided by intergovernmental agreement, each board member must be a resident of the city. Should the board member move out of the city, he may remain active until the mayor and city council appoint his replacement. 
(c)  Except as provided by intergovernmental agreement, members must attend three-fourths of the meetings in a twelve month period. Failure to do so warrants removal from the board. 
(d)  The city council may appoint alternates to any board. Alternates shall meet all of the membership criteria as regular members, shall attend all meetings of that board, and may participate in board discussions to the same extent and pursuant to the same guidelines as regular members except that an alternate may only vote on a matter in the absence of a regular board member. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-129; Ord. No. 2018-05-126, § 1, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 2-150. - Terms. 
(a)  Except as provided by intergovernmental agreement, each board member shall serve a specified term of not more than four years. Consecutive terms are permissible. Each board member, except the mayor and councilmembers that may serve on a board, shall have equal terms of an amount to be specified by the mayor. 
(b)  Neither the mayor nor the councilmembers may serve on a board unless otherwise provided by law. 
(c)  Members filling vacancies shall serve the remainder of the term to which they were appointed. A consecutive appointment is permissible. 
(d)  Except as provided by intergovernmental agreement, any member may be removed for cause by the mayor and a majority of the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-130) 
Sec. 2-151. - Quorum. 
Except as provided by intergovernmental agreement, a majority of actual board members establishes a quorum. Any action taken requires a majority of affirmative votes of the quorum present. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-131) 
Sec. 2-152. - Procedure. 
(a)  Each of the boards shall make its rules of procedure and determine its time of meetings. The date and time of each meeting, as well as agenda items to be considered, shall be publicized in the same manner as meetings of the city council. 
(b)  Each of the boards shall elect, annually, one of its members to serve as chair. 
(c)  All meetings at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records maintained by the committee shall be public records, unless expressly excepted by a provision of the O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.), and the Georgia Open Records Act. The boards shall keep minutes of their formal proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question; and records of their examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the mayor and each member of the city council. The minutes of the meetings shall be a public record. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting closed sessions when permitted by the O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.), the Georgia Open Meetings Act and O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.), the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section, all board action on behalf of the city under an intergovernmental agreement shall act under the lawful procedures under which they were constituted. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-132) 
Sec. 2-153. - Training. 
The council may establish a mandatory training program for board members. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-133) 
Sec. 2-154. - Additional guidelines of planning commission. 
(a)  The planning commission established pursuant to section 2-147 shall consist of seven members, who shall be appointed pursuant to the procedures established in sections 2-148 and 2-149 and who shall conduct the meetings of the commission pursuant to section 2-152, as well as the requirements. 
(b)  The appointed members of the planning commission shall elect a chair and vice-chair. Elections of such positions shall occur annually. The vice-chair may be appointed to the duties of the chair when deemed necessary by emergency or when the chair is no longer able to perform those duties assigned, as determined by the mayor. The duty of the chair shall be to conduct the meetings in accordance with the procedures set forth by the planning commission, and the vice-chair shall conduct the meetings in the chair's absence. 
(c)  Members shall serve a two-year term, except as otherwise provided herein, which terms shall be staggered, and may be reappointed following the same procedures as outlined in this division. In order to stagger the terms of office for the planning commission, members of the planning commission will be appointed to identifiable posts. Members of posts A, B, and C shall be appointed to initial terms of office beginning immediately after their effective appointment and expiring on January 15, 2014. Members of posts D, E, F and G shall be appointed to initial terms of office beginning immediately after their effective appointment and expiring on January 15, 2015. Thereafter, for successive terms of office, such terms shall be for two years. The planning commission serves at the pleasure of the mayor and the city council and may be removed as provided in the city Charter, as amended from time to time. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term of such vacancy in the same manner as the original appointment with said appointment serving the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(d)  The planning commission may receive reimbursement for customary expenses incurred in conjunction with any authorized activity of the planning commission. 
(e)  The planning commission shall meet monthly in accordance with an established schedule of meetings as prepared by the city department of community development. 
(f)  It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to review and make a recommendation for action by the mayor and city council on the following: all applications for annexation where there is an associated change in zoning, rezoning, concurrent variances, applications for use permits, amendments to the text of the city zoning ordinance, the city comprehensive plan, the future land use/development map, and the zoning map. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the mayor and city council from hereafter assigning other duties or remanding a case back to the planning commission. 
(g)  At the close of each public hearing, the chair of the planning commission shall call the members to order for consideration and a vote on the issue currently before them. The vote of the planning commission shall be nonbinding and shall be made in the form of a recommendation to the mayor and city council from the following list: 
(1)  Approval as recommended by staff with recommended conditions; 
(2)  Approval as recommended by staff with revised conditions as presented by the planning commission; 
(3)  Denial. 
(h)  The planning commission must render a recommendation pursuant to subsection (g) of this section, except that the planning commission may defer an issue for no more than one month if requested by the applicant/owner, if a new site plan is received less than seven days prior to the meeting, or in order to receive additional information necessary to make a recommendation to the mayor and city council at the time of a deferral motion; the specific reason for the deferral and the specific materials or information requested as necessary to render a recommendation shall be stated. 
(i)  Section 2-150 shall not apply to the planning commission and instead the provisions of this section shall control. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-134) 
Secs. 2-155—2-176. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADVISORY COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-177. - Authorization. 
The mayor may establish advisory committees. Each committee may have one or more city council members. The mayor is an ex officio member of every committee. The city manager or a designee shall oversee the meetings of each committee and is an ex officio, nonvoting, member of each. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-153) 
Sec. 2-178. - Membership. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the mayor shall establish qualifications for members of each committee. Each committeeperson shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by the city council. 
(b)  Each committee member must be a resident of the city. Should the committee member move out of the city, he may remain active until the mayor and city council appoint his replacement. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-154) 
Sec. 2-179. - Terms. 
(a)  Each committee member shall serve a specified term of not more than four years. Consecutive terms are permissible. Each committee member, except the mayor and councilmembers serving thereon, shall have staggered terms of an amount to be specified by the mayor. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers on each committee shall serve on that committee so long as they remain elected to office. A former councilmember or mayor may serve on a committee, but such person shall not take the place of the elected member. 
(c)  Members filling vacancies shall serve the remainder of the term to which they were appointed. A consecutive appointment is permissible. 
(d)  Any member may be removed with or without cause by the mayor. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-155) 
Sec. 2-180. - Compensation. 
Committee members may serve without compensation. Reasonable expenses for travel may be reimbursed and committee members may be compensated pursuant to a policy to be established by the city manager and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-156) 
Sec. 2-181. - Quorum. 
A majority of actual committee members establishes a quorum. Any action taken requires a majority of affirmative votes of the quorum present. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-157) 
Sec. 2-182. - Procedure. 
(a)  Each of the committees shall make its rules of procedure and determine its time of meetings. The date and time of each meeting as well as agenda items to be considered shall be publicized in the same manner as meetings of the city council. 
(b)  All meetings at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records maintained by the committee shall be public records, unless expressly excepted by a provision of the O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.), and the Georgia Open Records Act. The committees shall keep minutes of their formal proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question; and records of their examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the mayor and each member of the city council. The minutes of the meetings shall be a public record. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting closed sessions when permitted by O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.), the Georgia Open Meetings Act and O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.), the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(c)  Expenditures of the committees, if any, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose intended by the city council during the annual budgeting process. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-158) 
Sec. 2-183. - Duties. 
(a)  Each committee shall from time to time propose policies and ordinances to the city council in the subjects germane to the committee. 
(b)  This section shall not be interpreted to require committee approval for a measure to be heard before the city council. 
(c)  Members must attend two-thirds of meetings in a calendar year. Failure to do so warrants removal from the committee. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-159) 
Sec. 2-184. - Training. 
The mayor may establish a mandatory training program for committee members. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-160) 
Secs. 2-185—2-206. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-207. - City accountant. 
(a)  The mayor shall nominate a city accountant, subject to ratification by the city council. The city accountant may also serve as the city treasurer, city tax collector, and city finance director. Unless otherwise specified, the terms "city accountant," "city treasurer," and "city tax collector" are used interchangeably in this Code. 
(b)  The city may contract with a third party to serve as city accountant. 
(c)  The city accountant shall perform at least the following duties. The city council may require the city accountant to perform other duties. 
(1)  Managing, planning, directing, and maintaining the city's financial operations, including serving as chair of the finance department, if such a department is established; 
(2)  Directing and supervising the work of personnel involved in performing the accounting, utility billing, property tax, payroll, and purchasing functions for the city; and 
(3)  Providing technical leadership in budgeting, overseeing and directing investment opportunities and debt administration, as well as ensuring proper record retention policies are strictly followed. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-180) 
Sec. 2-208. - City tax collector. 
(a)  The mayor shall nominate a city tax collector, subject to ratification by the council. The city tax collector also may serve as the city treasurer, city accountant, and city finance director. 
(b)  The city may contract with a third party, including the tax commissioner of the county, to serve as the city tax collector. 
(c)  The city tax collector shall perform at least the following duties. The city council may require the city tax collector to perform other duties. 
(1)  Managing, planning, and directing the collection of all city taxes; and 
(2)  Notifying delinquent taxpayers of their status in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-181) 
Sec. 2-209. - Millage rate. 
(a)  The millage rate for Peachtree Corners shall not exceed 1 mill. 
(b)  In the event the city desires to set a millage rate above 1 mill, the city council shall pass a resolution specifically stating the reason(s) for seeking a millage rate above 1 mill and shall submit the approval of such resolution for ratification by electors of the city in a referendum. If the electors of the city vote in favor of ratifying such resolutions, then the city shall be authorized to set a millage rate above 1 mill at the rate stated in such resolution. If the electors of the city disapprove such resolution, it shall immediately be null and void and of no force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01-112, 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 2-210. - Delivery of city services. 
(a)  It shall be the policy and practice of the city that any services provided by the city, either directly or indirectly, shall be delivered in the most cost-effective manner. 
(b)  A public-public or public-private partnership shall always be the preferred service delivery method. 
(c)  A change to the method of service delivery shall only be made after: 
(1)  The city manager recommends a change; 
(2)  A detailed financial analysis is conducted; 
(3)  A public hearing is conducted; and 
(4)  A vote of the city council is taken. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01-113, 1-16-2018) 
Secs. 2-211—2-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC RECORDS 

Sec. 2-240. - Document retention. 
Pursuant to the Georgia Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.), the city adopts the records management plan and record retention schedules recommended by the state secretary of state as amended from time to time by future resolutions of the city council. The city clerk shall coordinate all records management for the city, including storage, archiving, and destruction of records. Records shall be maintained according to approved retention schedules. All requests made under O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.), the Georgia Open Records Act, excepting standardized routine requests of the city municipal court, shall be made to the city clerk. No record shall be destroyed, except as provided in the approved retention schedule; provided, however, a written record may be destroyed if it is otherwise preserved by means of microfiche, scanning, or other reliable photographic or digital means as permitted by law. Changes to the retention schedules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-211) 
Sec. 2-241. - Fees. 
The city clerk shall charge the full amount permitted by state law to copy the records subject to O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18, art. 4, (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.), the Georgia Open Records Act. If compilation and replication of such documents takes more than 15 minutes, the city clerk may charge an additional reasonable administrative charge. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-212) 
Secs. 2-242—2-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-261. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City finance director means the city accountant, his agent, or the chair of the city finance department, if such a department is created, or is in existence. 
Construction means the process of building, altering, improving, or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. The term "construction" does not include the routine operation, repair and maintenance of existing structures, building, or real property. 
Contract means any city agreement, regardless of form or title, for the procurement or disposition of goods, commodities, and services. 
Employee means an individual drawing a salary or wage from the city, whether on a full-time or part-time basis. The term "employee" means and includes all members of the governing authority without regard to whether or not such individual is compensated. 
Gifts or favors means anything or any service of value. 
Goods or commodities means supplies, apparatus, materials, equipment, and other forms of tangible personal property. 
Governing authority means the city entity responsible for the contract. 
Purchase order means the document used by the city to obtain supplies, goods, commodities and services from vendors. 
Purchasing agent means the principal purchasing official of the city pursuant to section 2-262. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-232) 
Sec. 2-262. - Purchasing agent. 
(a)  Appointment. The mayor may appoint the city manager or his agent to serve as the purchasing agent for the city, or the mayor may contract with an independent third party to serve as the purchasing agent. The city manager, upon appointment by the mayor, may serve as the purchasing agent or select a designee. 
(b)  Duties. The purchasing agent shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all equipment, supplies and contractual services for the city or any using agency; arrange and negotiate for the sale or otherwise dispose of all surplus equipment and supplies or real estate of the city or any using agency; 
(2)  Maintain a perpetual or periodic inventory record of all materials, supplies, or equipment stored in city storerooms, warehouses, and elsewhere, including monthly reports that provide: 
a.  The titles of all requests for proposals and the method of source selections to be used; 
b.  All contracts authorized by the city council, the method of source selections to be used, and the total dollar amount; 
c.  All emergency contracts awarded pursuant to this article; 
d.  All change orders of contract modifications authorized by the city council, the dollar amount, and the reason; 
e.  All change orders or contract modifications authorized by the purchasing agent, the dollar amount and the reason; 
f.  An explanation of any changes, and the costs involved, in the scope of services made between the time a contract is awarded and the time that a resolution authorizing the contract is sent to the city council for adoption; 
(3)  Control and supervise all city storerooms and warehouses, unless otherwise provided in this Code; 
(4)  Develop and maintain a purchasing policy and procedure manual which will be updated by the purchasing agent periodically; 
(5)  Direct efforts to procure services through advertisements of bids as required by this article and state law; 
(6)  Require bonds, insurance and other forms of protection for the city on the process of procuring goods and services for the city; 
(7)  Terminate solicitations for bids for any goods or services when, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, it is in the city's best interest to do so. This includes termination for breach of contract or anticipated breach of contract; 
(8)  Reject any and all bids when, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, it is in the city's best interest to do so; and 
(9)  Consult with the city attorney if a contracting party breaches or is reasonably anticipated to breach its contract with the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-233) 
Sec. 2-263. - General procurement efforts. 
(a)  Nondiscrimination. To the extent not required by federal law, the city shall not consider race, gender, national origin, or religion when evaluating bids for city contracts or the disposition of city property. To the greatest extent practicable, the bids submitted to the city will not convey the race or gender of the submitting party or the majority of shareholders in the submitting corporation. 
(b)  City council final policy maker. The city council remains the final policy maker for all decisions of the purchasing agent, as further defined in the administrative purchasing policy. 
(c)  Procurement of goods. The city may procure goods or services through: 
(1)  Emergency purchases; 
(2)  Informal purchases; or 
(3)  Formal purchases. 
Unless otherwise specified, competitive bidding shall apply to informal and formal purchases. 
(d)  Exceptions. Competitive bidding shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  A good is available from only one source or supply, or when standardization or compatibility is the overriding consideration. 
(2)  The purchase is pursuant to a contract with: 
a.  The United States of America or an agency thereof; or 
b.  Any government unit or agency thereof within the United States for the purchase, lease, or other acquisition of goods. 
(3)  The purchase is for: 
a.  Works of art for public places; 
b.  Printed copyright material, including published books, maps, periodicals, and technical pamphlets, but not including software for computer systems, except where a greater savings can be realized by a quantity purchase; 
c.  Real property, real estate brokerage and appraising, abstract of titles for real property, title insurance for real property, and other related costs of acquiring real property; 
d.  Subscriptions, dues, memberships, and board member fees; 
e.  Services provided directly to individual citizens and employees, including reimbursements and other miscellaneous payments; 
f.  Utilities, including, but not limited to, electricity and telephone service; 
g.  Licensed health professions; 
h.  Training, travel, and lodging or meal expenses; 
i.  Items for resale that require a particular manufacturer to enhance their marketability; 
j.  Legal advertisements; 
k.  Repair of equipment; 
l.  Repair of buildings where the extent of the project cannot be predetermined; and 
m.  Professional services not covered in this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-234) 
Sec. 2-264. - Pre-audit clearance. 
The purchasing agent shall not approve any contract for goods or services until the city director of finance or the city accountant certifies, after pre-audit, that there is, to the credit of the using department, a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such contact. Subject to the approval of the city manager, city finance director or city accountant, the purchasing agent may issue operating rules to verify compliance with this section. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-235) 
Sec. 2-265. - Small purchases. 
The purchasing agent shall establish procedures for purchasing goods or services for less than $5,000.00. These procedures must include quotations from as many competitive sources as reasonably practical. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-236) 
Sec. 2-266. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other section of this Code, when the city manager determines that an emergency exists, the purchasing agent may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements for supplies, services, construction items, or professional or consultant services. The city manager shall make such determination when there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety under emergency conditions. Such emergency procurements shall be made with as much competition as is practicable under the circumstances. 
(b)  A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. As soon as practicable, a record of each emergency procurement shall be made and shall set forth the contractor's name, the amount and type of the contract, a listing of the item procured under the contract, and the identification number of the contract file. 
(c)  If an emergency should arise after office hours which requires immediate action on the part of the agency involved for the protection of the city's best interest or if a like situation arises on a Sunday or holiday and when it is not possible or convenient to reach the purchasing agency, any purchase necessary shall be made by the official in charge of such agency, and such purchase reported to the purchasing agent within 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-237) 
Sec. 2-267. - Informal purchases. 
(a)  All contracts for the purchase of goods and services involving the estimated expenditure of $5,000.00 or more of public money, but not more than $50,000.00, except those described in section 2-263(d), shall be made after informal bids are secured. 
(b)  In addition to the normal publication of bids, the purchasing agent may directly solicit informal bids from no less than three businesses. The purchasing agent shall keep a record of all bids submitted and the record shall be available for public inspection after the contract is awarded, in the manner provided by law. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall develop written procedures for implementing the provisions of this section, which shall be subject to the approval of the city manager and city finance director. Such procedures shall be made publicly available. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-238) 
Sec. 2-268. - Formal purchases. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no contract for the purchase of goods and services involving the estimated expenditure of not more than $50,000.00 of public money shall be awarded, unless the provisions of this section are followed. The purchasing agent, subject to approval of the city administrator and city finance director, shall make the determination of the method of procurement. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-239) 
Sec. 2-269. - Competitive bidding. 
(a)  All purchases of, and contracts or agreements for, supplies and contractual services, having an approved budget estimate greater than $50,000.00, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be based wherever reasonably possible on three or more sealed competitive bids after publishing notice of request for bids as set forth herein. 
(b)  Sealed bid procedure. 
(1)  Bids shall be invited by advertisement in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. The advertisement shall state the time and place where specifications may be obtained and the time and place for opening of bids, unless otherwise directed by the city council. At least 14 full days must pass between the day the advertisement appears and the day of the bid opening. The advertisement shall state that the city reserves the right to reject any or all of the bids and to make award that is in the city's best interest. 
(2)  The purchasing agent may require that bid deposits be submitted with each bid. If bid deposits are required, they shall be in an amount equal to five percent of the amount of the bid and may be submitted in the form of a bid bond signed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, cashier's check, certified check issued by a bank or trust company insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or any other form of bid security deemed sufficient by the city attorney or his designee. The bid deposit requirement, including the form in which the bid security may be submitted, shall be included in the specifications. 
(3)  Bids shall be sealed. All bids shall be publicly opened and the purchasing agent shall make or oversee the making of a record of the bids received. The record and the bids received shall be subject to public inspection, after the bid opening, in the manner prescribed by law. 
(4)  As provided in the invitation for bids, the purchasing agent may require the successful bidder to furnish a payment and performance bond to secure the faithful performance of all of the terms of the contract. The payment and performance bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and the form of the bonds shall be included in the specifications. 
(5)  All contracts of more than $50,000.00, excluding commodity purchases, to which this section applies shall be in writing and shall be approved by the city council. The city council may reject any and all bids. 
(c)  The lowest bid for purchases shall be accepted by the purchasing agent or, if the purchasing agent, relevant department, or other contracting authority finds that the lowest bid is not in the city's best interest, whereupon the purchasing agent may accept another bid or may call for additional bids. The city reserves the right to reject all bids. If the purchasing agent finds that the lowest bid is not in the city's best interest, he must file reasons for that finding with the city council before the next scheduled meeting. 
(d)  In addition to price on all bids or quotations, the following shall be considered, but not limited to, in determining responsiveness: 
(1)  The ability, capacity, and skill of the person or firm offering the bid or quotation to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
(2)  Whether the person or firm can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(3)  The quality of performance on previous contracts or services with the city or others; 
(4)  The previous and existing compliance by the person or firm with laws and ordinances relating to the contractual service or supplies; 
(5)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the person or firm to perform the contract or provide the service; 
(6)  The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies, or contractual services to the particular use required; 
(7)  The ability of the person or firm to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
(8)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid or quotation; 
(9)  The above requirements shall not apply to any projects for which the city receives aid from any federal agency, state agency, or foundations, when unit prices have been established by such other agency. The contractor shall be selected from contractors certified by the agency supplying the funds for the project. In addition, the purchasing agent shall further ascertain that existing and future procurement procedures are in accord with applicable federal guidelines regulating procurement procedures for recipients of federal funds; and 
(10)  The above requirements shall not apply in sole source procurements where there is only one vendor capable of providing particular goods or services as determined by the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-240) 
Sec. 2-270. - Competitive sealed proposals. 
(a)  When the purchasing agent determines, in writing, that the use of the competitive sealed bid is either not practical or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposal. Use of the proposal is dependent upon such factors as: 
(1)  When the quality, availability, or capability is overriding in relation to price in procurement of technical supplies or services; 
(2)  When the initial installation needs to be evaluated, together with subsequent maintenance and service capabilities, and what priorities should be given these requirements in the city's best interest; 
(3)  If a fixed price or cost type contract is more advantageous; or 
(4)  Whether the market place will respond better to a solicitation permitting not only a range of alternative proposals, but evaluation and discussion of them before making the award. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  Proposals shall be requested by advertisement in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. The advertisement shall state the time and place where specifications may be obtained, and the time and place for deadline for receipt of the proposals, unless otherwise directed by the city council. At least 14 full days must pass between the day the advertisement appears and the day of the deadline for receipt of proposals. The advertisement shall state that the city reserves the right to reject any or all of the proposals. 
(2)  Proposals shall be sealed. All proposals shall be received in public and the purchasing manager shall make or oversee the making of a record of the proposals received. The name of each proposer shall be announced but no other information shall be disclosed, nor shall the proposals be considered an open record until a contract is awarded. The record of the proposals received shall be subject to public inspection after the deadline for receipt in the manner prescribed by law. 
(3)  Award of contract shall be made to the proposer that submits the proposal deemed in the city's best interest, taking into account the evaluation factors outlined in the proposal documents. A team consisting of not less than three persons shall conduct evaluation of proposals. This team shall include the purchasing agent, and the head of the user department. 
(4)  As provided in the invitation for proposals, the purchasing agent may require the successful proposer to furnish a performance bond to secure the faithful performance of all of the terms of the contract. The performance bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and the form of the bond shall be included in the specifications. The city council may reject the bond of any proposer if they find it to be unacceptable. 
(5)  All contracts of $50,001.00 or more to which this section applies shall be in writing and shall be approved by the city council. The city council may reject any and all proposals. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-241) 
Sec. 2-271. - Multistep competitive sealed procurement. 
The multistep competitive sealed procurement method may be used when the city desires to award a contract not necessarily based on price, and when specifications may not be readily available or when technical qualifications are essential for the decision making process. This type shall take the form of request for proposals or request for information and shall follow the following format. If time is of the essence, the two steps can be combined with the priced offer submitted in a separate sealed envelope at the time of submission of the technical offer. The pricing data is to remain unopened until evaluation of technical offers is complete. 
(1)  The solicitation shall be advertised in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. The advertisement shall state the time and place where documents may be obtained, and the time and place for deadline for receipt of the proposal, unless otherwise directed by the city council. At least 14 full days must pass between the day the advertisement appears and the day of the deadline for receipt of documents. The advertisement shall state that the city reserves the right to reject any or all documents received. 
(2)  The initial step shall consist of solicitation of technical offers with no costs or prices included. Unweighted evaluation criteria shall be included in the solicitation documents. A team consisting of not less than three persons shall evaluate the results of this solicitation. This team shall include the purchasing agent, the head of the user department, and an additional representative of the user department selected by the respective department head. Evaluation shall follow the same criteria as under request for proposals. 
(3)  In the second step, those who submitted technical offers deemed responsible and responsive in the initial step are then asked to submit price bids. 
(4)  Proposals shall be sealed. All proposals shall be publicly opened and the purchasing agent shall make or oversee the making of a record of the proposals received. The record and the proposals received shall be subject to public inspection after the proposal opening in the manner prescribed by law. 
(5)  Award of proposal shall be made to the bidder that submits the lowest responsible and responsive proposal that meets the specifications contained in the proposal documents and is in the city's best interest. The city reserves the right to make award if a single proposal is received. 
(6)  If required by the soliciting documents, the purchasing agent may require the successful contracting party to furnish a payment and performance bond to secure the faithful performance of all of the terms of the contract. The payment and performance bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and the form of the bond shall be included in the specifications. 
(7)  All contracts of $25,000.00 or more to which this section applies shall be in writing and shall be approved by the city council. The city council may reject any and all bids. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-242) 
Sec. 2-272. - City surplus property. 
(a)  All using agencies shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to other using agencies. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies, upon approval of the city manager. 
(d)  The purchasing agent may dispose of all personal property of the city in a manner consistent with this section and the city's adopted purchasing policy. Competitive bids shall be encouraged to the extent possible. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-243) 
Sec. 2-273. - Bid protests and appeals. 
(a)  Any party that submits a bid pursuant to this article and has a good faith basis to protest the bid must prepare a formal complaint to be filed with the city manager. The complaint shall specify the alleged act or omission by the city that provides the basis for the complaint. 
(b)  Upon the filing of a complaint, within three working days, the city manager shall request a response from the city purchasing agent within 30 days. Failure of the city purchasing director to file a response may be considered as evidence by the city manager. 
(c)  If requested by either party, the city manager or his designee shall have a hearing on the complaint and decide the merits of the claim. The city manager is empowered to decide that the contract at issue be voided, upheld, or whatever other relief may be necessary. The city council shall approve or reject the city manager's decision. 
(d)  If the party bringing the complaint disagrees with the conclusions of the city manager and council, the decision may be appealed to the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-244) 
Secs. 2-274—2-294. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-295. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appointee means any person appointed to a city board, committee or commission by the city council or mayor. 
City councilmember means any person who is a city councilmember, including the mayor of the city. 
City staff means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city, as well as any full-time or part-time employee of any independent contractor contracted to perform specific duties for, and on behalf of, the city. 
Family member means the spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son or daughter of a city councilmember or an appointee or the mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law or daughter-in-law of a city councilmember or an appointee. 
Financial interest means all direct ownership interests of the total assets or capital stock of a business entity where such ownership interest is ten percent or more. 
Government or city means the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia, government. 
Member includes city councilmembers and appointees. 
Substantial interest means the following: 
(1)  Funds received by the member from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed: 
a.  $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services; or 
b.  Ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; or 
(2)  The member is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-261) 
Sec. 2-296. - Prohibitions. 
All members shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Compliance with the law. Members shall comply with all laws of the United States, the state, and the city in the performance of their public duties. These laws include, but are not limited to, the United States and Georgia Constitutions; laws pertaining to conflicts of interest, elections, campaigns, financial disclosures, employer responsibilities, and open processes of government; and city ordinances and written policies. 
(2)  Policy role of members. Members shall respect and adhere to the structure of government of the city as outlined in the city's Charter and policies and procedures. In this structure, the city council determines the policies of the city with the advice, information and analysis provided by the public, boards, committees, commissions, and city staff. Members shall not direct the activities of city staff, interfere with the day-to-day administrative functions of the city or the professional duties of the city staff, nor impair the ability of city staff to implement city council policy decisions. 
(3)  Independence of boards, committees and commissions. Because of the value of the independent advice of boards, committees and commissions to the public decision-making process, city councilmembers shall refrain from using their position to influence unduly the deliberations or outcomes of board, committee and commission proceedings of which they are not members. Members shall also refrain from appearing or speaking on behalf of themselves or third parties in front of any board, committee or commission of the city; however, this prohibition shall not prevent: 
a.  A councilmember from appearing or speaking on behalf of the city in front of an independent authority or commission of the city created by the general assembly as its own political subdivision; 
b.  Members from speaking on behalf of the city board, committee, commission or council on which they serve when such city board, committee, commission or council has expressly authorized and appointed such member to speak on its behalf; or 
c.  A member from serving on more than one board, committee or commission of the city. 
(4)  Acceptance of gifts, benefits or remuneration. 
a.  Members shall not solicit or accept, directly or indirectly, anything of value from any person, corporation, or group which: 
1.  Has, or is seeking to obtain, contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city, unless a member's contractual relationship with such person, corporation, or group existed prior to the city's contractual relationship or prior to the member's election or appointment to office; the member, if in office at the time the contractual, business or financial relationship came before the city for consideration, disclosed such relationship or, if not in office at such time, has immediately disclosed the relationship to the city after being elected or appointed to office and becoming aware of the city's relationship with such person, corporation or group; the member abstained from discussion of the city's consideration of entering a contract with such person, corporation, or group or competing vendor; the member abstained from voting on any matter related to the relationship between such person, corporation, or group or the subject contract or services; and the member did not make personal use of any official non-public information, as prohibited by subsection (11) of this section; 
2.  In exchange for the thing of value, seeks to have a member exercise a matter of discretion in his or her favor; or 
3.  In exchange for the thing of value, seeks to have interests which may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duty of the member. 
b.  Members shall not directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, benefit or thing of value for himself or another person if: 
1.  It could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the future, and the member is involved in any official act or action which results in a pecuniary benefit for the donor or lender which is not available to the public at large; or 
2.  It could reasonably be considered to influence, benefit or reward the member, and the member recently has been, or is now or within six months in the future, involved in any official act or action which results in a pecuniary benefit for the donor or lender which is not available to the public at large. 
c.  The above prohibitions shall not apply in the case of: 
1.  Occasional non-pecuniary gift of insignificant trinkets or gifts such as a calendar, memento or pen received in the normal course of business with a value of less than $100.00 and admission to and or consumption of food and beverages at a breakfast, lunch, dinner, function or event; 
2.  Award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
3.  Transaction authorized by and performed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6 as now or hereafter amended; 
4.  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such loan or financial transaction; 
5.  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with state laws; 
6.  Any gift, loan, favor, promise or thing of value from a family member. 
(5)  Conflict of interest. 
a.  A member may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the member has a substantial interest. 
b.  A member who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
c.  Where the interest of a member in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the member may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(6)  Use of public property. A member shall not use city property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he direct city staff to use such property for these purposes. 
(7)  Coercion by members. A member shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or a family member, or those with whom a member has a financial interest. 
(8)  Voting in matters of personal interest. A member shall not vote on an ordinance or amendment for a specific item in a city council meeting that would directly affect his private business. Provided, however, that in the event of an ordinance of general application or a matter of citywide application, or in the event such vote would be proper under the city Charter, such member shall disclose such interest and, following such disclosure, shall be allowed to vote on such matter and such vote shall not constitute a violation of these rules and shall not be the subject matter of an ethics complaint hereunder. 
(9)  Unauthorized use of city staff. A member shall not use his superior position to unduly pressure or request or otherwise require a member of the city staff to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of a family member, business, social, church or fraternal interests; 
b.  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business or political purposes; and 
c.  Work for him personally without offering him just compensation. 
(10)  Restrictions on contracts with former members. The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding 12-month period a member, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. 
(11)  Improper use of official non-public information. Members shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information, which at the time of its disclosure is not subject to being made available to the general public, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, regardless of whether the private interest belongs to the member or a third party. 
(12)  Unauthorized attempts to bind the city. Members shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such expenditure, nor shall members attempt to obligate the city or give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization to purchase or otherwise be liable for any goods, services or property. 
(13)  Improper influence in city judicial matters. No member shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the city municipal court nor shall any member engage in ex parte communication with a city municipal court judge on any matter pending before the city municipal court. 
(14)  Retaliatory action against city employees. No member shall attempt to influence or take any adverse employment action against a city employee due to such city employee's provision of truthful information about such member or any other member, including any information that forms a part of a complaint or answer submitted under this article or which is provided pursuant to an investigation or hearing conducted in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-262) 
Sec. 2-297. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against members shall be filed with the city clerk; provided, however, to discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a member, whether currently serving as a member or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(b)  No action may be taken on any complaint which is filed later than one year after a violation of this article is alleged to have occurred, and a complaint alleging a violation must be filed within six months from the date the complainant knew or should have known of the action alleged to be a violation; such limitation periods to be measured from the date of the last act occurring in furtherance of such violation. No proceedings under this article shall be instituted or prosecuted after the earlier of: 
(1)  The expiration of the term of office of the person complained against; or 
(2)  The resignation, death, vacancy, disqualification or withdrawal from office of the person against whom a complaint is filed. 
(c)  No action may be taken on any complaint which arises out of substantially the same facts or circumstance which have previously served as the basis for a complaint pursuant to this article. 
(d)  A separate complaint shall be filed for each person alleged to have engaged in any activity violating this article even if the allegations arise from the same factual basis. Each complaint shall state: 
(1)  A separate count for each alleged violation; 
(2)  The specific section of state law, the city Charter, or this article alleged to be violated for each count; 
(3)  With specificity, the facts which are alleged to constitute the violation; and 
(4)  The documentary evidence which the charging party possesses. Copies of said documentary evidence shall be attached to the complaint as exhibits. 
(e)  All complaints shall contain an oath that the facts set forth therein are true and correct to the best of the complainant's knowledge in substantially the following form: 

 

 
(f)  Upon receipt of a complaint, the city clerk will deliver a copy of the complaint to the city manager. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-263) 
Sec. 2-298. - Appointment of hearing officer, service of complaint, burden of proof. 
(a)  All complaints filed hereunder shall be heard before a hearing officer who: 
(1)  Shall be a competent attorney at law of good standing in his or her profession, 
(2)  Shall have at least five years' experience in the practice of law, and 
(3)  Shall not maintain an office within a ten-mile radius of the city. 
The city clerk shall maintain a listing of no less than five qualified attorneys to serve as a hearing officer pursuant to this section. Upon receipt of a properly verified complaint, the city clerk shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified hearing officers and appoint the first one who is available to serve in the matter. Once a hearing officer is appointed, no member shall communicate with or otherwise contact the hearing officer, except as authorized herein, unless such member is the complainant or the member charged in the complaint; however, no party to a complaint shall engage in ex parte communications with the hearing officer. 
(b)  Original pleadings shall be filed with the city clerk and the city clerk shall cause the complaint to be served on the member charged as soon as practicable, but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by statutory overnight delivery. 
(c)  In all proceedings under this section, the burden of proof shall be on the complaining party. Further, the quantum of proof required to establish a violation under this article shall be beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-264) 
Sec. 2-299. - Hearing. 
(a)  The member charged in the complaint shall have 15 days to file an answer to the complaint; provided, however, the member charged shall have no obligation to file an answer to any complaint. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of the 15-day answer period, the hearing officer shall review the complaint and answer, if any, to determine: 
(1)  Whether the complaint is in conformity of the requirements of section 2-297; 
(2)  Whether, upon consideration of the complaint and answer, the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded; or 
(3)  Whether, upon consideration of the complaint and answer, the complaint demonstrates facts sufficient to invoke disciplinary jurisdiction as set forth in this article. 
(c)  If the complaint fails based upon the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the complaint shall be dismissed stating the basis for said dismissal. If the dismissal is based upon the failure to comply with section 2-297(d) or (e), the complaining party shall have 15 days to re-file the complaint correcting the defect. If the corrected complaint is not filed within said 15-day period, the provisions of section 2-297(c) shall apply to the complaint. If the complaint otherwise fails, the provisions of section 2-297(c) shall apply to the complaint. 
(d)  Upon a determination that the complaint should not be dismissed pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the hearing officer shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. In furtherance of this investigation, the hearing officer may: 
(1)  First, seek such further information from the complainant or the member charged through inquiry or written questions; provided, however the member charged shall have no obligation to answer any inquiries; and make a further determination as to whether the complaint demonstrates facts sufficient to invoke disciplinary jurisdiction as set forth in this article in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. If it is determined that the complaint should not be dismissed pursuant to this subsection, then the provisions of subsection (d)(2) of this section shall apply; or 
(2)  Conduct a hearing in accordance with the administrative hearing procedures, as adopted by resolution by council, regarding the allegations set forth in the complaint. At any hearing, the member who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to: 
a.  Representation by counsel at all stages of these proceedings; 
b.  Written notice of the hearing at least ten calendar days before the first hearing; 
c.  Hear and examine the evidence and witnesses; 
d.  Not testify; and 
e.  Submit evidence and call witnesses to oppose or mitigate the allegations. In all hearings held under this section, the rules of evidence applicable in civil cases shall apply. 
(e)  Hearing officer's determination. 
(1)  All investigations under this section shall be completed within 45 days of the filing of the complaint. Should the investigation not be completed in said period, the complaint will be deemed dismissed as a failure to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. Within seven days of the completion of the investigation, the hearing officer shall: 
a.  Dismiss the complaint on the grounds that it is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded, or that it fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; or 
b.  Prepare a report of findings and recommendations to the mayor and city council. 
(2)  Should the hearing officer determine to submit a report in the matter, the report shall consist of: 
a.  A written finding of facts; 
b.  A determination that the complaint establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that a violation has been committed, and, if so, the specific violation and evidence supporting the same; and 
c.  A recommendation regarding the punishment for such violation. 
(3)  Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
a.  Public or private reprimand or censure by the city council. 
b.  Request for resignation by the city council. 
c.  Removal from office in accordance with all applicable state and local laws. 
(4)  The hearing officer's written determination of findings and recommendations shall be delivered to the city clerk who shall provide a copy to the city manager and the mayor and council and serve a copy on the complainant and member charged by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by statutory overnight delivery. Such findings shall not be final until approved by vote of the city council, as provided in section 2-300. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-265) 
Sec. 2-300. - Report to mayor and council. 
(a)  Upon receipt of findings and recommendations from the hearing officer, the mayor and council may: 
(1)  By simple majority, accept the findings and recommendations of the hearing officer. 
(2)  By simple majority, accept the findings of fact and reject the recommended discipline, instead substituting its own discipline. 
(3)  By a supermajority consisting of a majority of those present forming a quorum, plus one, reject the findings and recommendations and either: 
a.  Dismiss the complaint; or 
b.  Conduct its own hearing in accordance with section 2-299. Upon the completion of such hearing, the findings and recommendations of the mayor and council shall be binding. 
(b)  If the subject of the complaint is the mayor or any city councilmember, he will not be allowed to vote pursuant to this section or participate in any hearing held pursuant to this section other than as set forth and allowable by the member charged, nor shall such position be counted for the purposes of establishing a quorum. 
(c)  Upon a final judgment and certification of the minutes of the meeting disposing of the matter, the city clerk shall serve the respondent with a copy of the certified minutes and findings and recommendations by personal service, certified mail, return receipt requested, or by Federal Express or other overnight delivery service. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-266) 
Sec. 2-301. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any member or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the city council may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the county superior court within 30 days after the final action on a complaint pursuant to this article. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 2-267) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Sale in city; license a privilege. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the city under a license granted by the city upon the terms and conditions provided in this chapter. 
(b)  All licenses in this chapter shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this Code and state and city law. 
(c)  All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any further ordinances which may be enacted." 
(d)  Any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the state before any sales commence. Additionally, city licensees are required to abide by all applicable state and city regulations and laws. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term "beer" or "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Eating establishment means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full-service kitchen. A full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments. An eating establishment will be prepared to serve food every hour they are open and will derive at least as much gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food as it derives from the sale of distilled spirits. 
Governing authority means the City of Peachtree Corners. 
Growler means a professionally sanitized reusable glass or hard plastic container not exceeding 64 ounces in volume used to transport draft beer for off-premises consumption. 
Hotel means any building or other structure providing sleeping accommodations for hire to the general public, either transient, permanent or residential. Such hotels shall maintain a minimum of 50 rooms available for hire and have one or more public dining rooms with an adequate kitchen. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of any licensed establishment described in this chapter and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of a hotel pursuant to this definition. 
Indoor commercial recreational establishment. 
(1)  The term "indoor commercial recreational establishment" means and is limited to an establishment which: 
a.  Regularly serves prepared food, with a full-service kitchen (a full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments), prepared to serve food every hour they are open and deriving at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreation activities; and 
b.  Wherein the sale of food and alcoholic beverages is incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises. 
(2)  The primary activity on the premises of the indoor commercial recreational establishment shall be family-oriented in nature, generally meaning a use which attracts a range of individuals from all age groups. Uses may specifically include, but are not limited to, dinner theatres, bowling centers, and other similar uses. Outdoor commercial recreation is not included, nor shall concession sales of alcoholic beverages be permitted. Bingo parlors, dance halls, nightclubs, taverns, billiard parlors, video arcades, skating arenas, adult entertainment and/or sexually related entertainment activities, and similar uses are specifically excluded from this definition of indoor commercial recreational establishments, provided that no indoor commercial recreational establishment shall offer alcoholic beverages for sale during the time it is sponsoring events which primarily attract persons under the lawful drinking age in the state. 
Indoor entertainment hall. 
(1)  The term "indoor entertainment hall" means a publicly or privately owned commercial establishment which: 
a.  Provides professional, live musical entertainment or concerts, performed on-site indoors, at least four nights a week on average over the course of a calendar year; 
b.  Regularly serves prepared food, with a full-service kitchen, consisting of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments; 
c.  Is prepared to serve food every hour it is open; 
d.  Derives at least 35 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods, admission charges, ticket sales, sale of merchandise, vending sales, attendance fees, or other recreational, promotional or operational activities; 
e.  Does not ever provide sexually related adult entertainment; 
f.  Has at least 50,000 square feet of enclosed heated space; 
g.  Has an occupant capacity of at least 3,500; 
h.  Is located on a major thoroughfare; 
i.  Does not provide the sale of alcohol on Sundays; and 
j.  Does not allow the admission of persons under the age of 18 during hours when alcohol is served. 
(2)  Indoor entertainment halls shall be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages through concession sales. 
Indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center means and is limited to publicly owned establishments which: 
(1)  Regularly serve food, with a full-service kitchen. A full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments, prepared to serve food every hour such center is open and deriving at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreational, promotional entertainment or operational activities; and in which 
(2)  The sale of food and alcoholic beverages are incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises. Indoor publicly owned civic and cultural centers may include renovated courthouses used as civic and cultural centers. 
License means an authorization granted by the city to operate as a retail consumption dealer or wholesale dealer. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation. 
Liter means metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg barrel, growler or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasipublic. 
Pouring permit means an authorization granted by the city to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages in establishments licensed as a retail consumption dealer. 
Public stadium, coliseum, auditorium means a facility owned or controlled by the city or the county with a seating capacity of at least 2,500 people and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Retail package dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term "retail package dealer" has the same meaning as the term "retail package liquor store." 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 ("Alcoholic Beverages- General Provisions- Definitions"), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-2; Ord. No. 2013-04-14, § 1, 5-7-2014) 
Sec. 6-3. - Sale or possession for sale without license or beyond boundaries of premises covered by license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity to possess, sell, or possess for the purpose of sale at any retail business location any alcoholic beverage where the person does not have a license granted by the city to sell or possess for sale these alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. Violations of this section shall result in penalties as described by section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-4) 
Sec. 6-4. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No person may sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage in or within 100 yards of a church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "school building," "school," "school grounds" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools, universities and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). The terms "school building" and "educational building" includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. The term "school grounds" shall apply only to the parcel or parcels of land on which a school, school building or educational building is located. 
(c)  The term "church building," as used in this section, shall mean the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes of worship. 
(d)  The requirements for minimum distance from a church building, college or university located in a shopping center, as defined by the latest Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (copyright 2004 by Rutgers), shall not apply to any new license for retail package or retail consumption. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the main entrance of the establishment from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  In a straight line, regardless of obstructions, to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; 
(4)  To the main entrance of the church building, or to the front door of the nearest school building or college campus building. 
(f)  No location which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be denied continued operation under an existing license, or denied any renewal of such license, nor shall any new owner of the location be denied a new license based upon the measurements set forth in this section. 
(g)  As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibited herein shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. Provided, however, that the distance requirements herein shall not apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-5; Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 2, 2-17-2015) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 6-5. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale. 
Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses must be issued. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-6) 
Sec. 6-6. - Application forms. 
(a)  All persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the city or its designee. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names and residence address of the partners; if a limited liability company, LLC, the name and address of the managers and the name of any person or legal entity owning 20 percent of the LLC; if a corporation, the names of the officers, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process, the name of the managers, and the name of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the city or its designee and the county police department the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish data, fingerprints, financial responsibility and other records as required by the city or its designee and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish data pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(d)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(e)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(f)  The city or its designee shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provisions of this chapter. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-7) 
Sec. 6-7. - Withdrawal of application. 
Any license application made pursuant to this chapter may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the application is withdrawn before the license is issued, any sums deposited as license fees will be refunded. After issuance of the license, no refunds will be made. No refunds shall be made under any circumstances for investigative and administrative expenses required in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-8) 
Sec. 6-8. - Licensing qualifications. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this subsection. In the case of a partnership the license will be issued to all the partners owning at least 20 percent of the partnership. If no partner owns 20 percent of the partnership, then the general partner, managing partner or the partner with the greatest ownership will be licensed. In the case of a limited liability company, the license will be issued jointly to the limited liability company and managers. 
(c)  No person, firm, limited liability company or corporation shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city or its designee that such person, managers, partners in the firm, or officers and directors of the corporation have not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to and have been released from parole or probation concerning any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither the applicant nor any of the other owners of the establishment has been convicted or has pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. An applicant's first conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a county ordinance shall not, by itself, make an applicant ineligible for an alcohol license. Should any applicant, partner, or officer instrumental in the sale or dispensing of any alcoholic beverage, after a license has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime, the license shall be immediately revoked and cancelled. 
(d)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony within ten years prior to the filing of application for such license. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any city employee directly involved in the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses under this chapter to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the county previously revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(g)  The city or its designee may decline to issue a license when any person having any ownership interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section for the licensee. 
(h)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in Gwinnett County or any county contiguous to Gwinnett County, a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of said county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city or its designee and shall be in such form as it may prescribe. 
(i)  All applicants for any alcoholic beverage license must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of like character. Corporate or firm applicants shall be of good business reputation. 
(j)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(k)  For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty of nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which a defendant who was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (1968 Ga. Laws, page 324), as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-9; Ord. No. 2018-10-136, § III, 11-27-2018) 
Sec. 6-9. - License fee scale. 
Before a license shall be granted, the applicant therefor shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the city regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the scale fixed, from time to time, by the mayor and city council and kept on file in the office of the city or its designee. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-10) 
Sec. 6-10. - Fees enumerated. 
License fees applicable to this chapter shall be in amounts as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-11) 
Sec. 6-11. - Collection of fees or taxes sums due. 
If any person shall fail to pay the sum due under this chapter, the city or its designee shall issue an execution against the person so delinquent and his property, for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-12) 
Sec. 6-12. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur, provided that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization with the city or its designee. 
(c)  If a license is surrendered or a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined by the city or its designee to be the date of severance, provided no such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made. The application shall indicate that no change of ownership has occurred, except as excepted in this section. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(d)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporation at the time of issuance of the license nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing his stock holdings to a total of ten percent or more of any class of stock. 
(e)  Except as provided in subsections (a) through (d) of this section, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license pursuant to this chapter automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. 
(f)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used and a fine on the new ownership and the old ownership of not less than $300.00 and/or 30 days in jail. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the city for one year from the date of the violation. 
(g)  Should a licensee make application to the city or its designee for a transfer of location and should such a transfer of a location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the previous license shall be applied to the new location. Each applicant for a transfer of location shall pay a transfer fee. The transfer fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-13) 
Sec. 6-13. - Display of license at place of business. 
The city alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view to the public at the place of the business of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-14) 
Sec. 6-14. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action, except that a public stadium, coliseum or auditorium shall not forfeit its license until after nine consecutive months for nonuse. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-16) 
Sec. 6-15. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the city manager or his designee where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license and for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The county chief of police, upon notice of this revocation from the city manager or his designee, shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease. 
(c)  Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of section 6-33 or 6-39 of this Code shall be subject to immediate license revocation. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee shall revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period. 
(e)  The city manager or his designee shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(f)  The city manager or his designee may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter at any time such knowledge becomes known to it. 
(g)  An act or omission of a licensee, owner of more than 20 percent interest in the licensed establishment, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state or city law or of any provision of this chapter will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of its license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when the city manager or his designee determines to his own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues; provided, however, in the case of an employee, the city manager or his designee must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee, were condoned by the licensee, or where the licensee has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(h)  Whenever it can be shown that a licensee under this chapter no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned, or whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city. 
(i)  Wherever this chapter permits the city manager or his designee to suspend any license issued under this chapter but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised within the guidelines of this subsection. 
(1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such license. 
(2)  The following factors shall be considered on any revocation or suspension as set out above: 
a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this chapter and those set by the city or its designee. 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing. 
c.  Impact of the offense on the community. 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by licensee. 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the licensee to take remedial or corrective steps. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-17) 
Sec. 6-16. - Hearings. 
(a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. This provision does apply to pouring permits for employees. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of his order to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city manager or his designee may have a review thereof by appeal to the mayor and council or its designee. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the city manager or his designee, and, in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee. The mayor, city council or a designee thereof, at its discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it's determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing said appeal. The filing fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(c)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the city clerk unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city manager or his designee. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. 
(d)  The findings of the mayor and council or its designee shall be forwarded to the appellant within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing. 
(e)  The findings of the mayor and council shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; 
(2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole; or 
(3)  Unreasonable. 
(f)  The findings of the hearing officer shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-18) 
Sec. 6-17. - Notice. 
For the purpose of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered three days after the date of deposit to the United States Postal Service by certified mail. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-19) 
Sec. 6-18. - Advertising; location requirements; signs. 
Retail package licensees shall indicate plainly, by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below the containers, the price of an alcoholic beverage exposed or offered for sale. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-20) 
Sec. 6-19. - Audits of licensees. 
(a)  If the city or its designee deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, he shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. The licensee shall cooperate with the audit or forfeit any licenses issued under this chapter. 
(b)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements. 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees). 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets. 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports. 
(5)  Federal income tax return with all Form 1099's. 
The city or its designee can waive all or some of the requirements of the foregoing sentence if the city or its designee finds that no such records exist and it is not financially practical based on the net income of the licensed establishment to require them to keep such records. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-21) 
Sec. 6-20. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. 
(a)  No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. 
(b)  The city or its designee may request from time to time information concerning purchases and sales of alcoholic beverages from retailers and wholesalers. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-22) 
Sec. 6-21. - Retail consumption dealers to store inventory only on premises. 
No retail consumption dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep any beer or wine or other alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. No retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to enter into any type of arrangement whereby distilled spirits ordered by a licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-23) 
Sec. 6-22. - Addition to contents of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No one shall add to or permit the adding to any alcoholic beverage or refill any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's container in any manner. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-24) 
Sec. 6-23. - Poured alcohol to be transported by employees. 
Poured alcoholic beverages will be transported from point of dispensing to the customer by permitted employees only. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-25) 
Sec. 6-24. - Licensees to maintain a copy of this chapter; employees to be familiar with terms; licensee responsible for violations. 
Each alcoholic beverage dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep a copy of this chapter in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms of this chapter; and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-26) 
Sec. 6-25. - Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets or convenient stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-27) 
Sec. 6-26. - Failure to require and properly check identification. 
(a)  It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not sold, served, or permitted to have in his possession, alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. The term "identification," in this section, shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. Identification shall not include a birth certificate and shall not include any traffic citation and complaint form. 
(b)  Licensee must have written policies and procedures for checking identification and train, instruct and supervise employees to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-28) 
Sec. 6-27. - Sales to underage person prohibited. 
No holder or employee of the holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wines, malt beverages, or any other alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years. 
(2)  The prohibition in subsection (1) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of distilled spirits to a person when such person has furnished proper identification showing that the person to whom the distilled spirits are being sold is 21 years of age or older. For the purposes of this subsection, proper identification means any document issued by a government agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, including, but not limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under an act to require the department of public safety to issue identification cards to persons who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(3)  Sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, who is of unsound mind, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee or his employees. 
(4)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(5)  No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall allow any minors to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises of the establishment or lounge unless such minors are accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian; provided, however, that such minors shall be permitted in eating establishments, indoor commercial recreational establishments, or private clubs, as defined in this chapter, without being accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian and provided further that this section shall not apply to minors who are employees under the terms of this chapter. 
(6)  The penalty for violation of this section by an individual shall be as follows: 
a.  For the first offense, a minimum fine of $250.00. 
b.  For the second offense and subsequent violations within one year, a minimum fine of $500.00. 
(7)  Any licensed establishment where two or more violations of this section or section 3-3-23 of Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Laws and Regulations have occurred within any 36-month period shall be punished as follows: 
a.  For the second offense within any 36-month period, suspension of licenses for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
b.  For the third and any subsequent violation within any 36-month period, suspension of licenses for a period not to exceed one year. 
As to the penalties in this subsection (7), if there is a change in a majority of the licensed establishment's owners, partners or shareholders, the violations under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners; however, a different corporation, partnership or other association will be charged with the violations of its predecessors if a majority of the owners, partners or shareholders are the same. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-29) 
Sec. 6-28. - Purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages by underage persons. 
(a)  No person under the age of 21 years of age shall purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  No person under the age of 21 years of age shall attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage or misrepresent his age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-30) 
Sec. 6-29. - Regulations as to employees and manager. 
The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: 
(1)  No person shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, mix alcoholic beverages, or serve in any managerial position by an establishment holding a license under this chapter until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the county chief of police or his designee, indicating that the person is eligible for such employment. 
(2)  This section shall not be construed to include volunteer groups with nonprofit tax exempt status from the Internal Revenue Service whose volunteer efforts financially benefit a nonprofit organization with no direct financial benefit, either by wages, tips or donations, to the individual volunteer. No volunteer under the age of 18 shall be allowed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders or mix alcoholic beverages. Employees of a licensed establishment whose duties are limited solely to those of busboys, cooks, or dishwashers shall also be excluded from this section. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the city or its designee and upon paying a fee which shall be established by the city, and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the person, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The city shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this chapter, the city shall issue a permit to the person, by mail, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for employment, the county chief of police or his designee shall notify the person, in writing, that they are not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and their right to appeal. 
(5)  No person shall be granted a pouring permit unless it appears, to the satisfaction of the city, that such person has not been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime within a period of five years of the date of conviction and has been released from parole or probation. A person's first time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a city or county ordinance shall not, by itself, make a person ineligible for an alcohol pouring permit. No person shall be granted a pouring permit who has been convicted, plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any federal, state, or local law for any felony within five years of the date of conviction and has not been released from parole or probation prior to the filing for application for such permit. For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilt or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which defendant who was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.), as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentence in court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(6)  An alcohol pouring permit shall be issued for a period of one calendar year from the date of the original application. As noted in subsection (11) of this section, the alcohol pouring permit must be in the possession of the employee while the employee is working at the licensed establishment. This permit must be in the possession of the employee while the pouring permit holder is working and available for inspection by members of the police department or the city or its designee. 
(7)  No person shall be issued a permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed or covered up any material fact by any device, trick or scheme while making application to the police department for an alcoholic beverage pouring permit under this section. If it is determined that a person is in violation of this subsection and a permit is denied for this reason, then 30 calendar days must elapse from the date of notification per certified mailing before a new application and fee may be resubmitted. 
(8)  All permits issued through administrative error can be terminated and seized by the county chief of police or his designee, or the city manager or his designee. 
(9)  Replacement permits will be issued within 30 days of original date, upon paying one-half of the fee charged for alcohol pouring permits. After 30 days of original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(10)  All permits issued under this chapter remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer or designee of the police department or agent or employee of the city or its designee. 
(11)  No licensee shall allow any employee or manager required to hold a permit to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in their possession a current valid city pouring permit. For new employees, a receipt issued by the city or its designee may be used for a maximum of 30 days from the date of its issue. Licensees are required by this chapter to inspect and verify that each employee required to do so has in their possession a valid current alcohol pouring permit. 
(12)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the county chief of police or his designee and the city, the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers, twice annually during the month of June and again during the month of December. 
(13)  Any person convicted of any violation of this section shall receive a minimum fine of $200.00. 
(14)  This section shall not apply to licensees providing malt beverage tasting samples pursuant to section 6-95(d), but shall apply to licensees providing malt beverage tasting samples pursuant to section 6-95(e). 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-32; Ord. No. 2015-06-48, § 4, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 6-30. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on-premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the city or its designee. 
(b)  Except within a designated entertainment district, the requirement for approval is that the patio/open area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. 
(c)  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of three feet above ground level. It does not have to be solid nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. It must be permitted and approved by the county's building inspection department and the county's fire department as required by their governing regulations or codes. 
(d)  The only exit from this type area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through an approved fire exit, not for general public use unless an emergency exists. The fire exit should be of the type that sounds an alarm so that the establishment will be alerted in the event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists. 
(e)  If a licensee desires a patio/open sales area inside an existing structure, plans will be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by the city or its designee. Interior type patio/open sales areas must also meet the requirements of the county's development and fire codes. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas of such hotel or motel, provided such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel. Patio areas, as that term is used in this subsection, do not have to conform to the standards in this section. 
(g)  Alcoholic beverages purchased within a designated entertainment district may be consumed throughout that entertainment district and transported anywhere within that district pursuant to article XII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-34; Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 6-31. - Consumption outside premises—Where prohibited, restricted and permitted. 
(a)  It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises with open alcoholic beverages, and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open beverages are sold and carried out. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the carrying out of wine or malt beverages for consumption at a publicly owned or privately- owned golf course or within a designated entertainment district. 
(b)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other contrary provision of law, any restaurant which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, outside consumption of alcoholic beverages beyond a restaurant or patio area is permitted within a designated entertainment district pursuant to article XII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-35; Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 6-32. - Specifications of premises. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of the building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, ordinances of the county, regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the building inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building, or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. All premises for which an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-36) 
Sec. 6-33. - Solicitation prohibited. 
No retail consumption dealers licensed under this chapter shall require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for herself, or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage, or money with which to purchase the beverage; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manager to solicit for himself or for the others the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage, or money with which to purchase the beverage. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-37) 
Sec. 6-34. - Noise from establishments prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any establishment licensed under this chapter to make or cause to be made any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others in the city, and which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability from the nearest property line of the business in question. In no event, however, shall any such loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise be made by an establishment licensed under this chapter between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Loud sound or noise resulting from outdoor activities associated with a public stadium, coliseum or auditorium shall not be considered a violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-38) 
Sec. 6-35. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the police department. 
Sworn officers of the county police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverages ordinances of the city during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and county and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city official to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-39) 
Sec. 6-36. - Establishment can be closed in cases of emergency. 
The county chief of police, or his designee, may immediately close an establishment licensed under this chapter in case of emergency, for the safety of the public or to investigate a crime, for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-40) 
Sec. 6-37. - Sale on election days. 
Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to this governing authority by Act No. 750 (House Bill No. 247), approved April 10, 1985, amending O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b)(2)(B), the sale of wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages, to wit: wine and malt beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-41) 
Sec. 6-38. - Bring your own bottle (brown bagging) prohibited. 
(a)  It is prohibited for any person to bring his own alcoholic beverage into any business establishment without regard to whether such establishment is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages except as follows: 
(1)  Any person dining at a business establishment licensed to sell wine and/or malt beverage for consumption on the premises may bring an unopened bottle of wine and/or malt beverage into said establishment for consumption if the establishment has a policy permitting same. 
(2)  Any person who is a patron of a theater, art gallery, book store, hair salon, nail salon, spa, florist, live music or comedy venue may bring an unopened bottle of wine and/or malt beverage into the establishment for consumption on the premises, provided: 
a.  The owners or their agents have a policy permitting a patron to bring an unopened bottle of wine and/or malt beverage into the business establishment for consumption on the premises; 
b.  The establishment is licensed as required hereinafter; and 
c.  The business establishment does not meet the requirements for an alcoholic beverage license as described in article II of this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to (a)(1) and (a)(2), individuals may bring wine and/or malt beverages into the common area of an entertainment district provided that the time and location for doing so is authorized in advance by the city and that no glass containers are used. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-42; Ord. No. 2013-12-23, § 1, 1-24-2014; Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 6-39. - Alcoholic beverage caterers. 
(a)  License requirements for resident caterers. 
(1)  Any caterer who possesses a valid license from the city to sell or otherwise dispense malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits at a fixed location within the city may apply for an off-premises license that permits sales at a catered event or function as authorized herein. 
(2)  Each off-premises catering license, authorized herein, shall be valid only for the event or function for which the license is issued. The fee for each license shall be set by resolution of the city council, and this fee amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained a license as provided herein. 
(b)  Permit requirements for nonresident caterers. 
(1)  A nonresident alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit to the city manager or designee. The fee for each such permit shall be $50.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3 (or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto). 
(2)  An application for an event permit shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address, time, and name of the event and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the applied-for catered event or function. 
(3)  The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages off-premises without an event permit as authorized herein. 
(c)  Limitation on license. A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or otherwise dispense only that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell or otherwise dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(d)  Sunday sales. An alcoholic beverage caterer wishing to cater an event or function on Sunday must possess a valid Sunday sales license and comply with the requirements of state law with respect to the service of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
(e)  Tax on sales by resident caterers. Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages by a resident caterer as provided in article IX of this chapter. 
(f)  Tax on drinks served by nonresident caterers. Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverage drinks served by a nonresident caterer in the amounts set forth in article IX of this chapter and shall be paid within 30 days after the conclusion of the catered event or function. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04-26, 5-20-2014) 
Sec. 6-40. - License renewal. 
(a)  An application for renewal shall be in the form of a sworn and notarized statement by the named licensee, on a form provided by the city manager, stating that there have been no changes in any of the information contained in the original application. If there have been any substantive changes, the application for renewal shall be in the same form as an original application. 
(b)  An application for renewal shall be filed no later than December 15 and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(c)  Renewal applications and payments not received by December 15 shall incur a late fee. Renewal applications and payments received between December 16 and December 31 are subject to a ten percent late fee. Businesses failing to apply for renewal of their licenses prior by December 31 must reapply for a license. 
(d)  Businesses required to reapply for a license pursuant to subsection (c) of this Code section shall at the time of reapplication pay the required application fee, the annual fee, and the ten percent late fee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12-62, § 1(6-56), 11-19-2016) 
Secs. 6-41—6-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RETAIL SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 6-69. - Locations where permitted. 
No distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except: 
(1)  In eating establishments regularly serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen. A full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the county health and fire departments. Such eating establishment will regularly serve food every hour they are open and derive at least as much gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food as it derives from the sale of distilled spirits. When eating establishments are located in hotels, motels, and high-rise office and apartment buildings, every entrance to the establishment shall be from a public lobby, hallway, mall or other publicly used interior portion of the primary use structure. 
(2)  In indoor commercial recreation establishments. 
(3)  In an indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center capable of serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen (a full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the county health and fire departments) prepared to serve food every hour it is open and deriving at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreational, promotional or entertainment or operational activities. 
(4)  In indoor entertainment halls. 
(5)  Public stadium, coliseum or auditorium. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-66) 
Sec. 6-70. - Investigative and administrative costs. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate certified check or cash in an amount sufficient to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded; but the cost paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. Any applicant for a license under this article who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this article shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. The investigative and administrative fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-67) 
Sec. 6-71. - Advertising in official gazette of county. 
A notice of each application to sell distilled spirits by consumption shall be advertised in the official gazette of the county, once a week for two weeks immediately preceding consideration of the application. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-68) 
Sec. 6-72. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. until 1:55 a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(b)  Distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the governing authority. 
(c)  The sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight in: 
(1)  Any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served; 
(2)  Any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging; 
(3)  In any publicly owned civic and cultural center capable of serving prepared food with a full-service kitchen (a full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the Gwinnett Health and Fire Departments) prepared to serve food every hour it is open and deriving at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreational, promotional, entertainment or operational activities; or 
(4)  A public stadium, coliseum or auditorium which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
(d)  Distilled spirits may be sold for consumption on the premises from 12:00 midnight to 1:55 a.m. on any Monday which is New Year's Day, January 1, of any year. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a business holding a distilled spirits consumption on the premises license to fail to remove from its retail service area any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups, or any other container used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages or to otherwise allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises one hour or more after the business is prohibited from selling, dispensing, or delivering alcoholic beverages to any customer, patron or guest of the business. A public stadium, coliseum or auditorium shall remove from its retail service area any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups, or any other container used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages within 24 hours following any event. 
(f)  A violation of subsection (a), (b) or (e) of this section by a licensee, majority stockholder, general manager or managing partner of the licensee or licensed establishment shall result in license suspension for a period of two days, which shall be scheduled to include a Friday and Saturday in succession. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-69; Ord. No. 2018-09-132, § 1, 10-23-2018) 
Secs. 6-73—6-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RETAIL SALES OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 6-103. - Type of retail establishment where permitted. 
No beer or wine shall be sold for consumption on the premises where sold except: 
(1)  In eating establishments having a full-service kitchen (a full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments), prepared to serve food every hour they are open; 
(2)  In indoor commercial recreation establishments; 
(3)  In an indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center capable of serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen (a full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the county health and fire departments), prepared to serve food every hour it is open and deriving at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreational, promotional or entertainment or operational activities; 
(4)  At a publicly owned golf course; 
(5)  An indoor entertainment hall; or 
(6)  Public stadium, coliseum or auditorium. 
(7)  Licensees under section 6-95 of this Code. 
These eating establishments must be located in a zoning district which permits restaurants and drive-in restaurants as conforming uses or where these eating establishments are incidental to a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-91; Ord. No. 2015-06-48, § 4, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 6-104. - License fee and amount to defray investigative and administrative costs to accompany application. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate certified check or cash in an amount sufficient to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded; but the costs paid for investigation and administration shall be retained. Any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. Any applicant for a license under this article who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this article shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. The investigative and administrative fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-92) 
Sec. 6-105. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Beer and/or wine shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:55 a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(b)  No beer and/or wine shall be sold for consumption at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the governing authority. 
(c)  The sale of beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight in: 
(1)  Any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served; 
(2)  Any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging; 
(3)  In any publicly owned civic and cultural center capable of serving prepared food with a full-service kitchen (a full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the Gwinnett Health and Fire Departments) prepared to serve food every hour it is open and deriving at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreational, promotional, entertainment or operational activities; or 
(4)  A public stadium, coliseum or auditorium which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
(d)  Beer and/or wine may be sold for consumption on the premises from 12:00 midnight to 1:55 a.m. on any Monday which is New Year's Day, January 1, of any year. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a business holding a beer and/or wine consumption on the premises license to fail to remove from its retail service area any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups, or any other container used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages or to otherwise allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises one hour or more after the business is prohibited from selling, dispensing, or delivering alcoholic beverages to any customer, patron or guest of the business. A public stadium, coliseum or auditorium shall remove from its retail service area any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups, or any other container used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages within 24 hours following any event. 
(f)  A violation of subsection (a), (b) or (e) of this section by a licensee, majority stockholder, general manager or managing partner of the licensee or licensed establishment shall result in license suspension for a period of two days, which shall be scheduled to include a Friday and Saturday in succession. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-93; Ord. No. 2018-09-132, § 2, 10-23-2018) 
Sec. 6-106. - Ancillary wine tasting license. 
(a)  The holder of a package wine license, with or without a package malt beverage license, but in no event with a package distilled spirits license, with licensed premises having a minimum of 200 square feet of floor space dedicated to die display of wine offered for sale, shall be eligible for an ancillary wine tasting license to provide samples of wine offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. 
(b)  Wine sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer request a sample of a wine offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with wine education classes and sampling designed to promote wine appreciation and education. 
(c)  Wine tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a wine counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(d)  Wine sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one time per day per customer for a period not to exceed two consecutive hours. Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. 
(e)  Wine bottles shall be opened only by the licensee or an employee, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. 
(f)  No open containers of wine shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(g)  Not more than three times per week for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours, the holder of an ancillary wine tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for classes. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. 
(h)  Holders of an ancillary wine tasting permit shall not charge for samples or tastings, but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. 
(i)  Wine sampling and tasting is only permitted within the enclosed portion of the premises. 
(j)  The annual fee for an ancillary wine tasting license shall be set and may be revised by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-14, § 3, 5-7-2014) 
Sec. 6-107. - Ancillary malt beverage tasting license. 
(a)  The holder of a package malt beverage license, with or without a package wine license, but in no event with a package distilled spirits license, with licensed premises having a minimum of 400 square feet of floor space dedicated to the display of malt beverages offered for sale or which is authorized pursuant to section 6-96 to sell growlers, shall be eligible for an ancillary malt beverage tasting license to provide samples of malt beverages offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. 
(b)  The applicant for an ancillary malt beverage tasting license must hold any and all applicable licenses and permits required by the state and the city, including, but not limited to those named above. 
(c)  Malt beverage sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a malt beverage offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with malt beverage education classes and sampling designed to promote malt beverage appreciation and education. 
(d)  Malt beverage tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(e)  Malt beverage sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one time per day per customer for a period not to exceed two consecutive hours. Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period, except as provided under subsection (e) of this Code section. 
(f)  A licensee under this Code section who also meets all the requirements of section 6-32 may offer malt beverage sampling for customers to be limited to no more than one time per day per customer for a period not to exceed two consecutive hours. Samples pursuant to this subsection (e) shall not exceed four ounces, and no customer shall consume more than 16 ounces in any two-hour period. 
(g)  Only the licensee or an employee shall open and handle unpackaged malt beverages, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. 
(h)  No open containers shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(i)  Malt beverage sampling and tasting is only permitted within the designated interior portion of the premises. 
(j)  The annual fee for an ancillary malt beverage tasting license shall be set, and may be revised, by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-14, § 4, 5-7-2014; Ord. No. 2015-06-48, § 4, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 6-108. - On-premises consumption unlawful; growlers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for die sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. It shall be unlawful for any retail package licensee to open or break the package of any alcoholic beverages for a purchaser or to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. This section shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Tastings provided pursuant to an ancillary wine tasting license; 
(2)  Tastings provided pursuant to an ancillary malt beverage tasting license; or 
(3)  Sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing prohibition, package malt beverage licensees, who are not also licensed to sell distilled spirits by die package, may fill growlers with draft beer at the licensee's licensed location from kegs lawfully procured by the licensee, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The filled growler must be securely sealed, on premises, with a tamper proof plastic cap; 
(2)  Either at least 90 percent of the licensee's total gross sales are from the packaged sale of malt beverages and/or wine or the licensee's premises have a minimum of 400 square feet of floor space dedicated to the display of malt beverages offered for sale; and 
(3)  The licensee complies with all state, federal and local packaging and labeling laws regarding alcoholic beverages. Each filled growler must be removed from die premises in its securely sealed condition. Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, consumption on the premises shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-14, § 5, 5-7-2014) 
Sec. 6-109. - Package sales prohibited; exceptions. 
Except as specifically provided hereafter, it shall be unlawful for any distilled spirits and/or malt beverages to be sold by the package by retail establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises. Wine and/or growlers may, however, be sold by the package by retail establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises, provided that package wine and/or malt beverage licenses are also obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2018-10-135, § III, 11-27-2018) 
Secs. 6-110—6-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE 

Sec. 6-130. - Types of retail establishments. 
(a)  No beer and/or wine shall be sold at retail except in establishments licensed to sell beer and/or wine in the original package, as applicable, which are located in zoning districts in which these establishments are permitted as a conforming use or when such establishment currently exists in the zoning district as a nonconforming use as defined in the zoning resolution of the city, as amended. 
(b)  In cases where, under section 6-205, a hotel or motel is allowed to sell liquor by the package for purposes of room service, beer and wine sales by the package shall also be permitted for purposes of room service to guests of the hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04-14, § 2, 5-7-2014) 
Sec. 6-131. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of beer and/or wine except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. The hours within which business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale of beer and/or wine. 
(b)  Retail package beer and/or wine shall not be sold at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulations or of any special order of the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-117) 
Sec. 6-132. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices. 
Retailers shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed the prices of all beer and wine exposed or offered for sale. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-118) 
Sec. 6-133. - Quantity sale requirements. 
Single cans or bottles or other containers of alcoholic beverages may be sold. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-119) 
Sec. 6-134. - License fee and amount to defray investigative and administrative costs to accompany application. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate certified check or cash in an amount sufficient to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded; but the cost paid for investigation and administration shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. As to any applicant for a license under this article who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this article, there shall be no investigative and administrative fee. The investigative and administrative fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-120) 
Secs. 6-135—6-151. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WHOLESALERS 

Sec. 6-152. - Special provisions applicable to wholesale purchases. 
(a)  Any person desiring to sell at wholesale any alcoholic beverages in the city shall make application to the city or its designee for a license to do so, which application shall be in writing on the prescribed forms, and pay any license as set by city or its designee. 
(b)  No person who has any direct financial interest in any license for the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages in the county shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale alcoholic beverage license issued by the city. 
(c)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-141) 
Sec. 6-153. - Hours and days of sale. 
Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. There shall be no sales of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-142) 
Sec. 6-154. - Audit and penalties. 
(a)  If the city or its designee deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, he shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(b)  Any licensee who violates any provisions of this article may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $300.00 for each offense and/or 30 days in the jail and the license may be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-143) 
Secs. 6-155—6-176. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRIVATE CLUBS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Sale of distilled spirits by private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-177. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include a commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulation shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this article; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with: 
a.  Suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
b.  A sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent or employee, directly or indirectly, receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Sports club means an association or corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state, organized and operated primarily to provide a location for the patrons thereof to engage in sporting events. To qualify for an alcoholic beverage consumption dealer's license, a sports club must have been actively in operation within the county at least two years prior to an application for license under this chapter; provided, however, the two-year operational requirement shall not apply to golf club associations or golf club corporations where the selling or the serving of alcoholic beverages is to take place on the golf course premises. A sports club organized or operated primarily for serving of alcoholic beverages shall not qualify for licensing under this article, and accordingly shall not be permitted to serve alcoholic beverages at any time. Unless otherwise indicated, a sports club licensee shall comply with all other requirements imposed upon retail consumption dealers. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-166) 
Sec. 6-178. - Regulation of sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-167) 
Sec. 6-179. - Certain organizations exempt from food establishment requirements. 
Veterans organizations, fraternal organizations, and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the state income tax law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food. However, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-168) 
Sec. 6-180. - Investigative and administrative costs. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate certified check or cash for distilled spirits and/or beer and/or wine in order to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded but the cost paid for investigation and administration shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. Any applicant for a license under this article who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this article shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. The investigative and administrative fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-169) 
Sec. 6-181. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:55 a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the governing authority. 
(c)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of the total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises from 12:00 midnight to 2:00 a.m. on any Monday which is New Year's Day, January 1, of any year. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-170) 
Sec. 6-182. - Eligibility for issuance of a temporary special event license. 
(a)  A temporary license may be issued to any person, firm or corporation, for a period not to exceed ten days in any one year, for an approved special event. The person, firm or corporation must make application and pay the fee that may be required by the ordinances and shall be required to comply with all general ordinances and the licensing and regulations for a consumption-on-the-premises establishment with the exception of the full-service kitchen requirement. 
(b)  The special event must meet the following criterion prior to the issuance of a license to sell alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  The special event must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. 
(2)  The special event must receive approval from the county police department on crowd control and security measures. 
(3)  The special event must receive approval from the county department of transportation, traffic operations section, on traffic control measures. 
(4)  The location at which the special event is to take place must be properly zoned and approved by the county planning and development department. 
(5)  The premises at which the special event is to take place must be approved by the city or its designee. 
(c)  Any employee or volunteer of the special event licensee working the special event in any position dispensing, selling, serving, taking orders or mixing alcoholic beverages shall not be required to obtain a pouring permit for the special event. 
(d)  The county chief of police or his designee may immediately revoke any temporary license for a special event if it is determined continued alcohol sales may endanger the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
(e)  As a condition on the issuance of a temporary special event license, the licensee shall indemnify and hold the city or its designee harmless from claims, demand or cause of action which may arise from activities associated with the special event. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-171) 
Sec. 6-183. - Expiration; renewal of license. 
All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full license fee must be paid for a license application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full license fee shall be paid for a license application filed after July 1 of the license year except for applications for temporary licenses under section 6-182 which shall not be halved. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-15) 
Secs. 6-184—6-204. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HOTEL-MOTEL IN-ROOM SERVICE 

Sec. 6-205. - License. 
(a)  In-room service means the provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel-motel guestroom which contains beer and/or wine only, which is provided upon written request of the guest and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of the beer and/or wine contained therein is final at the time requested except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. 
(b)  Any hotel-motel that acquires this in-room service shall also be required to obtain a consumption-on-the-premises license and meet all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  No hotel-motel shall be authorized to provide in-room service until it has been issued a special license to do so. A license fee shall be imposed to provide only beer and/or wine by in-room service. The license fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(d)  The sale of beer and/or wine by in-room service shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations relative to the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages, except as provided otherwise in this article. 
(e)  Keys for in-room service shall only be sold to guests between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. until midnight on Sunday. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-191) 
Secs. 6-206—6-233. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HAPPY HOUR 

Sec. 6-234. - Promotions and sales. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons. 
(2)  Deliver more than two alcoholic beverages to one person at a time, however, nothing herein shall prohibit a brewpub from offering a sampler of malt beverages in containers not exceeding four ounces. Each sampler shall not exceed four different types of malt beverages. 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week, except at private functions not opened to the public. 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not opened to the public. 
(6)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, in any container which holds more than 32 fluid ounces (0.947 liters), except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(7)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. 
(8)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the price charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner so as to be in view of the paying public, and the schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person. 
(e)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as happy hour or similarly designated promotions. 
(f)  The police department shall have responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(g)  No licensee may require the purchase of any alcoholic beverage as a part of or prerequisite to the purchase of any other product or service. If alcoholic beverages are included as part of a package of other goods and/or services, the alcoholic beverages must be priced separately and all customers must be allowed to purchase the remaining goods and services without the alcoholic beverages at a price from which the full price of the alcoholic beverages has been deducted. 
(h)  Any person deemed guilty of violating this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00 and/or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in the jail. Licensees may further be subject to revocation proceedings. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-211) 
Secs. 6-235—6-261. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - EXCISE TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; imposition of excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; authorization to levy tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60; authority of city may impose excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 

Sec. 6-262. - Levy and computation. 
In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon wholesale dealers selling malt beverages or wine to retail dealers in the city, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each such wholesale dealer the following excise taxes: 
(1)  Upon the sale of any beer or malt beverages there is imposed an excise tax of $0.05 per 12-ounce container and $6.00 for each container of tap or draft beer or malt beverage of 15.5 gallons and in similar proportion for bottles, cans and containers of various sizes as follows: 

 
(2)  Upon the sale of any wine there is imposed an excise tax of $1.00 per gallon. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-231) 
Sec. 6-263. - Payment; interest; records. 
(a)  The excise taxes imposed in sections 6-231 and 6-235 shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the city by the tenth of each month, based upon the units of beer and wine sold during the previous month. 
(b)  Interest shall accrue on late payments at the rate of nine percent per annum. 
(c)  The wholesale dealers shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments and shall render a sworn statement of the records accompanying the monthly report to the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-232) 
Sec. 6-264. - Bond; audit; fee. 
(a)  Wholesalers shall post a performance bond with the city equal to 1.5 times the estimated highest monthly payment made in a calendar year of the prorated taxes based on sales collected by wholesalers from the retailers to secure the payment for the taxes imposed in this article. The bond provided for in this subsection shall be secured by cash which shall bear no interest or a surety bond executed by a surety company licensed to do business in this state and approved by the city. 
(b)  The city shall audit each wholesale dealer licensed to do business in the city, and the wholesaler shall, at the time of filing application for a license or a renewal of license, pay to the city a sum sufficient to cover the cost of auditing the books and records of the wholesale dealer. A wholesale dealer applying for a combination license to cover wine and malt beverage sales shall, at the time of filing application for a license or renewal, pay to the director of finance a sum sufficient to cover the cost of auditing the books and records of the wholesale dealer. The auditing fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-233) 
Sec. 6-265. - Per drink excise tax. 
(a)  Every purchaser of distilled spirits by the drink shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three percent of the retail price or charge for such drink. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee licensed under this article, and such licensee shall remit the same to the city on or before the tenth day of the succeeding month along with a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, excluding malt beverages. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales and shall be reported and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the city or its designee to the same extent as required of cash sales. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction equal to that rate authorized for deductions from state tax under part V of the Georgia Retailer's and Consumer's Sales and Use Tax Act, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, as now written or hereafter amended; provided that the tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. It shall be the duty of every such licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levied pursuant to this article to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable pursuant to this article, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due. It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three years. 
(b)  Excise taxes received in the city after the 20th day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. 
(c)  If the city or its designee deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, he will notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(d)  Any licensee who violates any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $300.00 for each offense and/or 30 days in the jail and the license of such location may be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-234) 
Sec. 6-266. - Excise tax and bond required on wholesalers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter or $0.65 per ounce which shall be paid to the governing authority on all distilled spirits and wine sold by wholesalers to retailers in the city. Such tax shall be paid to the city by the wholesale distributor on all distilled spirits and wine sold to the licensees for the sale of distilled spirits and wine in the city as follows: each wholesaler selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits or wine to any licensees licensed pursuant to this article shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the excise tax, together with a summary of all deliveries, to each licensee on or before the tenth day of the month following. Excise taxes received in the city after the 20th day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. The $0.22 per liter or $0.65 per ounce shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits and wine shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter or $0.65 per ounce. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits or wine to a retail dealer without collecting the tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any distilled spirits or wine on which such tax has not been paid. Each wholesaler shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of the tax. 
(b)  There is hereby levied an excise tax on all beer and malt beverages sold by wholesalers to retailers in the city at the rate of $0.05 per 12-ounce container and $6.00 for each container of tap or draft beer or malt beverage of 15½ gallons and in similar proportion for bottles, cans and containers of various sizes as follows: 

 
All provisions as to excise tax in this section shall apply to this tax on beer and malt beverages except the tax rate which is set out in this subsection and the reimbursement of three percent of the taxes collected which shall not apply to beer and malt beverage wholesalers. 
(c)  Each wholesale dealer prior to commencement of any business operation within the city shall post a performance bond with the city equal to 1.5 times the estimated highest monthly payment to be made in a calendar year of the excise tax based on sales collected by the wholesale dealer from the retailers to secure the payments for the tax imposed in this section. These bonds shall be secured by cash which shall bear no interest, or a surety bond executed by a surety company licensed to do business in this state and approved by the city. 
(d)  A wholesaler may be excused from posting the performance bond as provided in subsection (c) of this section after demonstrating full and satisfactory compliance with the provisions herein for a period of 12 months subsequent to the commencement of business operations within the city. Continued exemption from the requirement of posting the performance bond shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the terms of this article and the payments of all sums as required by the provisions in this section 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-235) 
Secs. 6-267—6-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BREWPUBS 

Sec. 6-296. - Definition; licensing; excise tax; administration. 
(a)  Definition. The term "brewpub" means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed for retail consumption on the premises. The term "eating establishment," as used herein, means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full-service kitchen prepared to serve food every hour they are open and deriving at least as much gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food as it derives from the sale of distilled spirits. 
(b)  License required. No person, firm or corporation shall be issued a brewpub license without first obtaining a retail consumption license. 
(c)  Authorization of license holder. A brewpub license authorizes the holder of such license to manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 1,500 barrels of beer in a calendar year solely for retail sale on the premises and solely in draft form. 
(d)  Distribution. Distribution of any malt beverages produced by a brewpub licensed under this article to any wholesaler is prohibited. 
(e)  Excise tax. There is hereby levied an excise tax on all beer and malt beverage produced by a brewpub at the rate of $6.00 per one-half barrel (15.5 gallons) and $12.00 per barrel (31 gallons). Such tax shall be paid to the city no later than the 20th day of each month for the preceding month's production. A late payment penalty not to exceed ten percent of the tax otherwise due shall be added to the amount due for any payment not received by the due date. 
(f)  Administration. 
(1)  The city, or its designee, is authorized to establish procedures for administering all provisions of this article, to include, but not limited to, reporting forms and requirements, or establishing procedures and schedules for conducting financial audits or inspections of the books or records of any establishment licensed under this article. 
(2)  Every brewpub located within the city shall file a monthly report with the city or its designee, no later than the 20th day of each month, on such forms as the city or its designee may prescribe, setting forth all malt beverages produced during such preceding calendar month, to include beginning and ending inventories. Such report shall also indicate the total production of malt beverages during the report period and the proper tax remittance for such production. Failure to properly complete or submit the required reports shall subject the licensee to a late filing penalty not to exceed $25.00 for each deficient reporting period. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-236) 
Sec. 6-297. - Severability. 
If any section, provision or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 6-237) 
Secs. 6-298—6-337. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS—LIQUOR STORES 

Sec. 6-338. - License for retail sale of package distilled spirits—Liquor store. 
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, and except within a designated entertainment district, a license for the retail sale of package distilled spirits upon the terms and conditions provide in this chapter shall be granted as a special use by the city council after public hearing and evidenced by a written approval executed by the majority of the members of the city council. Upon the compliance with the foregoing provision and at the direction of the city council, the license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 1, 2-17-2015; Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 6-339. - Location of retail establishment. 
Except within a designated entertainment district, no distilled spirits shall be sold by the package at retail except by special use approval on property zoned C-2, general business or C-3, highway business. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 1, 2-17-2015; Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 6-340. - Liquor store limitations. 
(a)  Liquor stores must be located at least 300 feet from churches and 600 feet from schools. This distance shall be measured from the front door of the liquor store to the front door of the church or front door of the nearest school building as measured along pedestrian walkways. 
(b)  Liquor stores must be located at least 300 feet from parks. This distance shall be measured from the front door of the liquor store to the nearest portion of the park property. 
(c)  Except in designated entertainment districts, liquor stores must operate as sole tenants in freestanding buildings of at least 5,000 square feet in size and no greater than 10,000 square feet in size. Within designated entertainment districts, liquor stores may occupy leased space within a shopping center provided that the liquor store is at least 15,000 square feet in size. 
(d)  Liquor stores must be located on property that is a minimum of one-half acre in size with a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a state highway or major street. 
(e)  A liquor store shall not be located closer than 3,000 feet to another liquor store, regardless of jurisdiction. 
(f)  Liquor store buildings shall comply with overlay design regulations. 
(g)  Liquor store deliveries shall be made at the rear of the store building and all loading areas, dumpsters, recycling bins, and compactors shall be screened from ground view. 
(h)  Liquor store properties shall have no outdoor storage including the storage of shopping carts. 
(i)  Liquor stores shall not sell lottery tickets, magazines, or tobacco products (except quality cigars.) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 1, 2-17-2015; Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 6-341. - Both retail sale of package malt beverages and wine and package distilled spirits. 
For licensees who wish to operate a business which conducts both the retail sale of package distilled spirits and the retail sale of package malt beverages and wine, in the case of conflict, the provisions of this article regulating the retail sale of package distilled spirits shall prevail, and compliance with those provisions, rather than the provisions applicable to the license permitting the retail sale of package malt beverages and wine, is required. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 6-342. - Hours of sale. 
Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of distilled spirits except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 6-343. - Consumption prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on a premises licensed for the sale of package distilled spirits. For the purpose of this section "premises" shall include the parking area immediately adjoining the premises licensed for the sale of package distilled spirits and available for the use of the customers of the licensed premises, whether or not the same are owned or leased by the licensed holder. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on said premises or to sell unsealed (broken) package distilled spirits. If such licensee shall also have a license to sell malt beverages or wine, it shall likewise be unlawful for any such items to be consumed on the premises or to sell unsealed (broken) malt beverages or wine. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 6-344. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices. 
Retailers shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed the prices of all distilled spirits offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 6-345. - Signs and window obstruction. 
All glass surfaces forming the exterior walls of the premises shall remain unobstructed and shall provide a clear line of sight into the interior of the liquor store. No signs, window coverings, or other material shall be placed on or within ten feet of any exterior glass surfaces, except one 'open' sign of up to four square feet in area, may be placed on or near the front door. Additional signage for liquor stores shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  One wall sign per road frontage of up to 60 square feet in area; and 
(2)  One ground sign per road frontage of up to 75 square feet in area and five feet in height; and 
(3)  Temporary banners as allowed per zoning code section 86-109. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 6-346. - Excise taxes. 
(a)  In addition to all other taxes or license fees heretofore or hereafter imposed upon retailers, dealers, or wholesalers engaged in the city and the business of selling distilled spirits, there is imposed and levied upon all here and after described retailers, dealers, or wholesalers within the city an excise tax to be computed and collected as hereinafter set forth. The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to fortified wine. 
(b)  There is levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter or $0.0065 per ounce which shall be paid to the governing authority on all distilled spirits sold by wholesalers to retailers in the city. Such tax shall be paid to the City of Peachtree Corners by the wholesale distributor on all distilled spirits sold to those licensed to sale package distilled spirits in the city as follows: Each wholesaler selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits to any licensees hereunder shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each licensee on or before the tenth day of the month following. Excise taxes received by the City of Peachtree Corners after the twentieth day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. The $0.22 per liter or $0.0065 per ounce shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter or $0.0065 per ounce. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any wholesaler to sell, ship, or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits to any retail dealer or licensee without collecting said tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any retail dealer or licensee to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any distilled spirits on which such tax has not been paid. Wholesalers collecting the tax authorized herein shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be at the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, and any amendment thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 6-347. - Schedule of fees. 
(a)  Investigative and administrative costs. 
(1)  Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a $500.00 fee for investigative and administrative costs. 
(2)  The fee shall not be refundable if the license is denied or if the licensee withdraws the application. 
(3)  Anyone applying for more than one license shall pay only one investigative and administrative fee. 
(4)  Any applicant for a new license under this chapter that already holds an existing license, shall have the investigative and administrative fee waived. 
(b)  License fee. 
(1)  Retail package sales—Distilled spirits—$3,000.00. 
(2)  Retail package sales—Wine and distilled spirits—$3,600.00. 
(3)  Retail package sales—Malt beverage, wine and distilled spirits—$4,200.00. 
(4)  Retail package Sunday sales—$1,500.00 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 6-348. - Applicability of other articles of this chapter. 
All sections included in articles I, V, and VIII of this chapter shall apply to the licenses and authorizations granted by this article. Any inconsistencies between the sections included in this article and articles I, V, and VIII of this chapter shall be resolved by the language of this article taking precedence over the language of articles I, V, and VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
Sec. 6-349. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  Applications for variances from the provisions of chapter 6, alcoholic beverages, shall be made to, and considered by, the city council in the manner prescribed for public hearings. 
(b)  Appeals of city council decisions shall be made to superior court by petition for writ of certiorari in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-37, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
Secs. 6-350—6-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - MANUFACTURERS OF DISTILLED SPIRITS AND MALT BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-400. - License required to manufacture. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this article and chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08-98, § I, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 6-401. - Manufacturer defined. 
As used herein, a manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage and: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits, also known as a distiller; or 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer, excepting, however, brewpub brewers, licensed under article X of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08-98, § I, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 6-402. - Compliance with state law required. 
The applicant for a manufacturer license shall be subject to and comply with all state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08-98, § I, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 6-403. - Application for a manufacturer license. 
Application for a manufacturer license shall be made in the same manner and subject to the same rules and procedures as an application for any other license authorized under this chapter. The application shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08-98, § I, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 6-404. - Manufacturer licenses. 
Manufacturer licenses which may be issued under this article shall be specific to the alcoholic beverage to be manufactured: 
(1)  Manufacturer license for distilled spirits. 
(2)  Manufacturer license for malt beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08-98, § I, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 6-405. - Manufacturer of distilled spirits. 
(a)  Barrel, as used in this section, means 53 gallons. 
(b)  As provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-24.2, a limited exception to the three-tier system for the distribution and sale of distilled spirits shall include the right to sell up to 500 barrels of distilled spirits per year produced at the distiller's licensed premises to individuals who are on the premises for: (1) consumption on the premises; and (2) consumption off the premises, provided that such sales for consumption off the premises shall not exceed a maximum of 2,250 milliliters of distilled spirits per consumer per day. 
(c)  A distiller may sell distilled spirits pursuant to subsection (a) of this section on all days and at all times that sales of distilled spirits by retailers and retail consumption dealers are lawful, including, but not limited to Sundays. 
(d)  A distiller shall not sell any distilled spirits for consumption off the premises pursuant to subsection (a) of this section at a price less than the price at which a person licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package is permitted to sell distilled spirits pursuant to O.C.G.A 3-4-26(b). 
(e)  Any distiller engaging in sales of distilled spirits pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall remit all sales, use, and excise taxes to the proper tax collecting authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08-98, § I, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 6-406. - Manufacturer of malt beverages. 
(a)  Barrel, as used in this section, means 31 gallons. 
(b)  As provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-24.1, a limited exception to the three-tier system for the distribution and sale of malt beverages shall include the right to sell up to 3,000 barrels of malt beverages per year produced at the brewer's licensed premises to individuals who are on the premises for: (1) consumption on the premises; and (2) consumption off the premises, provided that such sales for consumption off the premises shall not exceed a maximum of 288 ounces of malt beverage per consumer per day. 
(c)  A brewer may sell malt beverages pursuant to subsection (a) of this section on all days and at all times that sales of malt beverages by retailers are lawful, including, but not limited to Sundays. 
(d)  A brewer engaging in sales of malt beverages pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall remit all sales, use, and excise taxes to the proper tax collecting authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08-98, § I, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 6-407. - Sale allowed only to wholesalers. 
Distilled spirits and malt beverages manufactured pursuant to a manufacturer license issued hereunder shall be sold only to wholesalers and not directly to retailers or end consumers except as may otherwise be specifically provided hereinabove as allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-08-98, § I, 9-19-2017) 
ARTICLE XIII. - ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 6-408. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Entertainment district means an area of Peachtree Corners with a highly concentrated grouping of businesses and activities focused on entertainment which may include, but is not limited to, restaurants, theater, jazz club, comedy club, special event space, and art galleries. Designated entertainment districts shall include the town center entertainment district and any other qualifying district as approved by the city council. 
Town center entertainment district means an area bounded by the following: 
(1)  To the north: the north side of all properties zoned C-2, MUD, and OBP located within Land Lots 301 and 317 and abutting the south side of Medlock Bridge Road and East Jones Bridge Road. 
(2)  To the south: the south side of all properties zoned C-2, MUD, and OBP located within Land Lots 301 and 317 and abutting DaVinci Ct. and the south side of Peachtree Corners Circle. 
(3)  To the west: the west side of all properties zoned C-2 located within Land Lots 301 and 317 and abutting that portion of Peachtree Parkway between East Jones Bridge Road and Peachtree Corners Circle. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 6-409. - Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages beyond a restaurant or patio area is permitted within a designated entertainment district provided that the alcoholic beverages are limited to malt beverages and wine. Any establishment licensed to sell malt beverages and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense malt beverages and wine in a paper or plastic cup, or other container other than a can, bottle, or glass, for removal from the premises, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  No establishment shall dispense to any person more than two alcoholic beverage at a time for removal from the premises, and no person shall remove at one time more than two alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises. 
(2)  No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in possession on the streets and sidewalks, in common areas, in the parking lots, or in other public places within a designated entertainment district any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, or glass, or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, common areas, and parking lots, whether public or private, except as follows: 
a.  Glass containers shall be allowed in a licensee's outdoor sit-down dining areas that are situated on a sidewalk or other right-of-way. 
b.  Non-glass containers are permitted in common areas when the city authorizes 'brown bagging' events pursuant to section 6-411. 
(4)  Alcoholic beverages consumed pursuant to this provision must be purchased from a licensed premises within that designated entertainment district. 
(5)  No alcoholic beverage purchased pursuant to this provision shall be consumed except within the authorized hours of sale of the establishment where purchased except during special events and festivals, as authorized by the city. 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages may not be consumed while in the confines of a motor vehicle while the motor vehicle is located upon any public street, parking lot or other place to which the public has or is permitted to have access within an entertainment district. An exception to this prohibition is permitted when the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid license for the operation of a vehicle for hire. 
(7)  No alcoholic beverage purchased pursuant to this section may be consumed outside of the designated entertainment district. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 6-410. - Brown bagging. 
Individuals may bring wine and/or malt beverages into the common area of an entertainment district provided that the time and location for doing so is authorized in advance by the city with a special event permit and that no glass containers are used. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 6-411. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Noise. Except as noted in (a)(1), below, sound levels should not exceed the following, (as measured from the property line of the receiving property): 

 
(1)  The maximum noise level may be exceeded for a cumulative period of less than one minute in any given 15-minute period. 
(b)  Pet friendly leashed dogs are permitted throughout common areas and on private property with the property owner's permission. Pet owners must comply with pet waste regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 6-412. - No abrogation of other laws. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to abrogate or otherwise impact any state law or local ordinance pertaining to public drunkenness, disorderly conduct, driving with an open container or under the influence of alcohol, or similar laws. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 1, 5-22-2018) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official or building inspector means the qualified building official or qualified building inspector as designated by the city. 
Code enforcement officer means the qualified code enforcement official as designated by the city. 
Sec. 10-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The building official and the code enforcement official are hereby authorized to enforce within the city the provisions of this chapter and the state minimum codes adopted herein. 
(b)  The community development director or designee, the building official, and the code enforcement official are further authorized to render interpretations of this Code and the adopted state codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the force and effect of law and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code or in the adopted state codes. 
Secs. 10-3—10-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 10-23. - City construction code; amendments. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for by subsequent ordinance or another provision of this Code, the city construction code shall be comprised of the following documents, including the administration and appendix chapters also contained in those documents, which are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this Code, as though they were copied fully in this article, and as amended from time to time. The state minimum codes enumerated under O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9), as now or hereafter revised or modified pursuant to state law, are as follows: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(3)  International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments 2011 and 2012. 
(9)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2009. 
(10)  International Existing Building Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2009. 
(11)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2014. 
(b)  If any of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section are adopted as a state minimum code pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the edition adopted by the state shall control. If any of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section are less stringent than the state minimum codes promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq., then the state minimum code shall control. 
(c)  A copy of each of the publications listed in subsection (a) of this section, as adopted by the state, is filed in the clerk's office and available for review by the public. The same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and, from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city. 
(d)  Any matters in the codes incorporated by reference in this article which are less restrictive than the laws of the state, those portions so in conflict are hereby repealed in that respect only; it being the intent not to affect state law. 
(e)  Any matters in the codes incorporated by reference in this article which are contrary to existing ordinances of the county, to that extent any existing ordinances to the contrary are hereby repealed in that respect only; except the 1988 development regulations, as amended, shall prevail. 
(f)  The county construction code and the county fire prevention and protection code shall be administered and enforced by the department of planning and development and the bureau of fire services as defined in the codes administration procedure titled, Areas of Responsibility Defined. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-26) 
Sec. 10-24. - References to officials in adopted technical codes. 
Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this article, then that official of the city as designated by the city manager who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code, shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
Secs. 10-25—10-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF CONSTRUCTION ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS 

Sec. 10-52. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a city board of construction adjustments and appeals. Said board shall be constituted of the members of the county board of construction adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-46) 
Sec. 10-53. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the board of construction adjustments and appeals shall be to: 
(1)  Review and decide specific appeals made by individuals concerning the interpretation or administration of the county construction code which includes by reference the state minimum standard codes. 
(2)  Review and decide specific appeals made by individuals concerning the interpretation or administration of the county fire prevention and protection code, the International Fire Code, and the National Fire Prevention Codes for every structure and occupancy constructed, with the exception of those buildings, structures and uses specified in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(a)(2). The uses specified in the subsection of the state fire safety law are hospitals, nursing homes, jails, ambulatory healthcare centers, penal institutions and any structure which is owned, operated or occupied by the state. Requests for variances or waivers concerning buildings, structures and uses specified in such subsection must be submitted in writing to the county fire marshal who shall make a written comment regarding the request and shall forward all documentation to the state fire marshal's office for a decision. The county fire marshal shall ensure that any applicant granted a variance by the state fire marshal is provided with a written response of the decision. 
(3)  Advise the board of commissioners, the department of planning and development, and the department of fire and emergency services on issues and matters of concern regarding the codes described in this section. 
(4)  Review and decide upon specific appeals of interpretation by the director and waiver requests from the stormwater requirements of articles VI, VII or VIII of the development regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-47) 
Sec. 10-54. - Appointment; qualifications. 
The board of construction adjustments and appeals shall consist of eight members representing or having the following qualifications: 
(1)  One barrier free county representative. 
(2)  One registered architect. 
(3)  One registered civil engineer. 
(4)  One registered electrical engineer. 
(5)  One registered fire protection engineer. 
(6)  One registered mechanical engineer. 
(7)  One registered structural engineer. 
(8)  One general contracting industry representative. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-48) 
Sec. 10-55. - Terms of office. 
Members shall be appointed to serve two calendar year terms. Appointments shall be effective January 1 of the first year of term. Members shall serve until replaced, except that any member who is absent without cause from two consecutive meetings of the board shall be automatically terminated from his appointment. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-49) 
Sec. 10-56. - Initial appointment terms. 
In order to establish permanent staggered terms, initial appointment terms shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two-year initial appointment (Group One membership) shall include: 
a.  One barrier free county representative. 
b.  One registered architect. 
c.  One registered civil engineer. 
d.  One registered electrical engineer. 
(2)  One-year initial appointment (Group Two membership) shall include: 
a.  One registered fire protection engineer. 
b.  One registered mechanical engineer. 
c.  One registered structural engineer. 
d.  One general contracting industry representative. 
(3)  Following the board of construction adjustments and appeals first year, all terms shall be a two-year appointment. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-50) 
Sec. 10-57. - Replacements. 
A member appointed to fill a vacancy which occurs during the year shall be appointed to fill the unexpired term of the vacant position for the remainder of the calendar year. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-51) 
Sec. 10-58. - Compensation. 
Members shall be compensated as established by the board of commissioners. Normal costs of operations, such as meeting space, minutes, etc., shall be borne by the department of planning and development. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-52) 
Sec. 10-59. - Limitation. 
All members shall be residents of the county. Employees of the county government shall not be members. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-53) 
Sec. 10-60. - Officers. 
Members shall elect from among them a chair and a vice-chair. The chair and vice-chair shall be elected to serve one-year terms. The term of office shall begin immediately upon election. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-54) 
Sec. 10-61. - Quorum. 
Five members of the board of adjustments and appeals shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-55) 
Sec. 10-62. - Voting. 
In varying the application of any provision of the codes or in modifying an order of the director of the department of planning and development or the director of the department of fire and emergency services, affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three affirmative votes, shall be required. A tie vote shall be deemed as a denial of a motion. A motion which fails by a majority vote shall not be deemed as approval of the opposite position, and a new motion must be made to approve the opposite position. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-56) 
Sec. 10-63. - Conflict of interest. 
If a board member has any interest in any matter which may result in a gain or loss to that board member, his immediate family by blood or by marriage, or to any individual, partnership or corporation with whom that member has had any regular business or contractual relationships within the previous 12 months, such member shall not participate in the consideration, discussion, questioning and voting on that particular matter before the board, nor shall the member take any action which may influence the vote of any other member. If the chair has a conflict of interest, the vice-chair shall preside over the meeting during consideration of that particular matter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-57) 
Sec. 10-64. - Records. 
The director of the department of planning and development and the director of the department of fire and emergency services, or their designee, shall act as secretary of the board of construction adjustments and appeals on a rotating annual basis. The designated secretary shall direct the preparation of a detailed record of all proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for the board's decision, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-58) 
Sec. 10-65. - Procedure. 
The board of construction adjustments and appeals shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure consistent with the provisions of the codes. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(a)(7), the board shall not have the authority to grant any variance or waiver which relieves any building, structure or use or the proposed plans from compliance with state minimum fire safety standards. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-59) 
Sec. 10-66. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the board of construction adjustments and appeals shall be once a month unless the chair determines that there is a lack of business to act upon during a particular month. 
(b)  Special called meetings. The chair or a majority of the board of construction adjustments and appeals may call a special meeting at any time. The secretary shall prepare and cause to be delivered written notice stating the specific purpose of the special called meeting to each board member. No business other than the specific stated purpose shall occur at the special called meeting. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-60) 
Sec. 10-67. - Appeals. 
(a)  Administrative decisions. 
(1)  The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, shall have the right to appeal an administrative decision made by the director of the department of planning and development or the director of the department of fire and emergency services, as appropriate, to the board of construction adjustments and appeals regarding any of the following: 
a.  The rejection or refusal to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.  Whether or not the provisions of the codes apply to a specific case. 
c.  Whether or not an equally good or more desirable form of installation may be employed in a specific case. 
d.  Whether or not the true intent or meaning of the codes, or any of the regulations pursuant to such codes, have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  In order to appeal an administrative decision, the applicant shall file a notice of appeal which shall be in writing. The notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the decision being appealed is rendered by the applicable director. 
(3)  A fee as may be established from time to time shall accompany such notice of appeal. 
(4)  Appeals filed pursuant to this section shall be made on forms provided by the department of planning and development or the department of fire and emergency services, as applicable. 
(5)  In the case of a building or structure which, in the opinion of the director of the department of planning and development or the director of the department of fire and emergency services, as applicable, is unsafe or dangerous, the director of the department of planning and development or the director of the department of fire and emergency services may, in his order, limit the time for such appeal to a shorter period. 
(b)  Variances. 
(1)  The board of construction adjustments and appeals, upon specific appeal and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the codes to a specific case when, in their opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the codes or the public interest and upon a finding by the board of any of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances are not the result of an action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
e.  That the grant of the variance will be consistent with the general intent and purpose of the codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  A fee as may be established from time to time shall accompany each variance application. 
(3)  Variance applications filed pursuant to this section shall be made on forms provided by the department of planning and development or the department of fire and emergency services, as applicable. 
(4)  In granting a variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced, completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformance with the codes. Violation of the conditions of the variance shall be deemed a violation of this article and the codes. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-61) 
Sec. 10-68. - Decisions to be final and without delay. 
(a)  Every decision of the board of construction adjustments and appeals shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy an aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. Every decision shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in the offices of both the department of planning and development and the department of fire and emergency services and shall be open to public inspection. A copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant, and a copy shall be publicly posted in the offices of the department of planning and development or the department of fire and emergency services, as appropriate, for two weeks after filing. 
(b)  The board of construction adjustments and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-62) 
Secs. 10-69—10-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOVING AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 10-95. - Permit required to move building; fees; issuance by department of planning and development; applicant's performance surety; indemnification. 
(a)  A person owning or leasing a building or a portion of a building to be moved shall not move nor authorize the moving of any house, dwelling, apartment building or other similar structure or any portion thereof from within the city to a point outside the city or from within the city to another point within the city, or from a point outside the city to a point within the city or from a point outside the city through the city to another point outside the city without first having obtained a permit as provided for herein. A moving permit shall not be required if the route of travel is located entirely on roads under the jurisdiction of the state department of transportation. A person shall not be issued a permit to move or authorize the moving of any house, dwelling, apartment building or other similar structure or any portion thereof in the city or into the city or from the city to a point outside the city or through the city until he has paid a moving permit fee, as follows: 
(1)  For moving such structure or a portion thereof wholly within the city, a moving permit fee shall be paid to the county. 
(2)  For moving such structure or any portion thereof from inside the city to a point outside the city and for moving such structure from outside the city to a point inside the city, a moving permit fee shall be paid to the county. 
(3)  For moving a house or any portion thereof through the city, a moving permit fee shall be paid to the county. 
(4)  The moving permit fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(b)  Where application for a permit to move a structure or a portion thereof, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, has been filed and the requisite moving permit fee paid, where written agreement regarding cleanup of the site has been signed and where all other applicable ordinances of the city have been complied with and all other permit fees paid, the director of the department of planning and development, or the director's duly authorized representative, shall be authorized to issue a moving permit to the applicant. 
(c)  A permit to move a structure or any portion thereof from inside the city to a point inside or outside the city shall not be issued until the applicant has posted performance surety in the amount of $5,000.00 with the department of planning and development. The performance surety may be in the form of cash deposited with the county, or a bond, irrevocable letter of escrow or letter of credit from a bank or other financial institution in a form acceptable to the director of the department of planning and development or city attorney. The performance surety shall be released to the applicant after the structure has been moved, the applicant has placed the premises or location in the condition as set forth in section 10-100, and any damages to city property caused by the move have been repaired by the applicant. In the event the permit holder should fail to comply with these requirements, all or any portion of the performance surety shall be applied by the county to the cost of the county performing the work to the premises or location from where the structure was moved or performing the repairs to county and city property damaged as a result of the move. In the application for the moving permit, the applicant shall grant in writing unto the county, its agents or employees, the right to enter upon the premises to perform the work. 
(d)  The application for a moving permit shall include information as to the route, date, and time of the move which shall be subject to the approval of the department of transportation. 
(e)  The mover shall, in writing, indemnify the city and the county and hold the city and the county harmless from any and all damages which the city or the county may suffer and from any and all liability claims, including interest thereon, demands, attorney's fees, and costs of defense, or judgment against it, arising from damages caused by the move of the structure. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-86) 
Sec. 10-96. - Permit to move building onto vacant land; application; fee; public hearing. 
(a)  Whenever any person desires to move or authorize the moving of a house or other similar structure onto any vacant residential land in the city (other than land zoned RA-200), he shall file an application for merit therefor with the county and shall pay a fee in addition to any fees or bonds specified in section 10-95. Upon the filing of the application, the director of the department of planning and development, or the director's duly authorized representative, shall cause to be posted upon the land on which the structure is to be moved a sign of not less than four square feet which shall display thereon the fact that the application has been filed to move the structure onto the land, and that a public hearing will be held before the mayor and council at which hearing all parties interested in the matter would have the right to appear and be heard. The aforesaid sign shall be located at the property in close proximity to a public road or thoroughfare and so that same can be clearly seen by the public. The director of the department of planning and development shall further cause to be sent a letter by regular mail to all abutting property owners of record, as indicated by the county tax commissioners records, giving notice of the public hearing and containing the same information as required for the sign. Prior to the public hearing before the mayor and council, the city planning commission shall be provided the opportunity to review the application and shall forward a recommendation to the board of commissioners. The application fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(b)  Wherever any person desires to move or authorize the moving of any apartment, duplex or similar structure onto any vacant multifamily land (must be zoned RM) in the city, he shall pay the same fee and the same procedure will be followed as in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  After a public hearing, as required in subsection (a) of this section, has been held and provided the applicant has complied with all applicable ordinances and has paid the additional fee specified in section 10-95 of this article, as may be required, the director of the department of planning and development, or the director's duly authorized representative, shall issue a moving permit to move the structure in accordance with the decision made by the mayor and council. 
(d)  Whenever any person desires to move or authorize the moving of any commercial building, trade or business structure, industrial building, or similar structure onto any vacant appropriately zoned land within the city, he shall submit all plans and specifications as required for new construction projects as required by the city subdivision regulations. The applicant will also pay all fees applicable to new construction projects and the review of his plans and specifications will follow the same review procedure as a new construction project as specified in the construction and development regulations. 
(e)  The owner and permit holder shall comply with any conditions or stipulations of approval placed upon the moving permit by the mayor and council or the department of planning and development. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-87) 
Sec. 10-97. - Placement on vacant land without permit; submission of plans. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to move any house or other structure onto vacant land without a moving permit. A permit to move a house or other building onto vacant land in the city shall not be granted, nor shall a house or other structure be placed on vacant land in the city, until the person desiring a permit to move a house or other structure shall have submitted all required plans and specifications showing the proposed additions or changes to be made on the structure. Ordinances applicable to applying for permits to move houses or other buildings onto vacant land in the city and in improving houses and other buildings moved onto vacant land in the city shall be followed and all resultant fees paid. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to move any structure as defined in section 10-95 onto any land within the city (whether the move is to be temporary or permanent) unless a moving permit has been granted therefor as provided in this article. The applicant shall further comply with any conditions or stipulations of approval placed upon the moving permit by the mayor and council or the department of planning and development. Any violation of this section shall be a continuing violation and each day of violation shall constitute a new offense. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-88) 
Sec. 10-98. - Demolition of structures. 
(a)  Whenever any person desires to demolish any house, dwelling, apartment or other similar structure formerly used for human habitation or any commercial, industrial or other structure formerly used in the conduct of any trade or business, he shall, before being entitled to the issuance of a demolition permit, agree in writing that he shall, following the demolition of the structure, take all necessary action, including that specified in section 10-100, to ensure that the premises or location where the structure is demolished shall be left in a sanitary condition and free from all trash, debris and structures which might become a harboring place for insects, rodents or vermin. 
(b)  A permit to demolish a structure shall not be issued until the applicant has posted a cash bond in the amount of $500.00 with the department of planning and development. The cash bond shall be returned to the applicant after the structure has been demolished and the applicant has placed the premises or location in the condition as set forth in this article. In the event the permit holder should fail to comply with this requirement, all or any portion of the cash bond shall be applied by the county to the cost of the city, the county, their agents or employees entering upon the premises or location in the condition as specified in this article. A permit or bond shall not be required for the demolition of barns, sheds or other accessory buildings where the structure was not used for human habitation or any commercial, industrial, trade or business purpose, or any building not having gas, water, electricity and other utilities connected. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to demolish any house, dwelling or other similar structure formerly used for human habitation or any commercial, industrial or other structure formerly used in the conduct of any trade or business without a permit. Any violation of this section shall be a continuing violation, and each day of violation shall constitute a new offense. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-89) 
Sec. 10-99. - Applicant; written agreement required; contents. 
Whenever any house, dwelling, apartment or other structure formerly used for human habitation, or whenever any commercial building or other structure formerly occupied in the conduct of any trade or business, shall be removed from a location within the city to another and different location either within or without the city or there is to be a demolition of the structure, the applicant for the permit to move such structure or demolish the structure shall, before being entitled to the issuance of a permit for removal or demolition, agree in writing that he will, following removal or demolition of the structure, take all possible action, including that specified in section 10-100, to ensure that the premises or location from which the structure is removed or demolished shall be left in a sanitary condition and free from all trash, debris and structures which might become a harboring place for insects, rodents or vermin. The applicant shall also be responsible for proper removal of all hazardous material in compliance with U.S. Environmental Protection Agency regulations contained in 40 CFR 61, Subparts A and M and 29 CFR 1910 and 1926. The applicant shall further be responsible for the proper disposal of solid waste containing asbestos in accordance with the Georgia Asbestos Safety Act and the Georgia Air Quality Act of 1978. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-90) 
Sec. 10-100. - Duty to restore premises to safe and sanitary condition. 
After the removal of the structure as set forth in section 10-99, the owner of the location or premises on which the structure was located shall be required to take necessary action to ensure that such location or premises shall be left in a safe and sanitary condition and shall be specifically required to do the following: 
(1)  Remove all trash, debris, garbage and other similar material. 
(2)  Fill all holes and depressions caused by the removal of any part of the structure, or caused as a result of compliance with this article, which might become a harboring place for insects, rodents or vermin. 
(3)  Tear down and remove all underpinnings, pilasters, steps, plumbing connections and fixtures above ground level. 
(4)  Seal, close-off, and make gastight and watertight all water, gas and sewer lines. 
(5)  Fill or cover all wells with a concrete cap. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-91) 
Sec. 10-101. - Time limits for premises restoration; failure to restore premises. 
All persons to whom this article is applicable shall comply with the provisions of this article within 30 calendar days following the date of the removal of any structure specified in this article. If any such person shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article, the city, the county, their agents, employees, designees or contractors, are authorized to enter upon the premises and to perform the work necessary thereon to comply with this article. The work may be performed by city forces, county forces or by parties employed by the city or county and the cost of the work charged against the person failing or refusing to comply. Any person, firm or corporation applying for a permit as provided in this article grants to the city and the country an easement on the premises to perform the work. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-92) 
Sec. 10-102. - Transporting of structures; when structure may be transported; insurance coverage; removal and replacement of roadway obstacles; removal of trees; law enforcement officer escort; notification of move. 
(a)  Structures regulated in this article shall only be moved on Mondays through Thursdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., unless otherwise approved in writing by the department of transportation. 
(b)  Any individual, firm or corporation transporting any house, dwelling, apartment or other structure formerly used for human habitation, or any commercial building or other structure formerly occupied in the conduct of any trade or business, across or along the public roads or highways of the city, shall be required to furnish proof that it has, in effect, public liability insurance in the amount of at least $500,000.00 combined single limit; to protect the property and persons who may be damaged as a result of the moving of the structure. 
(c)  All mailboxes, highway signs, and other movable obstacles to the move of the structure and located in the street right-of-way shall be removed as the structure approaches such an obstacle and re-erected immediately after the structure passes such obstacles in equal or better condition than prior to removal. 
(d)  Trees located in the street right-of-way shall not be removed or trimmed without the written permission of the department of transportation. 
(e)  During the move, all structures shall be provided with an escort by a county law enforcement officer at the mover's expense. 
(f)  For moving a structure or any portion of a structure for which a moving permit has been issued, the mover shall provide at least two calendar days notice to the department of police services prior to the date of moving. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-93) 
Sec. 10-103. - Eminent domain proceedings; exemption from fees. 
When an owner of a single-family dwelling who resides in the dwelling is effectively evicted by eminent domain proceedings or other governmental action, and desires to move his dwelling to another properly zoned location in the city where he will thereafter reside as their home, such owner shall be required to obtain a moving permit as specified in this article but shall not be required to pay the moving permit fee. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-94) 
Sec. 10-104. - Time of completion of moved structure. 
All structures for which a moving permit was required shall be completed within six months of approval of a moving permit with completion to include fine grading and landscaping of the property to which the structure was relocated. The director of the department of planning and development shall be authorized to grant one extension of completion time not to exceed 30 calendar days beyond the original six-month completion period. An application for such extension shall be made in writing and shall be made prior to expiration of the six-month completion time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-95) 
Secs. 10-105—10-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TALL STRUCTURE PERMIT 

Sec. 10-122. - Required. 
(a)  Any person shall obtain a tall structure permit from the mayor and council prior to commencement of the erection within the city of a chimney, cooling tower, elevator bulkhead, fire tower, gas tank, solarium, steeple, stacks, stage tower or scenery loft, tank, water tower, ornamental tower and spire, or necessary mechanical appurtenances or other structure not governed by the special use permit process that would be 50 feet or greater in height from the ground. 
(b)  The erection, within the city, of a wireless telecommunication, cellular telecommunication, television or radio transmission tower or antenna shall be subject to the provisions, requirements and limitations of chapter 58. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-116) 
Sec. 10-123. - Application; contents; fee. 
All applications for tall structure permits shall be submitted to the department of planning and development. Each application shall contain, as a part thereof, detailed plans and specifications which show the nature of the structure, its proposed use, height of the structure and its proposed location, with all property lines being clearly defined and distances from the proposed structure to all property lines. An application for a tall structure permit shall not be accepted for processing without the information required in this article. An application fee shall be charged by the department in an amount stated in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-117) 
Sec. 10-124. - Review of application by airport division. 
If, upon receipt of an application for a tall structure permit, the department deems that the proposed structure may interfere with the use of the airways of the county by the public or interfere with the operation of existing or proposed airport facilities, a copy of the application shall be submitted by the department to the airport division of the department of transportation for review and recommendation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-118) 
Sec. 10-125. - Public hearing. 
Before taking action upon the proposed tall structure permit, the mayor and council shall hold a public hearing on the matter. At least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing, the following notice requirements shall be instituted by the department of planning and development: 
(1)  A sign shall be erected, in a conspicuous location, on or adjacent to the property under consideration. The sign shall state the time, place, location, and purpose of the public hearing. 
(2)  A letter shall be sent by regular mail to all abutting property owners of record, as indicated by the county tax commissioner's records, giving notice of the public hearing. The letter shall state the same information as required for the sign. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-119) 
Sec. 10-126. - Criteria for disapproval. 
All applications for a tall structure permit shall be considered by the mayor and council and in the exercise of its discretion under the police power vested in the body may disapprove any application where the proposed structure could interfere with or endanger the public using the existing or proposed air facilities located within the city, or where the structure to be erected could endanger the person or property of citizens of the county or where the structure to be erected would not be compatible from an aesthetic viewpoint with existing or proposed development in the area of the proposed facility, or where the structure to be erected would not be acceptable or after evaluation would be found to be incompatible from an architectural standpoint with existing or proposed structures in the area. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-120) 
Sec. 10-127. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who attempts to erect or erects a structure described in this article without having first obtained a tall structure permit from the board of commissioners in the manner provided in this article shall be deemed in violation of this article. Any responsible party or other persons convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city and shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person guilty of violation of this article on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of the suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(b)  If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this article or without obtaining the required permits, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this article, the city attorney or other appropriate authority of the city, in addition to any other remedies, may institute an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use; or to correct or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-121) 
Sec. 10-128. - Governmental exemption. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to governmental facilities and structures. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-122) 
Secs. 10-129—10-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SHELTERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State Housing Trust Fund for the Homeless Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-300 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-155. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambulatory person means a person who has the ability to move from place to place by walking either unaided or aided by prosthesis, brace, cane, crutches or handrails, or by propelling a wheelchair, and can perceive an emergency condition, whether caused by fire or otherwise, and escape without human assistance, using the normal means of egress. 
Community shelter means a nonprofit institutional use, comprised of a building, institutional in nature, which provides overnight shelter, sleeping accommodations, and services, and not otherwise mandated by the state government for related or nonrelated individuals for a period of time not to exceed 15 hours every 24 hours. 
Department means the county board of health or its duly authorized representatives. 
Guest means any person staying in a community shelter and receiving services who is not related within the third degree of consanguinity to the person to whom the permit has been issued. 
Kitchen facilities means a food preparation and serving facility which includes at least a stove, refrigerator, sink, and sufficient cabinets, countertops and area for storage, preparation and serving of meals, and subsequent cleanup. 
Management means the board of trustees, the partnership, the corporation, the association, or the person or group of persons who maintains and controls the shelter and who is legally responsible for the operation of the shelter. 
Manager means the adult person designated by the management as responsible for the day-to-day operation, administration and/or supervision of the shelter. The manager or other responsible person shall be capable of operating the shelter in accordance with this article. 
Permit means the authorization granted by the board of health to any persons to operate a shelter; such a permit signifies satisfactory compliance with this article. 
Resident means any person residing in a residential shelter and receiving services who is not related within the third degree of consanguinity to the person to whom the permit has been issued. 
Residential shelter means a nonprofit institutional use comprised of a residential building, which provides two or more beds and other facilities or services, including room and food service facilities and not otherwise mandated by state government for related or nonrelated individuals. Length of stay of the individuals is presumed to be of a temporary nature. 
Responsible person means the manager or other adult person who is responsible for specified duties in the shelter. 
Special use permit (SUP) means the authorization granted by the mayor and council to any person to operate a shelter within a specific zoning district. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-171) 
Sec. 10-156. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  A shelter which fails to comply with this article shall be subject to revocation of its permit and/or other sanctions provided by law. 
(b)  Upon final determination that a shelter does not comply with this article, the department will: 
(1)  Inform all residents/guests in writing of the standards not being met. 
(2)  Have the power to revoke the permit. 
(3)  Provide all residents with a list of approved facilities and agencies that will help them to relocate. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-172) 
Sec. 10-157. - Permit applications for residential or community shelters. 
All residential and community shelters shall meet the following requirements for permit applications: 
(1)  The management of each shelter shall submit to the department an application for a permit to operate under this article. No shelter shall be operated in the city without such a permit that is current under this article. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be made on forms provided by the department and shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the anticipated date of opening and commencement of operation of a new shelter. 
(3)  Each application shall be accompanied by a copy of the policies for operating the shelter and shall include: 
a.  Statement of purposes, objectives, and goals. 
b.  Description of services to be provided. 
(4)  With each application, the manager shall include: 
a.  Description of staff and job descriptions of volunteers by which services will be accomplished. 
b.  Floor sketch showing the interior arrangement of shelter areas and room description, including use, number of beds and dimensions of interior floor space. 
(5)  Proof of ownership shall accompany the application: 
a.  Nonprofit associations shall submit legal proof of the organization, the name and address of each trustee and the office held, if any, including a copy of statement with tax exempt number, substantiating approval by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service of nonprofit status. 
b.  All others shall submit a statement attesting to the names and addresses of each person owning part of the facility. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-173) 
Sec. 10-158. - Permits. 
(a)  Application; eligibility. The management of each shelter shall apply for and obtain a valid permit from the department prior to beginning operation. To be eligible for a permit, the shelter must be in substantial compliance with this article and the provisions of law which apply to the locations, construction, and maintenance of shelters and the services and safety provided to residents/guests therein. 
(b)  Evidence of regulatory compliance. Prior to the issuance of a permit and at the request of the department, the management shall furnish to the department evidence of satisfactory compliance with all applicable city, county, state, and federal laws or regulations. This shall include a certificate of occupancy from the development division and the fire services department. 
(c)  Special use permit. If required, the management of each shelter shall apply for and obtain a valid special use permit (SUP) from the mayor and council prior to beginning operation. 
(d)  Inspection. The permits shall be readily available for inspection upon request of interested persons. 
(e)  Transference. Permits are not transferable from one shelter to another, nor are they valid when the shelter is moved from one location to another. 
(f)  Return. A permit shall be returned to the department when the shelter ceases to operate, is moved to another location, the ownership changes, the management is significantly changed, or the permit is suspended or revoked. 
(g)  Required for additional shelters under same management. A permit shall be required for each shelter located on different premises where more than one shelter is operated under the same management. 
(h)  Limit on number of residents. The permit shall state the maximum number of residents/guests to receive services at that location. 
(i)  Name and number required on advertising. All advertising of a shelter shall include the official name and permit number as shown on the face of the permit issued by the department. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-174) 
Sec. 10-159. - Inspections. 
(a)  The shelter and its records shall be available at reasonable hours for observation and examination by properly identified representatives of the department and for annual inspections both on an announced and unannounced basis. Inspections may be made on a more frequent basis if needed. 
(b)  Upon request, the department shall provide technical advice and consultation to any interested resident, guest, or shelter manager with respect to requirements for compliance with this article. 
(c)  The manager or an authorized representative shall notify the department of the anticipated opening date of a newly constructed shelter in order that a preopening survey of the shelter may be conducted to determine compliance with this article. 
(d)  The manager or a representative shall accompany the department representative on tours of inspection. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-175) 
Sec. 10-160. - Waiver of rules. 
The department may waive any rule exclusive of fire and building codes for a stated period of time when it can be shown that the specific rule is not applicable or when waiver is needed to permit experimentation and demonstration of new and innovative approaches to the delivery of services. Results of experimentation and demonstration projects shall be submitted to the department as prescribed by the plan under which the waiver is approved. The department will maintain a record of and make available to interested persons information on all waivers granted under this section. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-176) 
Sec. 10-161. - Reporting to the department. 
Reports shall periodically be submitted to the department on forms established by the department, which shall include information on the status of each shelter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-177) 
Secs. 10-162—10-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNITY SHELTERS 

Sec. 10-191. - Enumeration of rules. 
The following rules shall apply to all community shelters in the city: 
(1)  Community shelter. A community shelter is a nonprofit institutional use, comprised of a building, institutional in nature, which provides overnight shelter, sleeping accommodations, and services, and not otherwise mandated by the state government for related or nonrelated individuals for a period of time not to exceed 15 hours every 24 hours. 
(2)  Management. 
a.  Each shelter shall have a management which assumes full legal responsibility for the overall conduct of the shelter. 
b.  The ownership of the shelter shall be fully disclosed in its application for a permit. In the case of corporate partnerships and other bodies created by statute, the corporation officers and all others owning ten percent or more of the corporate stock or ownership shall be disclosed in the application for a permit. 
c.  The management shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable laws and regulations pertaining to the shelter. 
d.  The management shall certify in its application the name of the person to whom the responsibility for the management of the shelter is delegated, including the carrying out of the rules and policies adopted by the governing body. This person shall be known as the manager and have his legal authority defined in writing. 
e.  The manager and each responsible person or employee must submit to a background criminal investigation. 
f.  The department shall be notified with a new application when there are changes in ownership, management, and operational objectives. 
(3)  Administration. 
a.  Each shelter shall develop a written statement of policies and procedures outlining the responsibilities of the management and of guests. The statement shall include procedures for handling acts which are not consistent with policies of the shelter. 
b.  Each shelter shall have a written statement regarding fees, if any, and services which are provided, designating those which are included in the basic fee schedule and those which are available on a reimbursement or additional fee schedule. 
c.  Each shelter shall provide sleeping accommodations and food service facilities to all guests of the shelter. 
d.  Each shelter shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The manager and all designated responsible persons shall be at least 18 years of age and shall have certification of training in basic first aid at a minimum of every five years. All staff participating in guest care shall be in good health and by training and experience be capable of meeting the demands of the position. 
2.  The manager of a shelter shall designate in writing a responsible person to carry out his responsibilities and duties in his absence. 
3.  There shall be a written procedure for handling emergencies, available to all staff, which has been included with and approved by the department as a part of the application for a permit. 
(4)  Admissions. 
a.  A complete and current schedule of all fees, if any, and services shall be available, and a copy shall be provided to each applicant and guest. 
b.  Applicants requiring continuous medical or nursing services shall not be admitted or retained. 
c.  Persons admitted to a shelter may include those with impaired capacity of self care only if they are not bedfast or they do not require medical or nursing care and treatment on a continuing basis or they do not require skilled observations of symptoms and reactions or accurate recording of actions by licensed nursing personnel for the purpose of reporting to their physician. 
d.  Medical or nursing services required on a periodic basis, or for short-term illness, shall not be provided as services of the shelter. 
e.  Managers may require a personal interview and/or a preadmission evaluation of an applicant's health from an outside resource. 
f.  An admission agreement, in writing, shall be entered into between the shelter and the guest. Such agreement shall include provisions for the manager's continuous assessment of each guest's needs and referral to appropriate resources and for transfer or discharge if the guest's condition changes. The guest shall be given a signed copy of the agreement, and a copy signed by both parties (guest and management) shall be retained in the guest files maintained by the manager of the shelter. 
g.  A guest may not be required to perform services for the shelter except as provided for in the admission agreement. A guest and manager may agree that a guest will perform certain activities or services in the shelter. Such agreement shall be set forth in the admission agreement. 
h.  Each guest, prior to the execution of the admissions agreement, shall have an opportunity to read the agreement. If a guest is unable to read the agreement due to illiteracy or infirmity, the manager shall take special steps to ensure communication of its contents to the guests, e.g., manager's reading of the agreement to a vision-impaired or illiterate applicant, etc. 
i.  Each guest shall be provided a copy of the guest's bill of rights at the time of admission to the shelter. 
j.  The admission agreement shall include a statement of understanding concerning the shelter's policies and procedures. 
(5)  Guest files. 
a.  An individual guest file shall be maintained by the manager for each guest in the shelter. Personal information shall be treated as confidential and shall not be disclosed except to the guest, the management, the licensing agency, and others for whom written authorization is given by the guest. 
b.  A community shelter shall maintain a guest file. The guest file shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  Identifying information, including name, social security number, veteran status and number, marital status, age, sex, and previous address. 
2.  Name, address, and telephone number of next of kin, if known. 
3.  Name, address, and telephone number of any person or agency providing additional services to the guest on a regular basis. 
4.  Date of admission. 
(6)  Discharge of guests. 
a.  Each admission agreement shall include a written procedure for handling discharge. 
b.  If a guest develops a communicable disease or physical or mental condition requiring continuous medical or nursing care, the manager of the shelter shall advise the guest. Immediate arrangements shall be made based on the written admission agreement to discharge such guest and transport to an appropriate medical facility for evaluation. 
c.  Guests whose needs can no longer be met by the shelter shall be discharged, based on established agreements entered into at the time of admission. 
(7)  Death of guest. Should a guest expire, the manager or other responsible person shall immediately notify the proper authorities. 
(8)  Guest's rights. The written policies and procedures of the management shall include provisions for protecting the personal and civil rights of each guest and the management shall provide a copy of these provisions to each guest. At a minimum, these provisions shall guarantee the following rights: 
GUEST'S BILL OF RIGHTS 
Right to be fully informed as evidenced by guest's written acknowledgment made prior to or at the time of admission, as well as during his stay, of: 
a.  The guest's bill of rights. 
b.  All procedures and policies governing resident conduct and responsibilities. 
c.  The services available in the shelter. 
d.  The current schedule of all fees, if any, for such services. 
e.  Right to manage his personal financial affairs, including the right to keep and spend his own money. If the guest requests assistance from the shelter in managing his personal financial affairs, the request must be in writing and the shelter must submit a written accounting to the guest at least quarterly. A copy of this report shall be maintained in the guest's files maintained by the manager. 
f.  Right to be free from mental and physical abuse, humiliation, withholding of monetary allowances, physical restraints, including isolation, or any other corporal or unusual punishment, including interference with the daily functions of living, such as eating or sleeping. 
g.  Right to confidential treatment of personal information in his guest file as provided in this division. 
h.  Right to be treated with consideration, respect, and full recognition of his dignity and individuality. 
i.  Right to be accorded privacy for storage space of personal belongings; to have free access to day rooms, dining and other group living or common areas at reasonable hours and to come and go from the shelter, unless such access is unreasonable or infringes upon the rights of other guests. 
j.  Right to be accorded privacy and freedom for the use of bathroom facilities. 
k.  Right to wear his own clothes, to keep and use his own personal possessions, including toilet articles, as space permits, unless to do so would infringe upon the rights of other guests. 
l.  Right to send and receive unopened mail. 
m.  Right to associate and communicate privately with persons of his choice. 
n.  Right to have visitors at mutually agreed upon hours. Once the hours have been agreed upon, no prior notice is necessary. 
o.  Right to receive or reject medical care, dental care, or other services, except as required by law to control communicable disease. 
p.  Right to not be required to perform services for the shelter, except that the guest and manager may agree for the guest to perform certain activities or services in the shelter. 
Note— This bill of rights or portions thereof may be waived as provided for under section 10-160. 
(9)  Illnesses, accidents or abuse. 
a.  In the case of an accident or sudden adverse change in a guest's condition, a shelter shall immediately obtain needed care and notify the department. A record of such incidents shall be maintained in the guest's files. 
b.  An occurrence of a reportable communicable disease as defined by the laws of this state or the rules implementing such law shall be reported immediately to the department. 
c.  Immediate investigation of the cause of an on-site accident or incident involving a guest, employee or visitor shall be initiated by the manager of the shelter and an appropriate report made to the department with a copy of the report being maintained in the guest's files. 
d.  In the case of suspected child abuse, the manager shall notify the department of family and children's services. 
(10)  Building standards. 
a.  A shelter shall be so constructed, arranged, and maintained as to provide adequately for the health, safety, and well-being of occupants. 
b.  Furnishings and housekeeping standards shall be such that a shelter presents a clean and orderly appearance. 
c.  Dining, bath, sitting, living, and recreation rooms, during winter months, shall be maintained by an adequate central heating system or its safe equivalent at a temperature range of 70 to 75 degrees Fahrenheit or such other ranges which are consistent with individual health needs or may be imposed by an appropriate state or federal agency. 
d.  A shelter shall provide laundering facilities on the premises for guests' personal laundry. 
e.  A shelter shall be equipped to provide an adequate amount of hot water for guests' use. 
f.  Bathrooms and toilet facilities without windows shall have forced ventilation to the outside in accordance with the Standard Mechanical Code. Bathroom windows used for ventilation shall open easily. 
g.  Floors, walls, and ceiling shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
h.  A shelter shall provide separate and distinct living/kitchen and sleeping areas. All areas shall be well-lighted, heated, and ventilated. 
i.  A comfortable dining area that is adequate in size for the number of guests being served shall be provided. 
j.  A below-grade room to be used as a bedroom shall have adequate natural light and ventilation and be provided with two useful means of egress. Control of dampness shall be assured. 
k.  At least one functional toilet, lavatory, and bathing or showering facility shall be provided for each eight guests staying in a shelter. At least one toilet and lavatory shall be provided on each floor having guests' bedrooms. 
l.  Community shelters may convert recreation rooms, social areas, or other similar areas into sleeping areas. Traffic to and from any room may be through a guest's sleeping area. 
m.  Occupancy requirements for community shelters shall be a minimum of 75 square feet of gross floor area per guest. 
n.  When located within a multitenant building, a minimum of a two-hour fire rated construction shall be provided as separation between other tenants. 
o.  Sleeping areas or bedrooms for guests shall be separated from halls, corridors, and other rooms by floor-to-ceiling walls which contain no openings except doors. 
p.  Doorways of sleeping areas or bedrooms occupied by guests shall be equipped with side-hinged permanently mounted doors equipped with positively latching hardware which will ensure opening of the door by a single motion. For bedrooms which have locks on doors, both the occupant and manager must be provided with keys to ensure easy entry and exit. Shelters must furnish a lockable cabinet or storage container for personal belongings. 
q.  Guests of the opposite sex shall not be assigned to the same bedroom or sleeping area unless they are husband and wife or members of the same immediate family. 
r.  Guests having impaired mobility shall not sleep in or be assigned bedrooms on floors which do not have a grade-level exit to the outside; provided, however, that above grade exits with easily negotiable ramps may be used. 
s.  Each bedroom or sleeping area shall have at least one window, and shall be well ventilated and maintained at a comfortable temperature. 
t.  Bedroom furnishings shall include an adequate closet or wardrobe and lighting sufficient for reading and other guest activities. 
u.  Buildings shall meet the current state handicap accessibility code, ANSI 117.1, and chapter 22 of this Code. 
v.  The height, area, and design of buildings shall be in compliance with the city construction code for residential occupancies of group R-2 usage, based on type of building construction and whether sprinklered or not. 
w.  Complete site and building plans shall be submitted and reviewed by county fire services, county development division, and any other applicable agencies before the issuance of a building permit. These plans shall bear the seal of a registered designer when required by state law. 
(11)  Bedding, linen and miscellaneous. 
a.  A shelter shall provide beds with a clean protected mattress and a pillow. 
b.  A shelter shall provide bedding for each guest which includes two sheets, a pillow case, and a minimum of one blanket. A shelter shall provide clean towels and washcloths. Bed linen shall be changed at least weekly, or as needed. A shelter shall maintain an adequate linen supply. 
c.  A shelter shall provide soap, light bulbs, and toilet tissue. 
(12)  Safety. 
a.  Stairways with three or more risers shall have sturdy and securely fastened handrails on both sides, 34 inches above the leading edge of the tread. 
b.  Scatter or throw rugs on hard-finished floors shall have a nonskid backing. If used, floor wax shall not present a hazard to occupants of the shelter. 
c.  Handrails and nonskid surfacing or strips shall be installed in showers and bath areas. 
d.  Residential cooking appliances shall be suitably installed in accordance with approved safety practices, and chapter 22 of this Code. Commercial-type cooking appliances shall meet the requirements of NFPA-96. Where metal hoods or canopies are provided, they shall be equipped with filters, which shall be maintained in an efficient condition and kept clean at all times. 
e.  Fire screens shall be provided for open flames, and approved protection devices shall be used for properly-vented space heaters, stoves, and fireplaces. 
f.  Hot water heaters shall be equipped with devices which limit the outlet temperature, which shall not exceed 110 degrees Fahrenheit at the fixture. 
g.  The facility shall be maintained in a safe condition and shall be inspected annually by the county fire marshal. A signed copy of a compliance inspection report shall be submitted to the department as a part of the application for permit. For existing structures, a compliance inspection shall be made by the county development division prior to the issuance of a permit. 
h.  Smoke detectors and manual fire alarm systems shall be installed in each shelter in compliance with NFPA-101 and chapter 22. 
i.  Fire extinguishers shall be provided as required by chapter 22. 
j.  There shall be an established procedure and mechanism for alerting guests in case of fire and evacuating them to safety. This shall include emergency instructions and evacuation plans posted on each floor of the shelter. 
k.  Fire drills shall be conducted every six months, and records shall be maintained. 
l.  Fire safety information shall be provided on the back of room doors or as handouts in multisleep areas. 
m.  In addition to the above stated requirements, the shelter shall be required to meet all the requirements of chapter 22. 
(13)  Water and sanitation. 
a.  Sewage disposal systems shall meet the requirements of the department. 
b.  Kitchen and bathroom areas shall be cleaned at least daily and maintained to ensure cleanliness and sanitation. 
c.  Solid waste which is not disposed of by mechanical means shall be stored in vermin-proof, leak-proof, nonabsorbent containers with closefitting covers until removed. Waste shall be removed from the kitchen daily and from the premises at least weekly. 
d.  Handwashing facilities provided in both kitchen and bathroom areas shall include hot and cold running water, soap, and individual towels. Facilities used by more than one person shall be stocked with single-use towels, preferably of the disposable paper type. 
e.  An insect, rodent or pest control program shall be maintained as necessary and conducted in a manner which continually protects the health of guests. Poisons, caustics, and other dangerous materials shall be stored and safeguarded in nonfood preparation and storage areas. 
f.  Openable windows shall be screened. 
g.  When a guest is discharged, the room and its contents shall be thoroughly cleaned. Blankets and spreads shall be sanitized. 
(14)  Meals. 
a.  If meals are provided by the management, then a minimum of two regular meals shall be provided daily. Not more than 14 hours shall elapse between the substantial evening and morning meal. 
b.  Shelters which regularly house more than 16 persons shall possess a valid food service permit issued under provisions of the state health code, chapter 88-10, food service establishments, and rules and regulations applicable thereto. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-191) 
Secs. 10-192—10-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL SHELTERS 

Sec. 10-221. - Enumeration of rules. 
The following rules shall apply to all residential shelters in the city: 
(1)  Residential shelter. A residential shelter is a nonprofit institutional use comprised of a residential building which provides two or more beds and other facilities or services, including room and food service facilities and not otherwise mandated by state government, for related or nonrelated individuals. Length of stay of the individuals is presumed to be of a temporary nature. 
(2)  Management. 
a.  Each shelter shall have a management which assumes full legal responsibility for the overall conduct of the shelter. 
b.  The ownership of the shelter shall be fully disclosed in its application for a permit. In the case of corporate partnerships and other bodies created by statute, the corporation officers and all others owning ten percent or more of the corporate stock or ownership shall be disclosed in the application for a permit. 
c.  The management shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable laws and regulations pertaining to the shelter. 
d.  The management shall certify in its application the name of the person to whom the responsibility for the management of the shelter is delegated, including the carrying out of the rules and policies adopted by the governing body. This person shall be known as the manager and have his legal authority defined in writing. 
e.  The manager and each responsible person or employee must submit to a background criminal investigation. 
f.  The department shall be notified with a new application when there are changes in ownership, management, and operational objectives. 
(3)  Administration. 
a.  Each shelter shall develop a written statement of policies and procedures outlining the responsibilities of the management and of residents. The statement shall include procedures for handling acts which are not consistent with policies of the shelter. 
b.  Each shelter shall have a written statement regarding fees, if any, and services which are provided, designating those which are included in the basic fee schedule and those which are available on a reimbursement or additional fee schedule. 
c.  Each shelter shall provide sleeping accommodations and food service facilities to all residents of the shelter. 
d.  Each shelter shall meet the following standards: 
1.  The manager and all designated responsible persons shall be at least 18 years of age and shall have certification of training in basic first aid at a minimum of every five years. All staff participating in resident care shall be in good health and by training and experience be capable of meeting the demands of the position. 
2.  The manager of a shelter shall designate in writing a responsible person to carry out his responsibilities and duties in his absence. 
3.  There shall be a written procedure for handling emergencies, available to all staff, which has been included with and approved by the department as a part of the application for a permit. 
(4)  Admissions. 
a.  A complete and current schedule of all fees, if any, and services shall be available, and a copy shall be provided to each applicant and resident. 
b.  Applicants requiring continuous medical or nursing services shall not be admitted or retained. 
c.  Persons admitted to a shelter may include those with impaired capacity of self care only if they are not bedfast or they do not require medical or nursing care and treatment on a continuing basis or they do not require skilled observations of symptoms and reactions or accurate recording of actions by licensed nursing personnel for the purpose of reporting to their physician. 
d.  Medical or nursing services required on a periodic basis, or for short-term illness, shall not be provided as services of the shelter. 
e.  The manager shall conduct an interview with the applicant to ascertain that the shelter can meet the applicant's needs. Managers may require a personal interview and/or a preadmission evaluation of the applicant's health from an outside resource. 
f.  An admission agreement, in writing, shall be entered into between the shelter and the resident. Such agreement shall include provisions for manager's continuous assessment of each resident's needs and referral to appropriate resources and for transfer or discharge if the resident's condition changes. The resident shall be given a signed copy of the agreement, and a copy signed by both parties, resident and management, shall be retained in the resident files maintained by the manager of the shelter. 
g.  A resident may not be required to perform services for the shelter except as provided for in the admission agreement. A resident and manager may agree that a resident will perform certain activities or services in the shelter. Such agreement shall be set forth in the admission agreement. 
h.  Each resident, prior to the execution of the admissions agreement, shall have an opportunity to read the agreement. If a resident is unable to read the agreement due to illiteracy or infirmity, the manager shall take special steps to ensure communication of its contents to the residents, e.g., manager's reading of the agreement to a vision-impaired or illiterate applicant, etc. 
i.  Each resident shall be provided a copy of the resident's bill of rights at the time of admission to the shelter. 
j.  The admission agreement shall include a statement of understanding concerning the shelter's policies and procedures. 
(5)  Resident files. 
a.  An individual resident file shall be maintained by the manager for each resident in the shelter. Personal information shall be treated as confidential and shall not be disclosed except to the resident, the management, the licensing agency, and others for whom written authorization is given by the resident. 
b.  The resident files shall include the following information: 
1.  Identifying information, including name, social security number, veteran status and number, marital status, age, sex, and previous address. 
2.  Name, address, and telephone number of next of kin, if known. 
3.  Name, address, and telephone number of any person or agency providing additional services to the resident on a regular basis. 
4.  Date of admission. 
5.  Date of termination of residence. 
6.  Record of all financial arrangements and transactions between the resident and the shelter. 
7.  Record of all monies and other valuables entrusted to the shelter for safekeeping. 
8.  With written consent of the resident, the following information may be included: 
(i)  Religious preference, church membership, and name and phone number of minister, priest, or rabbi. 
(ii)  Forwarding address. 
(6)  Discharge of residents. 
a.  Each admission agreement shall include a written procedure for handling discharge. 
b.  If a resident develops a communicable disease or physical or mental condition requiring continuous medical or nursing care, the manager of the shelter shall advise the resident. Immediate arrangements shall be made based on the written admission agreement to discharge such resident and transport to an appropriate medical facility for evaluation. 
c.  Residents whose needs can no longer be met by the shelter shall be discharged, based on established agreements entered into at the time of admission. 
(7)  Death of resident. Should a resident expire, the manager or other responsible person shall immediately notify the proper authorities. 
(8)  Resident's rights. The written policies and procedures of the management shall include provisions for protecting the personal and civil rights of each resident, and the management shall provide a copy of these provisions to each resident. At a minimum, these provisions shall guarantee the following rights: 
RESIDENT'S BILL OF RIGHTS 
Right to be fully informed as evidenced by resident's written acknowledgment made prior to or at the time of admission, as well as during his stay, of: 
a.  The resident's bill of rights. 
b.  All procedures and policies governing resident conduct and responsibilities. 
c.  The services available in the shelter. 
d.  The current schedule of all fees, if any, for such services. 
e.  Right to manage his personal financial affairs, including the right to keep and spend his own money. If the resident requests assistance from the shelter in managing his personal financial affairs, the request must be in writing and the shelter must submit a written accounting to the resident at least quarterly. A copy of this report shall be maintained in the resident's files maintained by the manager. 
f.  Right to be free from mental and physical abuse, humiliation, withholding of monetary allowances, physical restraints, including isolation, or any other corporal or unusual punishment, including interference with the daily functions of living, such as eating or sleeping. 
g.  Right to confidential treatment of personal information in his resident file as provided in this division. 
h.  Right to be treated with consideration, respect, and full recognition of his dignity and individuality. 
i.  Right to be accorded privacy for storage space of personal belongings; to have free access to day rooms, dining and other group living or common areas at reasonable hours and to come and go from the shelter, unless such access is unreasonable or infringes upon the rights of other residents. 
j.  Right to be accorded privacy and freedom for the use of bathroom facilities. 
k.  Right to wear his own clothes, to keep and use his own personal possessions, including toilet articles, as space permits, unless to do so would infringe upon the rights of other residents. 
l.  Right to send and receive unopened mail. 
m.  Right to associate and communicate privately with persons of his choice. 
n.  Right to have visitors at mutually agreed upon hours. Once the hours have been agreed upon, no prior notice is necessary. 
o.  Right to receive or reject medical care, dental care, or other services, except as required by law to control communicable disease. 
p.  Right to not be required to perform services for the shelter, except that the resident and manager may agree for the resident to perform certain activities or services in the shelter. 
Note— This bill of rights or portions thereof may be waived as provided for under section 10-160. 
(9)  Illnesses, accidents or abuse. 
a.  In the case of an accident or sudden adverse change in a resident's condition a shelter shall immediately obtain needed care and notify the department. A record of such incidents shall be maintained in the resident's files. 
b.  An occurrence of a reportable communicable disease as defined by the laws of this state or the rules implementing such law shall be reported immediately to the department. 
c.  Immediate investigation of the cause of an on-site accident or incident involving a resident, employee or visitor shall be initiated by the manager of the shelter and an appropriate report made to the department with a copy of the report being maintained in the resident's files. 
d.  In the case of suspected child abuse, the manager shall notify the department of family and children's services. 
(10)  Building standards. 
a.  A shelter shall be so constructed, arranged and maintained as to provide adequately for the health, safety, and well-being of occupants. 
b.  Furnishings and housekeeping standards shall be such that a shelter presents a clean and orderly appearance. 
c.  Dining, bath, sitting, living, and recreation rooms, during winter months, shall be maintained by an adequate central heating system or its safe equivalent at a temperature range of 70 to 75 degrees Fahrenheit or such other ranges which are consistent with individual health needs or may be imposed by an appropriate state or federal agency. 
d.  A shelter shall provide laundering facilities on the premises for residents' personal laundry. 
e.  A shelter shall be equipped to provide an adequate amount of hot water for residents' use. 
f.  Bathrooms and toilet facilities without windows shall have forced ventilation to the outside in accordance with the Standard Mechanical Code. Bathroom windows used for ventilation shall open easily. 
g.  Floors, walls, and ceiling shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
h.  A shelter shall provide separate and distinct living/kitchen and sleeping areas. All areas shall be well-lighted, heated, and ventilated. 
i.  A comfortable dining area that is adequate in size for the number of residents being served shall be provided. 
j.  A below-grade room to be used as a bedroom shall have adequate natural light and ventilation and be provided with two useful means of egress. Control of dampness shall be ensured. 
k.  At least one functional toilet, lavatory and bathing or showering facility shall be provided for each six persons living in a shelter, including family, live-in staff and residents. At least one toilet and lavatory shall be provided on each floor having resident's bedrooms. 
l.  Toilets, bathtubs and showers shall provide for individual privacy. 
m.  A living room, dining room, or other room not ordinarily used for sleeping shall not be used for sleeping by residents, family or staff members. 
n.  Traffic to and from any room shall not be through a resident's bedroom. 
o.  Bedrooms for residents shall be separated from halls, corridors, and other rooms by floor-to-ceiling walls that contain no openings except doors. 
p.  Doorways of sleeping areas or bedrooms occupied by residents shall be equipped with side-hinged permanently mounted doors equipped with positively latching hardware which will ensure opening of the door by a single motion. For bedrooms which have locks on doors, both the occupant and manager must be provided with keys to ensure easy entry and exit. Shelters must furnish a lockable cabinet or storage container for personal belongings. 
q.  Residents of the opposite sex shall not be assigned to the same bedroom or sleeping area unless they are husband and wife or members of the same immediate family. 
r.  Residents having impaired mobility shall not sleep in or be assigned bedrooms on floors which do not have a grade-level exit to the outside; provided, however, that above grade exits with easily negotiable ramps may be used. 
s.  Each bedroom shall have at least one window. Bedrooms shall be well ventilated and maintained at a comfortable temperature. 
t.  Occupancy limits shall be met as set by this chapter. 
u.  Bedroom furnishings shall include an adequate closet or wardrobe and lighting sufficient for reading and other resident activities. 
v.  Buildings shall meet the current state handicap accessibility code, ANSI 117.1, and chapter 22. 
w.  The height, area, and design of buildings shall be in compliance with the county construction code for residential occupancies of group R-2 usage, based on type of building construction and whether sprinklered or not. 
x.  Complete site and building plans shall be submitted and reviewed by county fire services, county development division, and any other applicable agencies before the issuance of a building permit. These plans shall bear the seal of a registered designer when required by state law. 
(11)  Bedding, linen and miscellaneous. 
a.  A shelter shall provide beds with a clean protected mattress and a pillow. 
b.  A shelter shall provide bedding for each resident, which includes two sheets, a pillow case, and a minimum of one blanket. A shelter shall provide clean towels and washcloths. Bed linen shall be changed at least weekly, or as needed. A shelter shall maintain an adequate linen supply. 
c.  A shelter shall provide soap, light bulbs, and toilet tissue. 
(12)  Safety. 
a.  Stairways with three or more risers shall have sturdy and securely fastened handrails on both sides, 34 inches above the leading edge of the tread. 
b.  Scatter or throw rugs on hard-finished floors shall have a nonskid backing. If used, floor wax shall not present a hazard to occupants of the shelter. 
c.  Handrails and nonskid surfacing or strips shall be installed in showers and bath areas. 
d.  Residential cooking appliances shall be suitably installed in accordance with approved safety practices, and chapter 22 of this Code. Commercial-type cooking appliances shall meet the requirements of NFPA-96. Where metal hoods or canopies are provided, they shall be equipped with filters, which shall be maintained in an efficient condition and kept clean at all times. 
e.  Fire screens shall be provided for open flames, and approved protection devices shall be used for properly vented space heaters, stoves, and fireplaces. 
f.  Hot water heaters shall be equipped with devices which limit the outlet temperature, which shall not exceed 110 degrees Fahrenheit at the fixture. 
g.  The facility shall be maintained in a safe condition and shall be inspected annually by the county fire marshal. A signed copy of a compliance inspection report shall be submitted to the department as a part of the application for permit. For existing structures, a compliance inspection shall be made by the county development division prior to the issuance of a permit. 
h.  Smoke detectors and manual fire alarm systems shall be installed in each shelter in compliance with NFPA-101 and chapter 22 of this Code. 
i.  Fire extinguishers shall be provided as required by chapter 22. 
j.  There shall be an established procedure and mechanism for alerting residents in case of fire and evacuating them to safety. This shall include emergency instructions and evacuation plans posted on each floor of the shelter. 
k.  Fire drills shall be conducted every six months, and records shall be maintained. 
l.  Fire safety information shall be provided on the back of room doors or as handouts in multisleep areas. 
m.  In addition to the above stated requirements, the shelter shall be required to meet all the requirements of chapter 22. 
(13)  Water and sanitation. 
a.  Sewage disposal systems shall meet the requirements of the department. 
b.  Kitchen and bathroom areas shall be cleaned at least daily and maintained to ensure cleanliness and sanitation. 
c.  Solid waste which is not disposed of by mechanical means shall be stored in vermin-proof, leak-proof, nonabsorbent containers with closefitting covers until removed. Waste shall be removed from the kitchen daily and from the premises at least weekly. 
d.  Handwashing facilities provided in both kitchen and bathroom areas shall include hot and cold running water, soap, and individual towels. Facilities used by more than one person shall be stocked with single-use towels, preferably of the disposable paper type. 
e.  An insect, rodent or pest control program shall be maintained as necessary and conducted in a manner which continually protects the health of residents. Poisons, caustics, and other dangerous materials shall be stored and safeguarded in nonfood preparation and storage areas. 
f.  Openable windows shall be screened. 
g.  When a resident is discharged, the room and its contents shall be thoroughly cleaned. Blankets and spreads shall be sanitized. 
(14)  Meals. 
a.  If meals are provided by the management, then a minimum of two regular meals shall be provided daily. Not more than 14 hours shall elapse between the substantial evening and morning meal. 
b.  Shelters which regularly house more than 16 persons shall possess a valid food service permit issued under provisions of the state health code, chapter 88-10, food service establishments, and rules and regulations applicable thereto. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-201) 
Secs. 10-222—10-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION, AND INERT SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-251. - Responsibility. 
It shall be the responsibility of the department of planning and development, in the exercise of their normal duties, to enforce this article, as well as state, county and city laws regarding solid waste disposal. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-241) 
Sec. 10-252. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to active building, land disturbing, and development sites which have or will have a valid permit and are located in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-242) 
Sec. 10-253. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bury pit means a hole or depression in the ground that has been filled with building and/or organic materials (such as lumber and tree limbs) and then covered with dirt. In time, usually in five to ten years, the organic material in the holes starts to decay and the ground above the material subsides causing a depression in the ground surface. 
Construction/demolition waste , as defined in Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-4-.01(14) of the rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division, solid waste management, means waste building material and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, asbestos containing waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
EPD means the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
Inert waste landfill, as defined in Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-4-.01(28) of the rules of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, solid waste management, means a disposal facility accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause the production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed above. 
Municipal solid waste , as defined in Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-4-.01(37) of the rules of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, solid waste management, means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operation or industrial processes or operations. 
Open dump means a disposal facility in which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn, or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. 
Sinkhole means a hollow place or depression that has formed in the ground which may be the result of decay of buried organic material. 
Stop work order means an order to cease and desist building, development, and land disturbing and is issued by the department of planning and development pursuant to section 11.4.5 of the development regulations and section 102.3 of the construction code. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-243) 
Sec. 10-254. - Permit application; filing of solid waste management plan. 
Each application for a building, land disturbing or development permit shall be accompanied by a solid waste management plan filed on forms provided by the department of planning and development for that purpose. The applicant's solid waste management plan shall, at a minimum, consist of the following: 
(1)  The identity of the solid waste material hauler, if the solid waste material is to be hauled to a state approved solid waste material disposal site. 
(2)  The location of the state approved solid waste material disposal site where solid waste material will be hauled. 
(3)  If inert waste material is to be disposed of on site, acknowledgment that the applicant must file a notification of permit by rule with the EPD and must comply with the rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division, solid waste management. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-244) 
Sec. 10-255. - Exemption from EPD rules. 
Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-4-.04(3) of the rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division grants an exemption as follows: Provisions of these rules shall not apply to any individual disposing of solid wastes originating from his own residence onto land or facilities owned by him when disposal of such wastes does not thereby adversely affect the public health. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-245) 
Secs. 10-256—10-273. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 10-274. - Construction and demolition waste. 
(a)  Upon discovery of on-site disposal activity of construction and demolition waste at a building, land disturbing, or development site, the inspector shall investigate. 
(b)  A stop work order shall immediately be issued by the inspector and all inspections shall be suspended. A stop work order shall not be rescinded until the construction and demolition waste has been removed and disposed of at a state approved disposal facility. 
(c)  After issuing the stop work order, the department of planning and development shall give notice of the potential violation to the EPD (telephone number (404) 362-2671; fax number (404) 362-2654). 
(d)  If a violation of a stop work order is discovered, the inspector shall issue a citation to recorder's court for violating the stop work order. 
(e)  Approval of final plats, exemption plats, certificates of occupancy and certificates of completion, as appropriate to the project, shall be withheld by the department of planning and development until the construction and demolition waste has been removed from the building, land disturbing, or development site. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-261) 
Sec. 10-275. - Inert waste. 
(a)  Upon discovery of on-site disposal activity of inert waste at a building, land disturbing, or development site, the inspector shall investigate and request a copy of the applicant's notification of permit by rule operations that is required to be submitted to the EPD by state law under Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-4-.06 of the rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division. 
(b)  If the disposal activity is not covered by an EPD permit by rule, a stop work order shall immediately be issued by the inspector and all inspections shall be suspended. A stop work order shall not be rescinded until either the inert waste has been removed, or verification is obtained that a notification of permit by rule operations form has been filed with the EPD. 
(c)  Upon verification that a notification of permit by rule operations form has not been submitted, the department of planning and development shall give notice of the potential violation to the EPD (telephone number (404) 362-2671; fax number (404) 362-2654). 
(d)  If a violation of a stop work order is discovered, the inspector shall issue a citation to the recorder's court for violating the stop work order. 
(e)  Approval of final plats, exemption plats, certificates of occupancy and certificates of completion, as appropriate to the project, shall be withheld by the department of planning and development until one of the following compliance options have occurred: 
(1)  The inert waste has been removed from the building, land disturbing, or development site. 
(2)  A final plat or exemption plat has been recorded with the clerk of superior court indicating compliance with Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-4-.06(3)(c)9. of the rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-262) 
Sec. 10-276. - Bury pits. 
(a)  If an on-site bury pit is suspected of being located adjacent to the foundation of a building, the department of planning and development shall cause an investigation to commence to determine if a violation of the construction code occurred. 
(b)  If an on-site bury pit is suspected of being located within the right-of-way of a street, and the street is covered by a maintenance bond, the department of planning and development shall investigate and withhold release of the maintenance bond until the waste material has been removed. 
(c)  Any other suspected bury pit location (e.g., in the front yard, under a driveway, etc.) shall be considered a private problem and must be resolved between the property owner and the builder or developer or reported by the property owner to the EPD. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-263) 
Sec. 10-277. - Sinkholes. 
(a)  If a sinkhole is suspected of being located adjacent to the foundation of a building, the department of planning and development shall cause an investigation to commence to determine if a violation of the construction code occurred. 
(b)  If a sinkhole is located anywhere else in the yard or driveway, it shall be considered a private problem and must be resolved between the property owner and the builder or developer or reported by the property owner to the EPD. 
(c)  If a sinkhole is suspected of being located within the right-of-way of street, and the street is covered by a maintenance bond, the department of planning and development shall investigate and withhold release of the maintenance bond until the sinkhole has been corrected. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-264) 
Secs. 10-278—10-302. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-303. - Title. 
The title of this article shall be the "City of Peachtree Corners Property Maintenance Ordinance" and may be cited hereinafter as "this article." 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-281) 
Sec. 10-304. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum requirements and standards for premises and structures in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, order and general welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-282) 
Sec. 10-305. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to all commercial, office, industrial, multifamily, and single-family residential structures and premises and shall constitute the minimum requirements and standards for existing structures and premises. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-283) 
Sec. 10-306. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise noted, terms not defined herein shall have their meaning as defined in the zoning resolution, the development regulations, and the construction code, or in the absence of such definition, terms shall have their common dictionary definition. Whenever the terms "dwelling unit," "premises," "building," "roominghouse," "rooming unit" or "story" are stated in this article, they shall be construed as if they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bathroom means a room containing plumbing fixtures, including a bathtub or shower. 
Bedroom means a separate room planned or intended for sleeping, separated from other rooms by a door, and accessible to a bathroom without crossing another bedroom. 
Boarding-up means erecting, installing, placing, or maintaining boards over the doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure or otherwise securing such openings by a means other than the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Evidence of utility usage means a bill or invoice from a supplier of water, electric, and/or gas which includes, at a minimum, the base charge charged by such supplier for utility usage at the property indicated on such bill or invoice. 
Exterior property means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Garbage means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Habitable space means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage of utility spaces, garages, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
Junk vehicle means any vehicle, automobile, truck, van, trailer of any kind or type, or contrivance or part thereof which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, stripped, partially stripped, inoperative, abandoned, discarded, or kept parked, stored or maintained on any premises or public right-of-way without a current license plate and/or decal displayed on the vehicle. 
Local agent means any person or entity empowered by a creditor, mortgagee, or transferee: 
(1)  To ensure security and maintenance; 
(2)  To comply with code enforcement orders issued by the county; 
(3)  To provide a trespass authorization upon request of an enforcement officer; 
(4)  To conduct inspections; and 
(5)  To serve as an agent authorized to receive any citation under this article and notice pertaining to any court or enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this article. 
Maintenance means the act of keeping property, structures or vegetation in a proper condition so as to prevent their decline, failure or uncontrolled growth. 
Occupancy means the purpose for which a building is utilized or occupied. 
Occupant means any individual living or sleeping in a building; or having legal possession of a space within a building. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. A real estate broker or salesperson licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 40, is not an operator for the purposes of this article unless such broker or salesperson is under contract to provide property management services to the owner of such structure or premises. 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state or the county as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures thereon. 
Property means any unimproved or improved residential or nonresidential real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the real property, regardless of condition. 
Rubbish means discarded waste paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, cans, glass, crockery, and/or similar materials. 
Securing means such measures as may be directed by the director of the department of planning and development or his designee that render the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, the repairing of fences and walls, chaining or padlocking of gates, the repairing of doors, windows or other openings. 
Swimming pool means a water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the surrounding land, or an above ground pool, having a depth of more than 30 inches, designed, used, and maintained for swimming and bathing. 
Tenant unit means an individual unit of a building or structure intended to be occupied or used by an occupant for a fixed period of time through a lease or rental agreement with the property owner. 
Toilet room means a room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
Trash means combustible and noncombustible waste material, except garbage, including paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, cans, metals, bricks, lumber, concrete, mineral matter, glass crockery, and including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material. 
Vacant structure. 
(1)  The term "vacant structure" means a building or structure that is: 
a.  Not legally occupied for a period of at least 60 days, without evidence of water, electric and/or gas utility usage; 
b.  Is partially constructed or incomplete after the building permit authorizing its construction has expired; or 
c.  Held pursuant to a judicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu or contemplation of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor. 
(2)  The term "vacant structure" does not include a building or structure under a common ownership which is designed for and contains multiple tenant units and where at least one tenant unit is occupied with evidence of utility usage. 
Weeds means all rank vegetative growth, including, but not limited to, kudzu, poison ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, plants of obnoxious odors, or other similar unsightly vegetative growths; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers, fruits and vegetables, and gardens. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, pruned shrub and tree debris, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-285) 
Sec. 10-307. - Penalties. 
(a)  Fine and/or sentence. Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the county and shall be punished either by a fine not less than $250.00 per day and not to exceed $1,000.00 per day, or by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in jail, or both a fine and jail, or work alternative. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Powers of the court. The court shall have the power and authority to order the violation corrected in compliance with this article and the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(c)  Other legal remedies. In any case in which a violation of this article has occurred, the city, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-286) 
Sec. 10-308. - Transfer of ownership. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or structure who has received a notice of violation to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such building or structure until the provisions of the notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall furnish to the chief of police a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility, without condition, for making the corrections or repairs required by such notice of violation. Any citation for violation of this section shall be issued to the transferor of the property listed on the face of the document evidencing conveyance of the property. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-287) 
Secs. 10-309—10-336. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY 

Sec. 10-337. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  Fences and walls shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and in good repair. Fences shall be free from loose or rotting materials and shall have braces and supports attached or fastened in accordance with common building practices. Fences shall be maintained free of nails protruding more than 1/16 inch beyond the face of any uncovered fence member. 
(b)  All multifamily parcels which contain eight units per acre or more, excluding single-family attached dwellings on parcels that contain a minimum of three acres, shall be fenced on all sides with a chainlink or wrought iron fence, or other material approved by the director of the department of planning and development, no less than four feet in height. Any new fence required by the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be constructed within six months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(c)  All damaged or missing portions of a fence shall be replaced with comparable materials and shall be attached to the existing portion of the fence. Fences shall not be externally braced in lieu of replacing or repairing posts, columns or other structural members. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-301) 
Sec. 10-338. - Graffiti. 
It shall be a violation of this division for any person having a legal or equitable interest in a parcel of real property to permit graffiti to remain on a structure located thereon for a continuous period of more than 72 hours. For purposes of this section, the term "graffiti" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-302) 
Sec. 10-339. - Grass, weeds, and uncultivated vegetation. 
(a)  Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from grass, weeds, or uncultivated vegetation in excess of 12 inches in height. Exceptions: 
(1)  Any parcel zoned RA-200 (Agriculture—Residence District) that is greater than one acre in size. 
(2)  Any parcel within a single-family residential zoning classification that is greater than three acres in size. 
(b)  Property owners abutting a right-of-way shall not allow yard trimmings to accumulate on a public street or sidewalk. 
(c)  The unpaved areas of front yards shall be maintained with grass, ground cover or other type of landscaping to such an extent that the soil is not subject to erosion. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-303) 
Sec. 10-340. - Junk vehicles. 
Junk vehicles shall not be kept, permitted, parked, stored or maintained on any premises or public right-of-way. Exceptions: 
(1)  Junk vehicles, which are kept within a fully enclosed building on property in residential zoning districts, provided the owner or occupant of the property is in the process of reconditioning the junk vehicle for personal use; 
(2)  Junk vehicles which are kept on property in zoning districts authorized by the zoning resolution for repairing, reconditioning or remodeling junk vehicles and provided that such junk vehicles are not stored for the purpose of salvage of parts but are in the continual process of repair, reconditioning or remodeling; 
(3)  Junk vehicles which are kept on property in zoning districts as authorized by the zoning resolution for a junk or salvage yard. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-304) 
Sec. 10-341. - Driveways and walkways. 
All private driveways and walkways connecting a driveway to a building shall be maintained in a passable condition so as to allow safe vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress to the building served. For purposes of this section, there is a rebuttable presumption that a private driveway or walkway is impassable if the driveway or walkway contains a grade separation of six inches or more. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-305) 
Sec. 10-342. - Open or outdoor storage. 
The open or outdoor storage of appliances, building material or debris, equipment, garbage, glass, material, merchandise, rubbish, trash or similar items shall not be permitted, maintained or stored on any premises. Exceptions: 
(1)  Property where outdoor storage is authorized by the zoning resolution; 
(2)  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three feet for the personal use of the owner or occupant and which is stored in a side or rear yard; 
(3)  Rubbish, garbage, trash or other similar items placed outside for collection by an authorized waste hauler not more than 24 hours prior to the designated collection date for that property. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-306) 
Sec. 10-343. - Trees. 
(a)  Dead trees. Dead trees shall not be allowed to exist or to be maintained on any premises which are hazardous to persons on adjacent property or to adjacent property. A finding by a registered forester or certified arborist shall constitute prima facie evidence that a tree is in danger of falling upon adjacent lots or public streets due to the death of the tree. 
(b)  Tree stumps. Tree stumps greater than 12 inches in height above ground level shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises for more than 14 days after the tree has been cut. Exceptions: 
(1)  Property covered by a valid land disturbing permit; 
(2)  Property zoned RA-200 (Agriculture—Residence District). 
(c)  Tree debris. Felled trees, slash, or removed tree limbs shall not be permitted or maintained on the ground on any premises for more 14 days. Exceptions: 
(1)  Property covered by a valid land disturbing permit; 
(2)  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three feet and which is stored in a side or rear yard; 
(3)  Property zoned RA-200 (Agriculture — Residence District); 
(4)  Composting activities which comply with state law. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-307) 
Sec. 10-344. - Swimming pools. 
Swimming pools, spas, and similar structures above ground, on ground, or in ground, shall be maintained in a safe, clean, sanitary, secure, and structurally and mechanically sound condition, so as to prevent stagnant water, which is conducive to the harboring or breeding of mosquitoes or other insects. A finding by a health official of the county environmental health department shall constitute prima facie evidence that stagnant water in a swimming pool is conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects. All swimming pools shall be completely surrounded by a fence or other barrier having a minimum height of four feet. When the sides of an above ground pool are used as the barrier, the ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access; or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets these requirements. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-308) 
Sec. 10-345. - Registered agents. 
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any multifamily development, commercial, office or industrial property, or mobile home park, or during the first 30 calendar days of each year, whichever occurs earlier, the owner and each occupation tax certificate holder for each multifamily development, commercial, office, or industrial property, or mobile home park, must designate the name, county address, and 24-hour phone number of an agent for the property. The agent shall reside in the county and shall be on 24-hour call, seven days a week, to accept notices of violation regarding any provision of this Code. In addition, written notice to such agent shall be deemed delivered on the third business day following the mailing of such notice by first class mail to the agent at the address listed in such registration. The registration required by this subsection shall be submitted to the licensing and revenue section of the department of planning and development. Such registration shall be confirmed at the time of each annual registration. In the event that the holder of an occupation tax certificate or the owner of the property desires to change the name or contact information with regard to the registered agent, the occupation tax certificate holder and/or owner shall supply written notice to the licensing and revenue section of the department of planning and development. No change in registration shall be effective until written modification thereof is received by the licensing and revenue section of the department of planning and development. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-309) 
Sec. 10-346. - Yards. 
All premises yards and exterior property shall be maintained free from debris, litter, and rubbish, as well as grass and weeds in excess of 12 inches in height. The term 'exterior property' shall include all areas on the property to the edge of street pavement. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11-58, § 1, 12-15-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-11-58, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2015, did not specify manner of inclusion, hence, codification as § 10-346 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 10-347—10-363. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION, DESIGN AND REPAIR OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 10-364. - Numbering requirements. 
(a)  Assignation. Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public streets and street numbers and/or building numbers for dwelling units and places of business within apartments/condominiums and nonresidential developments located on private streets shall be assigned by the department of development in accordance with its administrative procedures. 
(b)  One- and two-family dwelling unit requirements. Each one- and two-family dwelling unit shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street, providing general public access, the street number of such dwelling unit in figures at least four inches high on a contrasting background that will allow 24-hour visibility. 
(c)  Multifamily requirements. Each multifamily building with three or more dwelling units shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the building, visible from the parking lot or street providing general public access, the addresses or numbers of the building in figures at least six inches high on a contrasting background and each individual apartment/unit within the building shall be marked on or about its main entrance with the individual apartment/unit number and/or address in figures at least four inches high on a contrasting background that will allow 24-hour visibility. In addition to these requirements, where a multifamily building has more than one exterior entrance, each such entrance shall be marked, in figures at least four inches high on a contrasting background, with the number and/or address of each and every individual apartment/unit or numerical range of apartment units to which access is provided through that common entrance. 
(d)  Business and other nonresidential building requirements. Each business or other nonresidential building shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place of the property, visible from the street providing public access, the address and/or street number of such building in figures at least four inches high on a contrasting background that will allow 24-hour visibility. If the numbers are not placed within 15 feet of the back of the street curbing or edge of the street surface, then such figures shall be at least six inches high. A quadrant designation will be posted as part of the address in figures at least two inches high on a contrasting background of a material that will allow 24-hour visibility and be placed with the number designation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-321) 
Sec. 10-365. - Exterior surface treatment. 
All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches and trim, shall be maintained in good repair. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints shall be maintained weather-resistant and watertight. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-322) 
Sec. 10-366. - Exterior walls. 
Exterior walls of buildings shall be maintained free from holes, breaks, loose or rotting materials, and shall be maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated as needed to prevent deterioration. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-323) 
Sec. 10-367. - Foundation walls. 
All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry the safe design and operating dead and live loads of the structure and shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks so as not to be detrimental to public safety and welfare. Every foundation, exterior wall, and other exterior surface shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-324) 
Sec. 10-368. - Roofs. 
Roofs of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound and in a safe condition and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the interior portions of a building. All portions, additions or sections of a roof, including, but not limited to, the fascia, eave, soffit, sheathing, rafter tail, barge rafter, vent screening, gutter, downspout, roof jack, and metal flashing, shall be complete with all trim strips, moldings, brackets, braces and supports attached or fastened in accordance with common building practices. Gutters must be free of vegetation and in good repair. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the building. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-325) 
Sec. 10-369. - Exterior stairways, decks, porches and balconies. 
Exterior stairways, decks, porches and balconies, and all appurtenances attached thereto, of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-326) 
Sec. 10-370. - Windows. 
Windows of buildings shall be fully supplied and maintained with glass window panes or with a substitute approved by the director of the department of planning and development, and such glass or substitute material shall be without open cracks or holes. Screens, if provided, shall be securely fastened to the window and maintained in good repair. Windows other than fixed windows shall be capable of being opened with reasonable ease and shall be held in position by appropriate window hardware. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-327) 
Sec. 10-371. - Exterior doors and frames. 
Exterior doors of buildings shall be maintained so that they fit reasonably well within their frames so as to substantially prevent rain and wind from entering a building. Exterior door jambs, stops, headers and moldings shall be securely attached to the structure and maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration. Additionally, exterior doors shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in proper working condition. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-328) 
Sec. 10-372. - Garage doors. 
Garage doors shall be capable of being closed reasonably plumb, properly attached, and the exterior surface of garage doors shall be maintained weatherproof so as to prevent deterioration. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-329) 
Sec. 10-373. - Decorative features. 
Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings, shutters, light fixtures, and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-330) 
Sec. 10-374. - Vacant structures. 
(a)  Vacant structure permit. All vacant structures located within the city require a vacant structure permit ("permit"). As set forth below, the county will issue the permit after receipt of the completed application, including the applicant's vacant structure maintenance plan ("vacant structure maintenance plan"), completion and passage of any necessary inspections, and receipt of all necessary fees. The permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months. The permit may be renewed within 30 days of the expiration of the original by supplying information required by the department by submitting an updated application, updated maintenance plan, any additional information required, and payment of necessary fees. A new permit must be obtained if the original permit is not renewed within 30 days of the expiration of the original permit. 
(b)  Registration of vacant structures. 
(1)  An owner or mortgagee of any vacant structure shall obtain a vacant structure permit from the county department of planning and development within 14 days of the structure becoming vacant as defined in this article. 
(2)  Any mortgagee that holds a mortgage on property that is improved with a building or structure shall, upon default under the mortgage, perform an inspection of the property that is encumbered by the mortgage. If the property is found to be vacant, it shall be deemed a vacant structure within the meaning of this article and the mortgagee shall, within 14 days of the inspection, apply for a vacant house permit. 
(3)  Upon receiving information that a structure is vacant as defined in this article and the owner has not applied for a vacant structure permit as set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the county shall provide a written notice to the owner of the existence of a vacant structure. The owner shall, within 14 calendar days of the date shown on such notice, submit the permit application and proposed maintenance plan to the department of planning and development and pay all applicable fees. 
(4)  The fees for residential and commercial permits and inspections are set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by the board of commissioners and the city. 
(5)  The owner registering a vacant structure shall supply the following information on an authorized permit application form provided by the department: 
a.  Name, current street address, telephone number, fax number, and e-mail address of the owner; 
b.  Name, street address, telephone number, fax number, and e-mail address of any local (within 75 miles of the subject property) agent of the owner, if applicable; 
c.  Name, current address and telephone number of all persons with any legal interest in the property, building or premises, including mortgagees and successors in interest; 
d.  Tax parcel identification number of the premises on which the structure is situated; 
e.  Common address of the structure; 
f.  Vacant structure maintenance plan; 
g.  Whether the property is a foreclosure; and 
h.  Additional information as may be required by the department shall be submitted within 14 days after request thereof. 
(6)  The owner shall notify the department of planning and development in writing of any change in the above required information within 14 days of said change. 
(c)  Vacant structure maintenance plan. 
(1)  At the time the owner submits an application for a vacant structure permit as required above, the owner shall submit to the department a maintenance plan. The plan shall include at least the following: 
a.  The length of time the owner expects the vacancy to continue; 
b.  The proposed rehabilitation or improvements, if any, to be made to the structure so as to make the structure suitable for its intended use and the time schedule for same; 
c.  A maintenance plan detailing the securing, monitoring and maintenance of the structure and premises thereof in conformance with this article. 
(2)  Upon a change in ownership of the vacant structure, the new owner shall be required to apply for a new vacant structure permit if the structure is to remain vacant for more than 60 days after the change in ownership. 
(d)  Inspection of vacant structures. 
(1)  At the time the permit is initially issued, the city and the county may perform an inspection of the property and any vacant structures thereon. The purpose of this inspection is to ensure that the vacant structure is in compliance with the requirements of this article and does not constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(2)  The department is hereby authorized to collect a fee to offset the cost of inspections. The fee for inspections shall be set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by the board of commissioners and the city. 
(e)  Minimum requirements. The vacant structure shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Have all doors and windows and other openings weather-tight and secured against entry by the general public as well as animals. The vacant structure shall be secured using the conventional methods used in the original construction. Where securing the structure through conventional methods is not feasible or where the owner desires to board up the vacant structure, the owner or interested party must obtain a separate boarding-up permit from the department of planning and development. 
(2)  All roof and roof flashings shall be sound and tight such that no rain will penetrate the structure and must allow for appropriate drainage so as to prevent deterioration of the interior walls or other interior portions of the structure. 
(3)  The structure must be maintained in good repair, be structurally sound and free from rubbish, garbage and other debris. 
(4)  Supporting members of the structure shall be capable of bearing both live and dead loads and the foundation walls likewise shall be capable of supporting an appropriate load. 
(5)  The exterior of the structure shall be free of loose or rotten materials as well as holes. Any exposed metal, wood or other surface shall be protected from the elements by appropriate weather coating materials (paint or similar treatment). 
(6)  All balconies, canopies, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes or other overhanging extensions shall be in good repair and appropriately anchored. The exposed metal and wood surface of such overhanging extensions shall also be protected from the elements against rust or decay by appropriate application of paint or similar weather coating. 
(7)  Any accessories or appurtenant structures, including, but not limited to, garages, sheds or other storage facilities, shall meet the standards set forth in this subsection. 
(8)  Have a plan for winterization of the vacant property if necessary. 
(9)  Retaining walls, drainage systems, or other structures must be maintained in good repair and be structurally sound. Any existing fence shall be maintained in good repair with gates locked at all times. 
(10)  Be in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-331) 
Sec. 10-375. - Boarding-up structures. 
(a)  No person, firm, association or corporation shall erect, install, place, or maintain boards over the doors, windows or other opening of any building or structure or otherwise secure such opening by a means other than the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure without first obtaining a valid boarding-up permit in accordance with this subsection. Any properties with boards existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived will have 60 days from the date of the adoption of said subsection to submit an application to the department of planning and development for a permit to continue to board. 
(b)  The department of planning and development may issue a boarding-up permit only upon satisfaction of the following conditions: 
(1)  Submission of a written application by the owner of the property or his authorized representative, including the following information: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of the owner; 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of any local agent of the owner; 
c.  Tax parcel identification number of the premises on which the structure is situated; 
d.  Common address of the structure; 
e.  Other information as may be required by the department. 
(2)  Payment of the required fee by the owner of the property or his authorized representative. 
(3)  Submission of a written statement or plan by the owner or the property or his authorized representative specifying: 
a.  Length of time the owner expects the boarding-up to continue; 
b.  Proposed plan to secure or board up the structure, including a detailed description regarding the manner and materials; 
c.  Proposed maintenance plan detailing the monitoring and maintenance of the structure and premises in conformance with this article. 
(4)  The city and the county may conduct an inspection of the subject property to ensure that the structure is boarded up in accordance with the plan approved by the department of planning and development. 
(c)  A boarding-up permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall authorize the boarding-up or other securing of a building or structure for a period of six months. An owner of a property desiring to continue to board his property beyond the six-month term must submit a renewal application to renew the boarding-up permit and continue to meet the requirements for the issuance of a new boarding-up permit. The permit may be renewed within 30 days of the expiration of the original upon payment of necessary fees. A new permit must be obtained if the original permit is not renewed within 30 days of the expiration of the original permit. 
(d)  No boarding-up permit shall be required to board-up a building for up to 30 days in the event of a temporary emergency situation, including, but not limited to, damage caused by vandalism, theft or weather. In the event an emergency situation requires a building or structure to be board-up for more than 30 days, the owner of the building or structure or his authorized representative must obtain a valid building permit for repair or a valid boarding-up permit in accordance with this section. 
(e)  The boarding of doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure or any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, shall be according to the specifications approved under the permit. All boarded openings shall be painted with a minimum of two coats of exterior paint, which is of a color compatible with the exterior color of the building or structure. 
(f)  Any structure which is boarded shall be in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the city. 
(g)  Any structure which is boarded up shall be posted with the name, permit information, and 24-hour contact phone number of the local agent. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-332) 
Sec. 10-376. - Burned structures. 
Whenever any building or structure is partially burned, the owner or person in control shall, within 30 days after completion of the scene investigation by the fire department and/or insurer of the property, remove from the premises all refuse, debris, and all charred and partially burned lumber and material. If such building or structure shall be burned to such an extent that it is rendered incapable of being repaired, the owner or person in control shall, within 60 days after completion of the scene investigation by the fire department and/or insurer of the property, remove from the premises all the remaining portion of the building or structure. If the building or structure is to be repaired, a permit shall be obtained and work shall begin within 60 days after completion of the scene investigation by the fire department and/or insurer of the property and shall be completed within 180 days from the date a permit is obtained. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-333) 
Secs. 10-377—10-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 10-396. - Privacy. 
Dwelling units, hotel units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-341) 
Sec. 10-397. - Minimum room widths. 
A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than 7.5 feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-342) 
Sec. 10-398. - Minimum ceiling heights. 
Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet. Exceptions: 
(1)  In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four feet on center and projecting not more than six inches below the required ceiling height; 
(2)  Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches with not less than six feet four inches of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions; 
(3)  Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least 7.5 feet over not less than 50 percent of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet or more shall be included. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-343) 
Sec. 10-399. - Bedroom requirements. 
(a)  Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
(b)  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and non-habitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-344) 
Sec. 10-400. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-401. - Efficiency unit. 
An efficiency dwelling unit shall conform to the requirements of the city construction code as enumerated in this chapter, except for the following modifications: 
(1)  The unit shall have a living room of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 m 2 ) of floor area. An additional 100 square feet (9.3 m 2 ) of floor area shall be provided for each occupant of such unit in excess of two. 
(2)  The unit shall be provided with a separate closet. 
(3)  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this Code shall be provided. 
(4)  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-346) 
Sec. 10-402. - Short-term occupancy. 
This division shall not apply to any occupancy which has not lasted, or is not intended to last, more than one week. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-347) 
Secs. 10-403—10-432. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT AND UNLAWFUL ACTS 

Sec. 10-433. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the chief of police or the director of planning and development or their duly authorized representatives, as applicable. 
(b)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this article, or whenever a police officer or code enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists upon any property a condition or violation which is unsafe, dangerous, hazardous, or detrimental to the public interest, the officer may enter upon the grounds of such property at all reasonable times to inspect the same; provided, however, that if such structure or property is occupied, the officer shall first present proper credentials and request entry upon such grounds. If such entry is refused, the officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry upon such grounds. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-361) 
Sec. 10-434. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with, or in violation of, this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-362) 
Sec. 10-435. - Liability. 
No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 14-363) 
Secs. 10-436—10-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CONSTRUCTION SITE WASTE MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-05-47, § 1, adopted June 16, 2016, did not specify manner of inclusion, hence, codification as §§ 10-501—10-505 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 10-501. - Discarded building materials and construction waste disposal requirements. 
(a)  Discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, paint washout, litter, sanitary waste, and other construction site wastes must be properly managed and disposed of to reduce the risk of pollution from materials such as surplus or refuse building materials or hazardous wastes. 
(b)  Practices such as trash disposal, recycling, proper material handling, and spill prevention and clean up measures must be implemented to reduce the potential for storm water runoff to mobilize construction site wastes and contaminate surface or ground water. 
(c)  The proper management and disposal of wastes should be practiced at all construction sites to reduce stormwater runoff. 
(1)  Waste management practices must be used to properly locate refuse piles. 
(2)  Cover materials that may be displaced by rainfall or stormwater runoff. 
(3)  Prevent all spill and leaks of hazardous wastes. 
(d)  Guidelines for the proper handling, storage, and disposal of construction site waste must be posted in storage and use areas on site. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05-47, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 10-502. - Storage and disposal of construction site waste. 
(a)  Designate a waste collection area onsite that does not receive a substantial amount of runoff from upland areas and does not drain directly to a water body. 
(b)  Designate areas for concrete trucks and equipment to be washed down so that it will not flow into storm drains or become surface water runoff that would lead to the storm drains. Under no circumstances should concrete truck wash out be conducted in the road or directly into storm drains. 
(c)  Designate areas for paint cans and equipment to wash down that will not flow into storm drains or become surface water runoff that would lead to the storm drains or ground water recharge areas. Under no circumstances should excess paint be washed out in the road or directly into storm drains. 
(d)  Ensure that containers have lids so they can be covered before periods of rain. Keep containers in a covered area whenever possible. 
(e)  Schedule waste collection to prevent containers from overfilling, which would prevent them from being able to be covered. 
(f)  Clean up spills immediately. For hazardous materials, follow cleanup instructions on the package. Use an absorbent material such as sawdust or cat litter to contain the spill. 
(1)  During the demolition phase of construction, provide extra containers and schedule more frequent pick-ups. 
(2)  Collect, remove, and dispose of all construction site waste at authorized disposal areas. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05-47, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 10-503. - Disposal of hazardous materials. 
(a)  Steps must be taken to ensure the proper disposal of hazardous materials: 
(1)  Local waste management authorities must be consulted about the requirements of disposing of hazardous materials. 
(2)  A hazardous waste container must be emptied and cleaned before it is disposed of to prevent leaks. 
(3)  The original product label must never be removed from the container as it contains important safety information. Follow manufacturer's recommended method of disposal, which should be printed on the label. 
(4)  If excess products need to be disposed of, they must never be mixed during disposal unless specifically recommended by the manufacturer. 
(5)  Consult state and local solid waste regulatory agencies and private firms to ensure the proper disposal of contaminated soils that have been exposed to and still contain hazardous substances. 
(b)  The following practices must be used to reduce risks associated with pesticides or to reduce the amount of pesticides that come in contact with stormwater: 
(1)  Follow all federal, state, and local regulations that apply to the use, handling, and disposal of pesticides. 
(2)  Do not handle the materials any more than necessary. 
(3)  Store pesticides in a dry, covered area. 
(4)  Construction curbs or dikes to contain pesticides in case of spillage. 
(5)  Follow the recommended application rates and methods. 
(6)  Have equipment and absorbent materials available in areas where pesticides are stored and used in order to contain and clean up any spills that occur. 
(c)  The following management practices must be followed to reduce the contamination risk associated with petroleum products: 
(1)  Store petroleum products and fuel for vehicles in dry, covered areas with construction curbs or dikes to contain any spills. 
(2)  Immediately contain and clean up any spills with absorbent materials. 
(3)  Have equipment available in fuel storage areas and in vehicles to contain and clean up spills. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05-47, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 10-504. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Containers or equipment that may malfunction and cause leaks or spills must be identified through regular inspection of storage and use areas. 
(b)  Equipment and containers must be inspected regularly for leaks, corrosion, support or foundation failure, or any other signs of deterioration and should be tested for soundness. Any found to be defective must be repaired or replaced immediately. 
(c)  If failures to the onsite BMPs occur, such as sediment build up in the road way, this must be shoveled by hand or with a road sweeper. Under no circumstances should this sediment be washed down into the storm drainage system or the creeks and streams. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05-47, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Sec. 10-505. - Violations. 
Violations will be handled according to the City of Peachtree Corners' ordinances as they relate to stormwater management, erosion control, and illicit discharge or illegal connections. 
Except as modified herein, the Code of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia, is hereby reaffirmed and restated. The codifier is hereby granted editorial license to include this amendment in future supplements of said Code by appropriate section, division, article or chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05-47, § 1, 6-16-2016) 
Chapter 14 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Occupation tax imposed on businesses in the city subject to applicable regulations and requirements. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or, in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state, and falling within the criteria of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation. Moreover, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, who is subject to any applicable regulations and requirements that the county under its police powers has set forth in the articles of this chapter, shall, prior to and during the operation of the business, trade, profession or occupation, comply with all applicable regulations and requirements. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "City of Peachtree Corners" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean "City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia"; wherever the term "city" is used herein, in the context of a geographic area, it shall be construed to mean "City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia." 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling of any kind for gain or profit, direct or indirectly, provided that this shall not include any business operating in the city solely under a franchise granted by the city. 
City means the City of Peachtree Corners government, acting through its appointed officials and employees in the administration of this chapter. 
City of Peachtree Corners or its designee means the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee who shall be the administrator of the occupational tax function, and who may be assisted by subordinates and who shall have the primary responsibility for the implementation of this chapter. 
Disabled veteran means a person who has served in the armed services of the United States and was terminated under conditions other than dishonorable. In addition, such disabled veteran must provide certification by the U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs as 25 or more percent disabled in line of duty service during peace-time or ten or more percent disabled in line of duty service during war-time, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 43-12-2; with further certification that such disability is likely to be permanent and continuing. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Engaged in business means any person, whether acting as an owner, operator or agent in any business within the city, shall be deemed to be engaged in business when performing any act of selling any goods or services, soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale for payment in an attempt to make a profit; including sales or services of a wholesaler, retailer or manufacturer. 
Flat fee means the amount assessed uniformly to all businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in the city for the initial start-up, renewal, or re-opening of occupation tax accounts. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" does not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; 
c.  Inter-organizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), or between or among a parent corporation, wholly owned subsidiaries of such parent corporation, and any corporation in which such parent corporation or one or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries owns stock possessing at least 30 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of such partially owned corporation, or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office from the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor or agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Occupation tax certificate means that document issued by the city or its designee, which, when properly annotated or validated by the city or its designee, shall serve as evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Permit means a work permit for employment in a regulated business, issued by the city mayor and council or its designee in conformance with the provisions of the chapter. 
Person, wherever used in this chapter, shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, professional practitioners or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. A separate occupation tax shall be required for each registered or licensed professional person, without regard to whether the person is fully engaged or employed in the profession, or whether the person performs all the duties customarily associated with the profession. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax based upon profitability ratio in combination with gross receipts. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
Transfer of tax certificate means only the transfer of a fully-paid business or occupation tax certificate from an existing location as specified in a duly issued certificate, to a different business situs. Certificates may not be transferred in the case of a change in ownership, or after expiration date of a certificate; in such cases, a new application and certificate shall be required. Certificates may not be transferred when there is an outstanding unpaid amount. 
Yard sales, garage sales, bake sales means events that occur not as a part of any business enterprise or profession, but instead are sponsored and operated by a private individual or group, normally for purposes of financially supporting special events or endeavors for nonprofit or charitable groups. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Administrative and transfer fee structure; regulatory fee levied; fees separate from taxes. 
(a)  Administrative and transfer fee. 
(1)  A non-prorated, nonrefundable flat fee shall be required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial start up, renewal and re-opening of those accounts. The administrative fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(2)  A transfer fee may be imposed for the transfer of an occupation tax certificate, and shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(b)  A regulatory fee is imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-8 and 48-13-9 on applicable businesses. A regulatory fee should cover the approximate cost of any regulatory function and may not be used as a revenue raising tool. A regulatory fee may not include a flat fee. 
(c)  Occupation taxes are levied as hereinafter provided, and are separate from administrative or regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Occupation tax levied; structure. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city or upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state falling within the criteria of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. The tax shall be based upon the following criteria: Gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United State Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(b)  The tax rates associated with the classifications of subsection (a) shall be adopted through resolution by the mayor and council on an annual basis and can be found in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-4; Ord. No. O2017-12-109, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 14-5. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18). 
(a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following. 
(b)  Practitioners of professions and occupations authorized under this section are, but not limited to: 
(1)  Architects. 
(2)  Chiropractors. 
(3)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineers. 
(4)  Dentists. 
(5)  Embalmers. 
(6)  Funeral directors. 
(7)  Land surveyors. 
(8)  Landscape architects. 
(9)  Lawyers. 
(10)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors. 
(11)  Optometrists. 
(12)  Osteopaths. 
(13)  Physicians. 
(14)  Podiatrists. 
(15)  Practitioners of physiotherapy. 
(16)  Psychologists. 
(17)  Public accountants. 
(18)  Veterinarians. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-5) 
Sec. 14-6. - Occupation tax exclusions and limitations. 
(a)  Limits upon tax levied. 
(1)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have, nor shall the city require that a business pay an occupation tax upon more than 100 percent of its gross receipts. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, where more than one business exists at a location, the gross receipts of each business will be taxed separately, and a separate application and tax certificate shall be required for each business. 
(b)  Exemption for payments made elsewhere. The city shall not require an occupation tax in any tax year for those receipts that were simultaneously taxed for purposes of an occupation tax in other localities within the state; provided, however, that those tax payments were legitimate, were made pursuant to a bona fide occupational tax structure, and further were not made primarily in an effort to avoid payment of occupation tax in the city. The city shall not tax in any event gross receipts which are proceeds from outside the state, as defined in section 14-2. 
(c)  The maximum occupation tax permitted under this chapter shall be $20,000.00 for any single occupation tax certificate. 
(d)  Occupational tax exemptions shall be granted as provided for in this chapter. The city or its designee shall be responsible for promulgating guidelines for making application for and granting occupational tax exemptions. 
(e)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as provided for herein. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-6) 
Sec. 14-7. - Computation, applications, returns; general procedures. 
(a)  Use of estimated information for returns. All occupation taxes levied hereunder are computed on the volume of business to be conducted during the current calendar year. However, for the convenience of the city and the business community, each business or professional subject to the levy of an occupation tax shall, on or before the dates set forth, file with the city the application and return provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payments on the tax due for the current calendar year. The final actual amount of tax payable in a calendar year shall be computed and paid based upon the final return of taxable gross receipts to be made after the end of the year. 
(b)  Final returns. The owner or responsible official of each business subject to the occupation tax shall, after the end of the taxable year, and on or before February 15 or the due date established by the city or its designee of the ensuing year, file with the manager a signed application and return, in the form required, setting forth the amount of gross receipts for the business for the preceding calendar year. This form will be used to determine the final tax due for the year just ended and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current year. 
(c)  Part year returns. Where the business subject to the tax levied herein has been conducted for less than the full preceding calendar year, the amount of actual gross receipts shall be included on the return. Such return shall also include a figure that, when combined with the actual receipts, will be a reasonable estimate of an annualized, whole-year gross receipts. 
(d)  Newly established businesses. In the case of a newly established business subject to occupation tax in the current year, and for which no business was conducted within the city in the previous calendar year, the owner or responsible official shall, on or before actual commencement of business, file a return estimating the gross receipts for the current calendar year, and the tax shall be computed thereon. The tax shall become due 30 days from filing of the return, and shall be delinquent if not paid within 30 days of the due date. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a lawyer begins business after January 1 of the occupation tax year, the tax and flat fee on such business shall be due and payable on December 31 of the year in which the business begins. 
(e)  False or fraudulent returns or estimates. Failure to supply complete or accurate information is punishable as specified within this chapter. 
(f)  Dates. Filing or payment dates may be extended upon written order of the city or its designee. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-7) 
Sec. 14-8. - Submission of final return showing gross receipts required, procedures where tax overpaid or underpaid; refunds. 
(a)  Not later than March 31 or the established due date, the owner or responsible official for each business subject to an occupation tax shall file in the format specified by the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee a final return setting forth the total amount of gross receipts for the business during the immediately preceding year. 
(b)  If the amount of occupation tax required herein, computed based upon the final return, is more than the amount of occupation tax previously paid by the business based upon an estimated filing, the difference amount shall be due and payable not later than April 1 of the year following the year in which the tax was incurred, and shall become delinquent if not so paid. 
(c)  If the amount paid for occupation tax during the immediately preceding year, computed on the estimated gross receipts for the period, is more than the amount due as computed upon the final actual return, the overpayment difference shall be refundable to the business, or alternately, if the business enterprise remains in existence, the overpayment may be credited toward the estimated occupation tax due for the current year. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the city or its designee to at least annually provide a statement of estimated and final tax computations, along with a schedule of payments and final status of the account of each business for the immediately preceding year. 
(e)  Refunds. Refund of the occupation tax shall be permitted where there has occurred a clerical error in the submission of a return or application, or where there has been discovered a clerical error in business classification or tax computation, or where there has been a voluntary or involuntary overpayment of the tax. Written requests for refund of the occupation tax, or any part thereof, must be filed with the city or its designee by the owner or responsible business official, and the request shall set forth a detailed justification for claim for refund. The flat fee is nonrefundable. 
(f)  Evidence of gross receipts generated during any period may be substantiated by a certified copy of Schedule C of Form 1040 filed with the Internal Revenue Service by the certificate holder; and shall be required to be submitted upon request of the city or its designee. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-8; Ord. No. 2015-12-61, § 1, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-9. - Applications required annually; general form. 
(a)  Every person, firm, company, or corporation engaged in business as of January 1 of the taxable year, and subject to the occupation tax, shall, on or before February 15 or the established due date of each year, make an application for occupation tax certificate in writing to the city or its designee, in the form and manner required setting forth hereafter the following information: 
(1)  Name of the person, firm, company, or corporation, including the complete address of the resident agent or other responsible official of the business. 
(2)  Location, telephone number, and mailing address at which trade, business, or profession is to be conducted. 
(3)  Exact nature of the trade, business, or profession for which the occupation tax certificate is requested. 
(4)  Other information as shall be required by the city in order to compute the occupation tax, including, without limit, the number of registered or licensed professionals, previous calendar or fiscal year gross receipts, projections of gross receipts for the current taxable year, federal tax identification or Social Security account number, or other information as may be required for the administration of this chapter. 
(5)  All such information therein required being given by the owner, a member of the firm, an officer of the corporation, or an authorized employee, agent, or accountant having knowledge of actual business done, which application shall identify the individual making the return and shall be certified to be true, correct, and complete to the best of his knowledge and belief. 
(b)  Applications by newly established businesses are due prior to commencing business operations 
(c)  Any applicable certificate shall be shown to the city or its designee, or to the county chief of police or his designees, upon request. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to lawyers. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-9) 
Sec. 14-10. - Business required to furnish names of persons to call in emergency situations. 
(a)  All commercial businesses operating within the confines of the city, having a permanent or leased premises, and not considered a home occupancy enterprise, shall furnish to the city or its designee the names, addresses, and phone numbers of two persons who may be reached in the event of an emergency by the county police or fire departments. 
(b)  The county police department shall issue a decal containing a code number to such business which shall be posted on the front door of the business. The county police department will maintain the name records for each decal with code number as a means of identifying the proper record to consult in the event of an emergency. 
(c)  All commercial businesses as currently defined in subsection (a) of this section, and currently operating in the city, shall have 60 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived to comply with its provisions. 
(d)  All new commercial businesses, except lawyers and those businesses considered a home occupancy enterprise which begin operation after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, shall comply with this section as a condition precedent to the issuance of an occupation tax certificate. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the president of a corporation, which is domiciled in city, to comply with this section. If a foreign corporation not domiciled in the city, it shall be the responsibility of its local manager to comply with this section. In all other cases, the owner of the business shall furnish the information required under this section. 
(f)  Any person who shall cease operating the business for which a code number has been issued shall notify the city or its designee, in writing, within ten days of ceasing business. 
(g)  It shall be the responsibility of the president of the corporation, local manager, or owner of a business to notify the city or its designee of any changes in personnel to be notified in the event of an emergency. This notification will be made in writing within ten days of the effective date of the change. 
(h)  The county police department shall be responsible for enforcement. 
(i)  Any person violating this section by not posting the decal/code number, or not keeping the list of names current, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor with the payment of a $25.00 fine. This subsection shall not apply to lawyers. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-10) 
Sec. 14-11. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
The registration and the assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses or practitioners with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-11) 
Sec. 14-12. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city or its designee and that line of business being noted by the city or its designee upon the business occupation tax certificate which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-12) 
Sec. 14-13. - The number of businesses considered operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one store or place, each store, location, outlet, or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-13) 
Sec. 14-14. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain an occupation tax certificate or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-14) 
Sec. 14-15. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to pertinent general state and local laws and ordinances. The payment of any tax levied herein shall not constitute a grant or authorization to engage in a business, profession, or trade; nor shall any such payment constitute a waiver of any regulation, ordinance, or rule that otherwise might apply. Except as provided for herein, the tax or fees so levied shall be in addition to any other tax or charge as may be imposed. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-15) 
Sec. 14-16. - When tax due and payable; penalties. 
(a)  Any registration and occupation tax levied hereunder shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by April 1 of each year, and be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in subsections (c), (d), and (e) of this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, occupation taxes and the flat fee for lawyers shall be due and payable on December 31 of the year in which the tax is incurred. Any lawyer failing to pay the occupation tax and flat fee by April 1 of the year following the year that the tax was incurred shall be considered delinquent and shall be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in subsections (d) and (e) of this section. 
(b)  On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city, the certificate shall be delinquent if payment is not received within 30 days of first commencing operations and a penalty shall be imposed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, occupation taxes and the flat fee for lawyers beginning business after January 1 of the occupation tax year shall be due and payable on December 31 of the year in which the tax is incurred. Any lawyer failing to pay the occupation tax before April 1 of year following the year in which the tax was incurred shall be considered delinquent and a penalty shall be imposed. 
(c)  If any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration, fails to file returns, obtain registrations or pay taxes when due, or who is found to have violated other provisions of this chapter as herein specified, such offender shall, upon conviction by the judge of the municipal court, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, either or both in the discretion of the municipal court judge. This subsection shall not apply to lawyers. 
(d)  There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to pay the occupation tax and flat fee as provided herein. The penalty for failure to make any payment required within this chapter shall be assessed in the amount of not more than ten percent of the flat fee and occupation tax determined to be due and owing under the provisions of this chapter for the first 30 days or fraction thereof of delinquency and an additional penalty not to exceed 1.5 percent of the flat fee and occupation tax for each additional month or fraction thereof of delinquency. 
(e)  In addition to the above remedies, the sheriff or tax commissioner may proceed to collect delinquent sums in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(f)  Dates. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, the following deadlines are applicable: 
(1)  Final returns or applications for renewal of occupation tax certificates are due not later than March 31 or on the date specified by the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee. The City of Peachtree Corners or its designee may establish different due dates for the various tax classes, however in no event shall the date be set prior to March 31. 
(2)  The amount of occupational tax for the current year shall be payable on January 1 and shall become delinquent if not paid by April 1 of that year. The city or its designee may establish a different date other than January 1 for the current year occupation tax; if a different date is established, the tax shall become delinquent if not paid within 90 days of the due date. 
(3)  Final payment of underpaid prior year's tax is due not later than April 1 of the ensuing year. 
(4)  Applications by newly established businesses are due prior to commencing business operations, and payments are due not later than 30 days from filing of the application and return. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-16; Ord. No. 2015-12-61, § 2, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-17. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intra or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. In the case where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments; and 
(3)  Occupation tax payments made to other jurisdictions. 
(b)  Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-17) 
Sec. 14-18. - Location of business; applicability of certificate. 
An occupation tax certificate granted under this chapter shall apply only to the location, owner and the business lines included within the certificate. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-18) 
Sec. 14-19. - Change of location. 
Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the city or its designee in writing in the format specified of the move and the new address no later than the day of moving. Upon surrender of the original occupation tax certificate to the city, and upon submission of the required information, a new certificate will be issued for the new location as long as the new location conforms to the zoning or fire codes and other applicable regulations of the city and county. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-19) 
Sec. 14-20. - Transfer of occupation tax certificates. 
Occupation tax certificates shall not be transferable, except for a change in location, and a transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the termination of the business and the establishment of a new business. A new occupation tax certificate shall be required for the new owner of the business. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-20) 
Sec. 14-21. - Occupation tax certificate qualifications. 
(a)  No occupation tax certificate required by this chapter shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or a registered resident alien. Where the owner-applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers, and majority stockholders. 
(b)  Where an applicant is a corporation, a certificate will be issued jointly to the corporation, president or chief executive officer, and to the majority stockholder. Where the applicant is a partnership, the certificate may be issued to a partner or general partner. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-21) 
Sec. 14-22. - Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose. 
Businesses owned by nonprofit organizations and operated for charitable purposes may apply annually for an exemption from the occupation tax. Such application shall be in the format required by the city or its designee, and shall contain such supplemental information, including without limitation, a copy of the organization's approval of exemption from federal income taxation, as may be necessary. The exemption shall be effective for that taxable year. No enterprise on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this chapter shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 80 percent or more of the entire gross receipts from said business are devoted to direct support of such charitable purpose. Any number of locations and lines of business may be granted such exemption; provided, however, that a separate application shall be required for each location and line of business for which an exemption is sought. The exemption from the occupation tax shall not extend to the flat fee, except, however, that any single organization, in any tax year, shall be required to pay the flat fee only on the first certificate obtained, and any additional certificates for other lines or locations shall be issued without charge. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-22) 
Sec. 14-23. - Exemption for disabled veterans. 
Any business majority owned by a disabled veteran, or any practitioner who is a disabled veteran, as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 43-12-2, shall be exempt from the payment of any flat fee and occupation tax levied herein; provided, however, that this exemption shall apply to only one business or occupation taxed hereunder, and shall not apply to any other businesses or locations. Such disabled veterans shall be required to file the necessary application forms, and obtain a tax certificate. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-23) 
Sec. 14-24. - Yard sales, garage sales, bake sales. 
A private individual or group may conduct, not more than once in any six-month period, a sale of used items, baked goods or other food items, and which shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter except as herein provided. Such events shall be limited to three consecutive days per event and subject to any health, zoning or other regulatory ordinances as may be in effect, and shall be subject to regulatory fees. The exclusion granted in this section shall not be available to flea market operators, promoters, performances or other such enterprises or any other business-related operations. The city or its designee shall promulgate the necessary administrative regulations to implement this section. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-24) 
Sec. 14-25. - Evidence of state registration required, if applicable; state registration to be displayed; other registrations or permits. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed under title 43 of the state license examining boards shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city certificate can be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous public place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(c)  It shall in every case be the duty of the owner or responsible business official to ascertain that all applicable registrations, permits, or licenses are obtained and are properly issued and in force, and are displayed as required. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-25) 
Sec. 14-26. - Evidence of qualification required, if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, fire inspections, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or other regulatory matters shall first, before the issuance of a city certificate, show evidence of such qualification; and it shall further be required that all such qualifications or certificates be maintained and kept current so long as the business remains in operation. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before the certificate is issued. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-26) 
Sec. 14-27. - Police permits required before issuance of tax certificate. 
No occupation tax certificate shall be issued to businesses subject to city regulation until a background criminal investigation has been completed and a work permit is issued by the city or its designee, as prescribed in article XIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-27) 
Sec. 14-28. - Liability of officer and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation taxes provided in this chapter shall be required to make application for and obtain the necessary certificate for such business prescribed in this chapter, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a certificate. Every person commencing business in the city or its designee after January 1 of each year shall likewise pay the required fees or taxes and obtain the registration herein provided for on or before the date required. Failure to comply with provisions shall make the officer or agent subject to penalties provided therefore. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this section shall not apply to lawyers. Lawyers shall not be required to apply for or obtain an occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-28) 
Sec. 14-29. - When registration and returns due; penalties. 
(a)  Each registration period and tax certificate shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. Failure to make application for and obtain, where applicable, an appropriate occupation tax certificate, or make estimated or final returns of gross receipts when due, shall be subject to a penalty fee of 100 percent of the flat fee for each year or fractional part thereof for which the return or application is overdue. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties herein provided, and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The tax certificate provided for herein shall be issued by the city or its designee and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a certificate shall fail to pay taxes when due or obtain the required certificate, subject to this chapter, such offender shall, upon having been convicted in a municipal court, be punished as provided for in section 14-32. This subsection shall not apply to lawyers. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-29) 
Sec. 14-30. - Transient or nonresident business owners. 
Any transient or nonresident person, firm, or corporation doing business within the city shall have in their possession proof of registration from where the business is domiciled upon his person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in the business and the person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement or police officer. This section shall not apply to lawyers. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-30) 
Sec. 14-31. - Certificate expiration; renewal; transfer. 
(a)  All occupation tax certificates granted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on March 31 of each year. 
(b)  Certificate holders who desire to renew their certificates shall file an application with all applicable fees with the city or its designee on the form provided for renewal of the occupation tax certificate for the following year. Applications for renewal must be filed before the established due date of each year, with payment of tax being due on April 1. No renewal shall be granted after April 1 unless another date has been specified by the city or its designee. Applications for renewal received after April 1 may be subject to regulations for the granting of occupation tax certificates as if no previous occupation tax certificate had been held in this city. 
(c)  All occupation tax certificates granted hereunder shall be for the full calendar year and are not subject to proration. 
(d)  Transfer of certificate shall be in accordance with section 14-20. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the renewal applicant to obtain renewal permits as may be required by this chapter or any other ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-31) 
Sec. 14-32. - Penalty of chapter violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction before the judge of the recorder's court, be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisoned, not exceeding 60 days of imprisonment, either or both, in the discretion of the municipal court judge. Citations issued by the city or its designee shall be heard before the municipal court of the city. This section shall not apply to lawyers. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-32) 
Sec. 14-33. - Businesses not covered by this chapter. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-33) 
Sec. 14-34. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
This occupation tax is not levied upon the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-34) 
Sec. 14-35. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the gross receipts of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and the tax will be calculated at the rate of the dominant line of business conducted by the business identified on a form to be furnished by the city or its designee. Where more than one business is operated at a location, each business shall file a separate occupation tax return. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-35) 
Sec. 14-36. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of audits, judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner to any person not needing such information for the discharge of official duties, the amount of gross receipts or related financial information disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this chapter. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as "employees." Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials, statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state or of the United States, and other local governments. Any employee of the city who violates the confidentiality of this information shall be subject to discharge or other disciplinary action. Ownership, identity of registered agent, business locations and other nonfinancial data shall not be confidential. Tax deficiency, failure to file returns or pay taxes when due shall not be confidential. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-36) 
Sec. 14-37. - Inspections of books and records; penalty for understating financial information. 
At any time during the taxable year, or for up to two years thereafter, the city or its designee may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. Such officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the county and upon demand of the city or its designee such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within ten business days. Failure of submission of such books or records within the time required shall be grounds for revocation of the tax certificate currently existing. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city or its designee at its discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of not more than 125 percent of the difference between the tax initially paid and the tax finally determined to be due may be imposed. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-37) 
Sec. 14-38. - Tax certificate to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books, or upon submission of false or incomplete information. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay such occupation tax or any final installment or part thereof before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to make any of such returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true and complete return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon the submission of false information, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books or records as provided for within this chapter, any business or occupation tax certificate granted by the city or its designee under this chapter shall be suspended or revoked. The city or its designee shall notify the responsible business official of any such violation, omission, or infraction, and of its intended sanction. Further, no new occupation tax certificate shall be granted by the city for a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city or its designee in accordance with provisions found in section 14-37. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-38) 
Sec. 14-39. - Administration and appeals. 
Appeals regarding tax certificate decisions of the city and appeals regarding work permit decisions shall be before the city mayor and council or its designee. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-39) 
Sec. 14-40. - Notices. 
For purposes of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by mail, as of three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-40) 
Sec. 14-41. - Effect of failure to comply with chapter provisions; continuing in business after tax certificate revocation. 
Any person, their managers, agents or employees, who fail to surrender a tax certificate after its revocation or suspension, who conduct business in such the city after the certificate for such business has been revoked as above; any persons, their managers, agents or employees hereby required to make returns, showing the amount of gross receipts and who fail to make such returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, or refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees or representatives of the county request such inspection, during the business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-41) 
Sec. 14-42. - Execution for delinquent tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city or its designee, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of such tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for such tax, which such execution shall bear interest at the rate specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21 from the date when such tax becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person, partnership or corporation liable for such tax, all as provided by the ordinances of the county and the laws of the state. The lien of such occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the sheriff or tax commissioner of the county upon the property of defendant located in such county or in any other location if no property remains in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of such execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and the Charter of such county and the laws of the state, and the defendant in such execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by ordinance or the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city or its designee against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full, together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-42) 
Sec. 14-43. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the governing authority to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-43) 
Sec. 14-44. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city or its designee to see that the provisions of this chapter relating to occupation taxes are observed, and, where applicable, to summon all violators of the same to appear before the city municipal court. It is hereby the further duty of the city or its designee to inspect all certificates issued by city, along with the books and records of the various businesses holding certificates, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the certificate held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. It shall be the duty of the county chief of police, or his designee, to make diligent background investigations and searches of records of criminal conviction in those cases as required in this chapter; and to furnish timely information to the city or its designee in furthering the administration of these provisions. The county chief of police, or his designee, shall also have the authority to check businesses within the city for proper certificates issued by the city, and to issue citations for violations of thereof. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-44) 
Sec. 14-45. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing authority. 
This chapter shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-45) 
Sec. 14-46. - Requirement of public hearing. 
The governing authority shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax. Furthermore, the governing authority shall hold one or more public hearings in any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-46) 
Sec. 14-47. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this chapter between specific and general provisions, it is the intention that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-47) 
Sec. 14-48. - Display of certificate at place of business. 
Any occupational tax certificate issued under this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place of the business of the licensee and within public view. Such occupational tax certificate shall be shown to any appointee of the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-93, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Secs. 14-49—14-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, adopted May 16, 2017, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 14-68, 14-69, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to Temporary Outdoor Activity and derived from Ord. of July 1, 2012, §§ 18-71, 18-72. 

Sec. 14-68. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Film production includes motion picture, television, video, educational film, and photography. 
Producer means any person responsible for planning, producing and conducting a special event. 
Special event means any organized for-profit or nonprofit activity having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education which (i) takes place on public property or (ii) takes place on private property, but requires special public services and which is permitted by the city under this article. Gatherings or activities that take place on private property and that make no use of city streets, other than for lawful parking, are not subject to the provisions of this article, but shall comply with all other requirements specified by ordinance as to the use of residential property. No special event other than film production, as defined above, shall be allowed to exceed six days in any 30-day consecutive period of time. 
By way of example, special events include, but are not limited to; fairs, tours, grand opening celebrations, races, parades, marches, rallies, assemblies, festivals, film production, concerts, holiday celebrations, bicycle runs, and block parties. Private social gatherings which will make no use of city streets other than for lawful parking are not included. Garage sales, lawn sales, rummage sales, flea market sales, or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property are not included. 
A parade, march, or procession subject to this article is defined to be a group or number of people or vehicles, or the combination thereof, consisting of five or more vehicles and ten or more persons, or a combination of three or more vehicles and five or more persons, proceeding or moving in a body or in concert along the streets or sidewalks of the city. Specifically excepted from this definition are funeral processions. 
Special event permit , when used hereafter, shall mean and include film production special event permit unless specifically stated otherwise. 
Vendor means any person or persons or entity who engages in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary itinerant basis on any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way as an authorized participant of the special event. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 14-69. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of any of the sections of this article or any part thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 14-70. - Permit conditions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a special event to occur in the city without having first obtained a permit for such special event. 
(b)  All permits issued pursuant to this article shall be temporary and shall not vest in the holder any permanent property rights in a permit. 
(c)  The location of a special event must comply with all existing zoning requirements of the city, and there must be sufficient lawful parking available. An application for a permit shall be subject to review of the director of the department of community development or designee to determine compliance with zoning requirements. Administrative exceptions are subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(d)  Parades, marches, and processions shall follow such designated route or routes as may be on file with the city manager and shall be preceded by a police vehicle. 
(e)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, a special event is subject to and must comply with any and all other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 14-71. - Application. 
(a)  The producer of a special event shall make application for a permit for the special event on a form prescribed by the city. 
(b)  An application for a special event permit, other than a film production special event permit, shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the date the special event is scheduled to take place; provided, however, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the special event. 
(c)  An application for a film production special event permit shall be filed at least five days prior to the date the filming is scheduled to take place; provided, however, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the filming and provided further no more than one such permit shall be issued quarterly for any one residential location and of no more than 14 consecutive days in duration, unless previously requested and approved by the city manager. 
(d)  Each application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as may be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(e)  All producers of a special event shall be properly identified on the application; provided, however, a special event permit shall be issued only to an individual person. Therefore, if a group, organization, association, or other entity is producing the special event, a designated agent of the producer shall be named for purposes of the permit, and this individual shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements of this article and other applicable laws. 
(f)  The application for a special event permit, other than a film production special event permit, shall include the following information: 
(1)  Purpose of the special event; 
(2)  Name, address, e-mail address, and telephone number of the sponsoring entity or person in addition to the person named in subsection (d) of this section; 
(3)  Proposed date, location, and hours of operation, but in no event earlier than 8:00 a.m. or later than 11:00 p.m. in residential zoned locations and in no event earlier than 8:00 a.m. or later than 12:00 midnight in commercial zoned locations; 
(4)  Schedule of proposed activities; 
(5)  Projected attendance at the special event; 
(6)  Plans for parking, restroom facilities, and sanitation concerns; 
(7)  Plan for crowd and traffic control. 
In addition, the city or any of its departments may require any other information deemed reasonably necessary to determine that the permit meets the requirements of this article. 
(g)  The application for a film production special event permit shall include the following information: 
(1)  Purpose of the filming and the type of production; 
(2)  Location manager or production manager name, address, e-mail address, and telephone number of the sponsoring entity or person in addition to the person named in subsection (a) of this section; 
(3)  Proposed date, location, and hours of operation, but in no event earlier than 8:00 a.m. or later than 11:00 p.m. in residential zoned locations and in no event earlier than 8:00 a.m. or later than 12:00 midnight in commercial zoned locations; 
(4)  Proposed schedule of filming activities; 
(5)  Full disclosure of special effects, i.e., fire, explosives, gunfire; 
(6)  Full disclosure of nondomestic animals and if there will be the consumption or sale of alcohol on film site; 
(7)  Site plan - showing production location and base camp; 
(8)  Proof of permission of property owner for use of the production location and base camp; 
(9)  Notification of neighbors and businesses affected by production location. 
In addition, any film project that occurs in a residential location and involves any of the four items below; will require a meeting with the special event/film permit review staff a minimum of one week prior to the submission of the film permit application: 
(1)  Outdoor filming; 
(2)  Film project that lasts three or more days; 
(3)  Full and partial lane and street closures; 
(4)  Requested variances to any City of Peachtree Corners ordinance. 
(h)  Two copies of a to-scale survey of the proposed location for the special event shall accompany the application and shall accurately depict the proposed location of the special event, all buildings, structures, parking, and curb cuts permanently located on the site. The survey shall further show the proposed temporary location of any and all buildings, structures, and parking to be associated with the proposed special event. Moreover, the entire location shall comply with the city's standards for setbacks. 
(i)  Each city department and/or agency whose services would be impacted by the special event shall review the application and recommend in writing any conditions or restrictions deemed necessary. Special conditions or restrictions recommended by the city manager, or his designee, shall become a condition of the permit. 
(j)  The following standards shall be considered in reviewing the application: 
(1)  A special event permit may be issued only after an adequate plan for crowd and traffic control, as well as security has been presented, and, when deemed necessary, employment of off-duty, uniformed Gwinnett County Police Officer(s) shall be utilized. If Gwinnett County Police Officer(s) are not available, then a P.O.S.T. certified police officer(s) may be utilized after they have been verified by the city and obtained by the producer. 
(2)  A special event permit may be issued only after an adequate plan for fire inspection/prevention and/or fire code enforcement and, when deemed necessary, employment of off-duty, uniformed fire personnel has been verified by the city and obtained by the producer. 
(3)  A special event permit may be issued only after an adequate EMS plan and, when deemed necessary, employment of off-duty medics who are state-certified EMT or paramedics has been verified by the city and obtained by the producer. 
(4)  A special event permit may be issued only after adequate waste disposal facilities have been determined by the city and obtained by the producer. The producer shall be required to clean the right-of-way or public property of rubbish and debris, returning it to its pre-special event condition, within 24 hours of the conclusion of the special event. If the producer fails to clean up such refuse, cleanup shall be arranged by the city, and the costs incurred for this service shall be charged to the applicant. 
(5)  A special event permit granted by the city may provide for the city to close designated streets and intersections to allow use of the public right-of-way for the special event during designated hours and days. 
(6)  The sound level of any special event must comply with the city noise ordinance (section 38-81 et seq.). 
(k)  After all of the requested information pertaining to the special event has been submitted, reviewed, and approved, a permit may be issued upon payment of all applicable fees and costs. The special event permit, as well as any other permits required in conjunction with the special event, shall be posted on site during the special event. 
(l)  Should a permit be denied, the producer shall be notified in writing of the denial. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 14-72. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Each city department and/or agency whose services would be impacted by the special event shall itemize the departmental activity required for the special event, showing the hourly rate and the actual and reasonable total cost. The "total costs to the city" shall be the sum of each department's costs. The city manager shall determine and calculate a reasonable fee to reimburse the city for its services. 
(b)  A cash bond may be determined to be appropriate by the city, and in this event the city shall advise the producer of the amount, and this bond shall be remitted to the city before the special event permit is issued. 
(c)  The initial permit fee shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of the permit and in any event no later than 72 hours prior to the date of the event. 
(d)  The fees required in this article shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other applicable ordinances or regulations. 
(e)  No producer of any special event, except as may otherwise be provided herein, shall be exempt from the payment of the appropriate fees and charges required under this article. 
(f)  Should a producer desire to have use of any equipment owned by the city, such as barriers, traffic cones, and the like, an additional fee, as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, shall be paid so as to cover the reasonable cost for use of the equipment, as well as the delivery and return of the items by city employees. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the producer of any special event associated with and benefiting the cause of a charitable organization, recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, shall be excused by the city manager from the permit fee requirement, but may be required to post the bond described in subsection (b) of this section. Criterion to be considered in determining the appropriateness of requiring a bond shall include the impact of the event on the cost of services to be provided by the city and on the general public health, welfare, or safety of the city. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 14-73. - Liability. 
(a)  At the discretion of the city, prior to issuance of a permit, the producer shall provide to the city proof of comprehensive liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured. The insurance requirement is a minimum of $300,000.00 personal injury per person, $1,000,000.00 maximum, and $100,000.00 property damage against all claims arising from permits issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The producer of any special event shall provide a written agreement in a form satisfactory to the city providing the producer shall defend, pay, and save harmless the city, its officers, employees, and agents from liability of all personal or property damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event and from any and all claims, attorney fees or lawsuits for personal injury or property damage arising from or in any way connected to the special event. The agreement shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form. 
(c)  The city, its officials, employees, or agents shall not incur any liability or responsibility for any injury or damage to any person in any way connected to the use for which the permit has been issued. The city, its officials, employees, or agents shall not be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reasons of inspections performed, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any use of the right-of-way or other public property. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 14-74. - Vendors of food and merchandise. 
(a)  The sale of food and/or merchandise by vendors shall be allowed as a component of a special event provided each vendor is authorized to participate in writing by the producer of the event and provided further each vendor shall be subject to all conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the producer and submitted as part of the application for a permit. 
(b)  The producer of a special event shall have sole responsibility and control of all food and merchandise vendors as a component of a special event and to designate the location and activities of such vendors. 
(c)  Authorized vendors of the producer, providing food and/or merchandise, shall not be required to obtain a separate vendor permit to operate during the special event. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, food vendors authorized by the producer shall be required to comply with rules and regulations of the county health department as to the preparation and service of food. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 14-75. - Vendors of alcoholic beverages. 
The dispensing of alcoholic beverages, by sale or otherwise, shall be allowed as a component of a special event provided each vendor is authorized to participate by the producer and provided further each vendor dispensing alcoholic beverages shall have been duly licensed by the state and the city or another local governing authority and shall further have complied with all provisions of this Code relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages off-premises at an authorized function or event. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 14-76. - Miscellaneous provisions regarding vendors. 
(a)  Each vendor authorized by the producer of the special event shall prominently display on his or her person a badge provided by the producer and identifying the vendor as an authorized participant in the special event which shall bear the signature of the producer or his designated agent. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vendor not authorized by the producer as provided herein to engage in any business within a distance of 100 yards of the special event from one hour before the start of the special event, and until one hour after the special event. 
(c)  A special event permit granted by the city may provide for the city to close designated streets and intersections to allow use of the public right-of-way for the special event during designated hours and days. The producer shall bear all responsibility for having all vendors remove any structures and all trash and debris from the designated area by not later than the time stated under the permit for re-opening of all streets. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 14-77. - Other permits. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to allow the city's departments and staffs to review an application for a special event permit outside the regular ordinance standards in order to determine how disruptive a special event may be to the ordinary use of parks, public streets, rights-of-way, or sidewalks and to make recommendations and allowances. Administrative guidelines issued by the department of community development shall be followed by the city in allowing specified signage and advertising which may not be in compliance with existing zoning ordinances for banners and vendors. Upon approval by the city manager, or his designee, recommendations and allowances made shall become conditions of the permit to be followed and carried out by the producer. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  The holder of a resident or nonresident license to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages shall obtain an off-premises license and event permit for pouring alcoholic beverages for an authorized function or event as provided in chapter 6 of this Code if he is authorized to participate by the producer; and 
(2)  A permit allowing fireworks shall be approved and permitted by the chief of the county's fire department or his designee. Further, the person to be performing the firework display shall be pyrotechnics licensed and qualified in the state. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 14-78. - Denial or revocation of a special event permit. 
(a)  Reasons for denial of a special event permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The special event will unnecessarily disrupt traffic within the city beyond practical solution; 
(2)  The special event will interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants; 
(3)  The location of the special event will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses or residents; 
(4)  The special event will cause unnecessary disruption of public services which would unreasonably impact the remainder of the city; 
(5)  The application contains incomplete or false information; and 
(6)  The producer fails to comply with any terms required by this article. 
(b)  Reasons for revocation of a special events permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  False or incomplete information on the application; 
(2)  Failure to comply with all terms and conditions of the permit; 
(3)  Failure to arrange for or adequately remit all fees, deposits, insurance or bonds to the city; and 
(4)  Existence of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency as the city determines, in its sole discretion, to be an impact upon the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  Further, a special event permit may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the city, if the chief of the police department, the chief of the fire department, or their designees, determines that the health, welfare, or safety of the public may be endangered. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 14-79. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any producer whose special event permit application has been denied or revoked may request in writing a review of this decision by the city manager. This request must be in writing and received by the city manager within five days of the permit denial or revocation. 
(b)  The city manager shall review the application and reasons for the denial or revocation of the special event permit and shall issue a decision, within five days, whether to uphold or reverse the previous decision and grant or reinstate the permit with such additional conditions as the city manager may deem justified by the evidence. 
(c)  Should the producer be dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager, an appeal may be filed with the city council within five days of the decision of the city manager. The council shall set a hearing date within 30 days of receiving an appeal. At the hearing, evidence may be submitted by the producer addressing why the permit should have been granted or not revoked and by the city manager addressing why the permit was denied or revoked. The city council shall determine whether the denial or revocation of the permit is justified, or it may reverse the previous decision and grant or reinstate the permit with such additional conditions as deemed justified by the evidence. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-92, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Secs. 14-80—14-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POOL ROOMS 

Sec. 14-97. - Applicability of article. 
Pursuant to the authority granted to cities under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 8, the city mayor and council hereby declares that such title and chapter, regulating operators of billiard rooms, shall not apply within the city and further declares that the provisions of this article shall govern the operation of pool rooms within the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-81) 
Sec. 14-98. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pool or billiard includes any game played on a table surrounded by an elastic edge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue. 
Poolroom means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of pool or billiard. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-82) 
Sec. 14-99. - Occupation tax certificate required; application. 
(a)  All persons, firms or corporations desiring to operate a poolroom shall, prior to commencing such business, trade or profession, comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the governing authority regulating the operation of poolrooms. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the information required on all occupation tax returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  Name and residence address of the owner-applicant. 
(2)  If the owner-applicant is a corporation, the names of the officers; along with the name and address of the agent for service of process. 
(3)  The name of the manager; and the name of all shareholders holding 20 or more percent of any class of corporate stock. If the manager changes, the owner-applicant must furnish to the city or its designee and the county police department, the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change in management. 
(4)  Failure to furnish required information, and in the form designated, shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. 
(5)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(6)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provision of the article, and after lapse of the time for appeal, or upon the adjudication of the appeal with decision rendered in favor of the county, the applicant may not reapply for an occupation tax certificate for at least 120 days from the final date of denial. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-83) 
Sec. 14-100. - Work permits required. 
Prior to the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, a work permit shall be required for the owners, managers and employees. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-84) 
Sec. 14-101. - Applicant disqualifications. 
(a)  No occupation tax certificate shall be granted to any person who has had any occupation tax certificate or employee work permit issued under the police powers of the city or the county previously revoked within two years prior to filing the current application. 
(b)  The city or its designee may decline to issue a certificate when any person having an ownership or management interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as herein set forth for the certificate holder. 
(c)  All establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the certificate holder or owner may be served. This person shall be a resident of the county. The certificate holder shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, in the city or its designee in such form as may be prescribed. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-85) 
Sec. 14-102. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  No gambling or other games of chance shall be permitted in a poolroom. 
(b)  All establishments which have three or more pool tables shall have a manager or designated employee on duty during operating hours whose responsibility is the operation of the pool tables. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-86) 
Sec. 14-103. - Inspection of registered establishments. 
Sworn officers of the county police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments registered under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. Such inspection shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article. This section is not intended to limit the authority of the city or its designee or of any other county officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the Code. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-87) 
Sec. 14-104. - Unlawful or prohibited activities. 
No occupation tax certificate shall be granted to any person under the age of 18 or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate, and has been released from parole or probation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-88) 
Secs. 14-105—14-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 

Sec. 14-122. - Exemption. 
Limousines and limousine carriers, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 40-1-162, are exempt from regulation by the provisions in this article. 
Sec. 14-123. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined elsewhere in this Code, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Open stand means locations on the streets of the city, including the locations on the premises of Gwinnett Transit or MARTA stations that may be used by any taxicab on a nonexclusive, first come, first served basis, and not by private vehicles or other public conveyances. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle used to transport passengers for a fee or fare and which is fitted with a taximeter or other device that is used to compute such fee or fare. 
Taxicab business means an entity with its primary business being the operation of motor vehicles used to transport passengers for a fee or fare. 
Taximeter means an instrument or device attached to a motor vehicle and designed to measure the distance traveled by such vehicle, or an instrument or device attached to a motor vehicle and designed to compute and indicate the fare or fee to be charged to the passengers. 
Vehicle for hire means a taxicab or other motorized passenger-carrying vehicle that is used to transport passengers for a fee. Vehicles regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission, non-emergency medical transport vehicles, and passenger vans with a capacity of 15 or more passengers shall not be considered a vehicle for hire. A vehicle registration card ("cabcard") issued by the state department of revenue shall be considered prima facie evidence that a limousine or van is not a vehicle for hire subject to this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-101) 
Sec. 14-124. - Doing business defined. 
Any person shall be deemed doing business in the city under this article if such person is picking up passengers, responding to calls for service, or soliciting business in any way in the city and accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the vehicle is used or by contract for the use of any motor vehicle or other vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers. Any person shall also be deemed as doing business in the city under this article if such person has established a business relationship with independent contractors or operates vehicles for hire on such person's own behalf for the purpose of transporting passengers in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-102) 
Sec. 14-125. - Compliance; zoning. 
No person shall conduct the business of operating vehicles for hire in the city without first meeting the requirements of this article. Vehicle for hire businesses shall meet all applicable zoning, development, and building code requirements for the use of land and structures located within the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-103) 
Sec. 14-126. - Business permit holder's responsibilities for violations. 
Business permit holders are responsible for violations of this article by their employees, lessees, subcontractors, and independent contractors, including drivers and dispatchers. An occupation tax certificate or business permit may be suspended or revoked for violation of this article by the business permit holder's employees, lessees, subcontractors, and independent contractors in accordance with section 14-136. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-104) 
Sec. 14-127. - Notice. 
For the purposes of this article, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by mail within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-105) 
Sec. 14-128. - Hearings. 
(a)  Decisions of the city or its designee that adversely affect or aggrieve any applicant or occupation tax certificate holder under this article may within five business days be appealed to the city manager. Decisions of the county police department that adversely affect or aggrieve any taxicab business permit holder or taxicab drivers permit holder may within five business days be appealed to the county chief of police or the county chief of police's designated representative. Any applicant or occupation tax certificate holder who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final decision of the city manager or his designee or any applicant or permit holder who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final decision of the county chief of police or the county chief of police's designated representative may request an appeal to the city mayor and council. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed with the city municipal clerk, along with an appeal fee and within 15 days after the final decision. The appeal fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(b)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing the written petition, unless a continuance of such hearing is agreed to by the appellant and the city manager. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. 
(c)  The findings of the city mayor and council shall be forwarded to the city manager after the conclusion of the hearing. It shall be the duty of the city manager to notify the appellant of the action of the mayor and council or its designee. 
(d)  The findings of the city hearing officer shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; 
(2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole; or 
(3)  Unreasonable. 
(e)  The findings of the city mayor and council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of mailing of decision to the appellant of said finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. An aggrieved party shall have all other remedies provided by law or at equity to all ordinances. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-106) 
Sec. 14-129. - Audits. 
Each business and individual operating under the provisions of this article shall be subject to audit upon reasonable notice by the city or it designee. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-107) 
Sec. 14-130. - Occupational tax certificates, in-city businesses. 
In addition to any other requirements with respect to the issuance of occupational tax certificates found elsewhere in this Code, the following requirements apply to taxicab businesses having a verifiable dispatch location within the city: 
(1)  An applicant for an occupational tax certificate is required to provide information showing its qualifications on a form provided by the city office. 
(2)  Applicants must be approved by the city or its designee, and such clearance shall include a background investigation and fingerprinting of the applicant. 
(3)  No taxicab business permit shall be issued to any taxicab business owning or leasing less than one vehicle. 
(4)  All permits required by the provisions of this article shall expire on the same date as the expiration of the occupation tax certificate. 
(5)  If the applicant is not a sole proprietor or individual then all partners, officers or managers of the legal entity shall be required to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(6)  All applicants must: 
a.  Be at least 21 years of age; 
b.  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by United States Immigration Customs Enforcement; 
c.  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five years previous to the date of application, for the violation of any of the following offenses of the state, of any other state, or of the United States: any felony; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; criminal solicitation to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection; attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection; any misdemeanor crime of violence or theft, any misdemeanor crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs or any crime involving moral turpitude. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant from applying for a permit; 
d.  Provide a verifiable dispatch location staffed by business agents or employees and have a published telephone number; 
e.  File applications for the initial permitting and inspection of the taxicabs, with a list of all drivers that will be scheduled for driver permitting, indicating whether drivers are business employees or contract drivers. A copy of each contract driver's insurance coverage must be included in the application; 
f.  Provide a copy of the applicant's rate schedule and the daily hours of operation; and 
g.  Provide the name, address and telephone number of a responsible individual residing in the county who will be the registered agent for the purpose of service of process or receipt of citations. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-108) 
Sec. 14-131. - Business permits. 
(a)  An applicant for a business permit is required to provide information showing its qualifications on a form provided by the county police department. 
(b)  Applicants must be approved by the county police chief or his designee, and such clearance shall include a background investigation and fingerprinting of the applicant. 
(c)  No business permit shall be issued to any business owning or leasing less than one vehicle. 
(d)  No business permit shall be issued to an applicant unless the applicant has a valid and current occupation tax certificate to do business issued by a city, county, or consolidated government in the state. 
(e)  All permits required by the provisions of this article shall expire on the same date as the expiration of the occupation tax certificate. 
(f)  If the applicant is not a sole proprietor or individual then all partners, officers or managers of the legal entity shall be required to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(g)  All applicants must: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age; 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by United States Immigration Customs Enforcement; 
(3)  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five years previous to the date of application, for the violation of any of the following offenses of the state, of any other state, or of the United States: any felony; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; criminal solicitation to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection; attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection; any misdemeanor crime of violence or theft, any misdemeanor crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs or any crime involving moral turpitude. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant from applying for a permit; 
(4)  Provide a verifiable dispatch location staffed by business agents or employees and have a published telephone number; 
(5)  File applications for the initial permitting and inspection of the taxicabs, with a list of all drivers that will be scheduled for driver permitting, indicating whether drivers are business employees or contract drivers. A copy of each contract driver's insurance coverage must be included in the application; 
(6)  Provide a copy of the applicant's rate schedule and the daily hours of operation; and 
(7)  Provide the name, address and telephone number of a responsible individual residing in the county who will be the registered agent for the purpose of service of process or receipt of citations. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-109) 
Sec. 14-132. - Insurance. 
(a)  All businesses and drivers permitted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall provide with their application, and shall maintain for the duration of the permit, a certificate of insurance showing proof of motor vehicle insurance covering public liability and property damage issued by a state approved insurer. Such insurance shall insure passengers and third persons against personal injury and property damage in amounts specified by the county police department's published rules and regulations. 
(b)  All permit holders must provide the county police chief or his designee with an annual certificate of insurance showing the existence of such policies of insurance as required by this article. The annual certificate of insurance must be provided to the county police chief or his designee 30 days prior to the expiration of any such insurance. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-110) 
Sec. 14-133. - Work permits. 
(a)  No person shall do business in the city as defined by section 14-124 without a valid work permit issued by the city or its designee. All drivers must have held a valid state driver's license for a minimum period of one continuous year prior to applying for a work permit pursuant to this article. No business shall employ or associate with, in any way, including independent contractors, any driver who has not first met the requirements of this article and been issued a valid work permit as authorized by this article. 
(b)  No work permit shall be issued to any person who is not employed by or represented by an approved business. All work permits shall expire on the drivers' birthday, and shall be renewed annually. A work permit shall only be good for one business which it was obtained for, if a driver works for more than one cab business he must have a work permit for each and every business the driver works for. 
(c)  Work permits must be posted on the dash or sun visor of the vehicle being driven so that it is visible from the passenger area. Businesses under this article are responsible for checking to ensure that each driver has a current work permit in the driver's possession and posted on the dash or sun visor of the vehicle being operated along with a visible vehicle inspection sticker. 
(d)  No request for a work permit will be processed unless the permit applicant presents a letter on business stationery to the county police department from a current business permit holder requesting issuance of a work permit to the named individual. The work permit applicant will further furnish information requested on a form to be provided by the county police department and submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation or fingerprinting. Work permit applicants must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration Customs Enforcement. 
(3)  Possess a current valid state driver's license. Such license must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-58 and 40-5-64. 
(4)  Exhibit a proficiency with the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers and obey lawful orders of police and others in lawful authority. 
(5)  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five years previous to the date of application, or for the violation of any of the following offenses of the state, of any other state or of the United States; any felony; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; child molestation; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempts to commit any of these offenses; any crime of violence or theft; any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs or moral turpitude. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
(6)  Have not been convicted of four or more moving traffic violations, or one more mandatory suspensions as defined by state law, within the 12-month period preceding the date of application or renewal of the application. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
(e)  Drivers are responsible for reporting any change in qualifications or other licensing or permitting information previously supplied to the county police department within ten days of the change. 
(f)  Any vehicle purporting to be a taxicab operating within the city shall be in compliance with all of the provisions of this article or shall be deemed to be in violation of this article. 
(g)  Replacement work permits will be issued within 30 days of original date upon the payment of one-half of the fee charged for work permits. After 30 days of original application date, a new application must be submitted. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-111) 
Sec. 14-134. - Determination of work permit or inspection fees; proration of license permit or inspection fees. 
Fees for vehicle inspections and taxicab driver permits under this article shall be recommended by the county police department for approval to the city. Fees required by this article are nonrefundable and are not prorated. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-112) 
Sec. 14-135. - Transfer and term of work permits and vehicle stickers. 
(a)  No business permit, work permit, occupation tax certificate or county inspection sticker for individual vehicles required by this article are transferable, except that the business permit shall be transferable pursuant to a purchase, gift, bequest, or acquisition of the stock or assets of a corporation to a person otherwise meeting the requirements of this article. If not renewed in compliance with this article, all permits, occupation tax certificates, and inspection stickers shall expire annually and be of no further force and effect. 
(b)  All county inspection stickers required by the provisions of this article shall expire on the date the state motor vehicle license tag expires. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-113) 
Sec. 14-136. - Suspension or revocation of occupation tax certificate, business permit, and work permit. 
(a)  Suspension. For reasons set forth below, an occupation tax certificate, a business permit, or a work permit issued under this article may be suspended until these conditions no longer exist: 
(1)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of an occupation tax certificate, business permit, or a work permit. 
(2)  Violation of any part of this article. 
(3)  For work permits only: have not been convicted of four or more moving traffic violations, or one or more mandatory suspensions as defined by state law, within the 12-month period preceding the date of application or renewal of the application. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
(4)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse, allowing a vehicle to operate in the unincorporated area of the county without a county inspection sticker, or allowing a vehicle to operate in the city without a county inspection sticker. 
(b)  Suspension for six months. For reasons set forth below, an occupation tax certificate, a business permit, or a work permit issued under this article may be suspended for six months: 
(1)  Charging a fare in excess of those fares on file with the county police department. 
(2)  Refusing to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, sex or sexual orientation. Sexual orientation shall mean the state of being heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual. Operators shall not refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. 
(c)  Revocation. 
(1)  An occupation tax certificate, a business permit, or a work permit issued under this article may be revoked where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information, or omits information, requested in the application. 
(2)  An occupation tax certificate, business permit, or work permit may be revoked for a violation of this article. If any permit holder's employees, lessees, subcontractors, or independent contractors are found to have violated this article on three or more occasions in a 12-month period, the business permit may be revoked. 
(3)  A business permit may also be revoked if any driver affiliated in any way with such permit is found to have violated this article on five or more occasions in a 12-month period. 
(d)  Citations. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the permit holder may also be cited for violating the provisions of this article, and such citations shall be prosecuted in accordance with the requirements of this article in the city municipal court. 
(e)  Requirements in addition to other laws. The requirements of this article shall be in addition to all other taxing and regulatory provisions of local, state or federal law and shall not authorize violations of any other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-114) 
Sec. 14-137. - Vehicle condition and equipment; inspection and inspection sticker. 
(a)  Drivers and businesses are responsible for maintaining each vehicle for hire in a clean and mechanically safe condition. The interior and exterior shall meet the requirements set out under inspection requirements outlined in this section. The city will provide forms to be used to meet the requirements of the inspection. Permits shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time and charged for each vehicle, which shall include a GCIC check for the driver/operator of said vehicle. The cost for a taxicab business to obtain a permit shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time and shall include a GCIC check for said owner. 
(b)  Drivers are not to drive and businesses are not to allow drivers to operate a vehicle without the required markings, a taximeter, top light and inspection sticker as outlined in this section. Required markings shall also include the name of the business painted or affixed by decal to the outside right and left front doors and the schedule of rates, including minimum fares, painted or affixed by decal to the outside right and left rear doors. Magnetic signs, or non-permanent signs or markings, shall be prohibited. Limousines are excepted from having markings, top lights, or taximeters; however, limousines are required to have a plate attached to their front or rear bumper indicating the business name. 
(c)  All vehicles for hire to be used by a business in the county shall be inspected annually by an approved ASE or Master ASE mechanic at the licensee's expense. Any attempt by the permit holder to fraudulently obtain the required inspection will result in being disqualified from operating such a business in the city and may result in the loss of the current occupation tax certificate and/or business permit. Once a vehicle meets the requirements of the inspection, the business permit holder shall bring proof of the inspection to the county police department and a sticker will be affixed to the left side of the rear window. The requirements that each vehicle must meet are as follows: 
(1)  Exterior inspection shall ensure that headlights, taillights, brake lights, directional signal lights, license plate lights, windshield wipers, all vehicle glass, window cranks or electric windows, doors and door locks, trunk lid, trunk, hood, door handles, exhaust system, bumpers, fenders, body, tires and other vehicle parts are in good condition and functioning properly. There shall be no tears or rust holes in the vehicle body and no loose pieces hanging from the vehicle body. There shall be no unrepaired body damage or any body condition which would create a safety problem or interfere with the operation of the vehicle. 
(2)  Interior inspection shall include the rearview mirror, steering wheel, foot brakes, parking brakes, air conditioning and heating systems to ensure each item is in good operating condition. The upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels and the trunk compartment shall be inspected to ensure there are no tears, that they are clean and have no offensive odors and that the trunk has sufficient space for passenger luggage. 
(3)  The vehicle shall have a spare tire, a jack, and a taximeter. The taximeter is to be positioned so that it is visible from the passenger compartment. Taximeter accuracy shall be verified according to the county police department's published rules and regulations for vehicles for hire. Limousines are excepted from having a taximeter. 
(4)  Vehicles shall be subject to random inspections at any time. Vehicles found to be substandard shall be removed from service immediately and shall be subject to immediate vehicle inspection sticker removal by the county police department. Additional inspection requirements will be outlined in the county police department's vehicle rules and regulations governing passenger-carrying vehicles. 
(d)  The inspection sticker is proof that the business met the permit and insurance requirements at the time of permit issuance and that the vehicle passed the last vehicle inspection. Each vehicle driver must have in the vehicle proof of current insurance coverage. Any business or vehicle letting insurance coverage lapse shall have the inspection stickers removed by the county police department and the business permit and/or occupation tax certificate suspended or revoked. Business operations shall not be resumed until proof of insurance is provided to the city or its designee (if a city business) or the police department (if an out-of-county business), the business permit and occupation tax certificate reinstated and the vehicles re-inspected and new inspection stickers issued by the police department. 
(e)  No business shall use any vehicle that has not been inspected and had the Gwinnett County inspection sticker affixed. 
(f)  Inspection stickers are not transferable from vehicle to vehicle and are nonrefundable if the vehicle is wrecked or taken out of service for any reason. The county police department must be notified within ten days of any vehicle being taken out of service; stickers from vehicles taken out of service must be turned in to the county police department. Stickers for replacement vehicles or additional vehicles are issued under the same procedures as original inspection stickers. 
(g)  The maximum number of inspection stickers issued in any calendar year shall not exceed 1,000. 
(h)  Inspection stickers shall expire on the date the state motor vehicle license tag expires. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-115) 
Sec. 14-138. - Miscellaneous requirements and regulations. 
(a)  All drivers shall maintain in each vehicle a suitable map or street guide of the metropolitan Atlanta and the city area or a functioning global positioning system (GPS). 
(b)  All drivers shall make a reasonable search of their vehicle immediately following each trip, and, upon discovery of any personal property left by a passenger in the vehicle, shall immediately notify the dispatcher so that the dispatcher can attempt to locate the owner to return the property. If the owner cannot be located within 24 hours, the dispatcher shall forward the property to the county police department. The county shall reflect the initial receipt of the property in a log that shall be maintained and available for inspection by the county police chief or his designee for 90 days. 
(c)  All drivers shall take the most direct route to a passenger's destination unless otherwise authorized or directed by the passenger. 
(d)  No driver shall refuse to accept a passenger, unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. All employees and independent contractors of companies permitted pursuant to this article shall be courteous and respectful to members of the public. 
(e)  No driver shall refuse to accept a passenger solely on the basis of that passenger's race, color, gender, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, age or disability. 
(f)  All drivers shall provide receipts upon request of a passenger, showing the amount of fare paid, the name of the business, the vehicle identification number, the number of passengers, and origin and termination location of trip. 
(g)  No driver shall refuse to transport a blind or disabled person or that person's guide or service dog. No driver shall charge any extra fee for the guide or service dog to accompany said blind or disabled person. 
(h)  All drivers shall practice good personal hygiene, and wear proper dress while operating a taxicab. Proper dress shall mean shoes (not sandals), ankle length pants, and a shirt or blouse with sleeves and a collar. Hats must be of the baseball style or a chauffeur's cap. Clothing must be clean and not visibly soiled. 
(i)  Business permit holders are responsible for ensuring that any driver who is affiliated in any way with such permit complies with the requirements of this article. In addition to being cited for a violation of this article, violations of this section may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(j)  Failure of a driver to comply with this article shall result in the issuance of a citation and/or the driver's arrest and the impoundment of the taxicab. 
(k)  No driver's work permit shall be issued to a driver not affiliated with a business properly permitted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-116) 
Sec. 14-139. - Trip sheets or logs. 
Drivers must maintain daily trip sheets or logs of all passengers, the time, place of entry, the destination of each passenger, the amount charged and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire. Trip sheets must be maintained in the vehicle for 48 hours and, thereafter, transferred to and maintained at the licensed business premises for a period of time to be specified by the county police department in that department's published rules and regulations for vehicles for hire. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-117) 
Sec. 14-140. - Drivers smoking, playing radios, etc. 
A driver while operating a vehicle for hire is not to smoke or play a radio or tape player if objected to by a passenger. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-118) 
Sec. 14-141. - Cruising and use of vehicle stands. 
Business permit holders under this article are responsible for ensuring that no driver participates in cruising. Cruising is defined as moving about the streets of the city for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or by personal command. Business permit holders shall ensure that their drivers use open stands on a nonexclusive, first come, first served basis. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-119) 
Sec. 14-142. - Call jumping. 
Businesses under this article shall not participate in nor allow their drivers to practice call jumping or the act of intercepting a passenger who has requested service from another business. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-120) 
Sec. 14-143. - Age of vehicles for hire, taxicabs and limousines. 
No vehicle having a vehicle age greater than eight years may be operated as a taxicab, vehicle for hire or limousine in the city. For the purposes of this section, the term "vehicle age" means the vehicle's model year. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-121) 
Sec. 14-144. - Schedule of fares. 
(a)  All permitted taxicab drivers shall charge according to the schedule of fares as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(b)  All taxicab drivers permitted under this article shall have the right to charge a minimum charge if the meter is not utilized. The charge for non-utilization of a meter shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(c)  Taximeters shall be calibrated by the permitted taxicab driver or taxicab business to calculate the fares in accordance with the schedule set forth in this section. The permit holder shall install lead and wire seals to the taximeter once it is calibrated so that no adjustments, alterations or replacements may be made to the taximeter that affects in any way its accuracy or indications. 
(d)  The county chief of police may revise this schedule of fares effective January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-122) 
Sec. 14-145. - Enforcement. 
The county police department shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article. The county police department is authorized to inspect taxis anytime without a warrant to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-123) 
Sec. 14-146. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article may be summoned to appear in the city municipal court. Any person convicted a first time for one or more violations of this article shall be punished by a fine of $250.00. Any person convicted a second time for one or more violations of this article shall be punished by a fine of $500.00. Any person subsequently convicted for one or more violations of this article shall be punished by a fine of $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-124) 
Secs. 14-147—14-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SPAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-176. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the term: 
Massage apparatus shall mean any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric, or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power, which is utilized by a "massage therapist" for the purpose of administering a "massage." 
Massage establishment shall mean any business established for profit which employs or contracts with one or more "massage therapists" or operates or maintains for profit one or more "massage apparatus", and which for good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of "massages". This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the State of Georgia. 
Massage or massage therapy shall mean the manipulation and/or treatment of soft tissues of the body, including, but not limited to, the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range of motion stretches, and any other soft tissue manipulation whether manual or by use of massage apparatus, and may include the use of oils, lotions, creams, salt glows, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, hot packs, and cold packs. 
Massage therapist/practitioner/masseur/masseuse shall mean any person who for good or valuable consideration administers a "massage" or "massage therapy." 
Spa establishment shall mean any business established for profit that provides personal services such as body wraps, hydro mineral wraps, body polish, body wash, baths and hydro tub soak. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-131) 
Sec. 14-177. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the certificate or permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by Gwinnett County and state law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent, or restrict in any manner: 
(1)  Any physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of said profession. 
(2)  Any hospital or other professional health care establishment separately licensed as such by the state. 
(3)  Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-132) 
Sec. 14-178. - License required; application. 
(a)  In addition to obtaining an occupation tax certificate as referenced in section 14-1, all persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of a massage establishment shall, before engaging in such trade, business, profession, make application for a license in the form and manner prescribed in this article. The application shall include the information required on all license returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  No license for a massage establishment shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(2)  A letter certifying as to the good moral character of the applicant, signed by three currently qualified and registered county voters of good moral character. Individuals signing such letter must provide their name, address and Social Security number. 
(3)  The applicant must hold and furnish a certified copy of a diploma or certificate of graduation from a state certified school and accredited school of massage therapy. The diploma must be representative of the fact that applicant attended a course of study of not less than 500 credit hours, consisting of a curriculum of anatomy, physical culture, physiology, basic massage theory, technique and clinical practice, approach to massage, allied modalities and disease awareness and other such subjects. 
(4)  The applicant must furnish a certified statement from the National Certification Board of Therapeutic Massage and Body Work evidencing passage by the applicant thereof of the exam for massage therapists administered by said board. 
(5)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the foregoing information and exhibits with regard to each employee, independent contractor agent and partner, general or limited associated with the operation of the massage therapy establishment. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall, in addition to the foregoing information, submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations, and provide the name and address for its registered agent in the city. 
(7)  If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state. 
(8)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must submit a copy of a valid driver license or a valid I.D. card as reliable proof thereof. Additionally, if the applicant does not reside in the city, the applicant must provide the name and address for an agent who resides in the city authorized to receive legal process and notices under this article on behalf of the applicant. 
(b)  In addition to obtaining an occupation tax certificate as referenced in section 14-1, all persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of a spa establishment shall, before engaging in such trade, business, profession, make application for a license in the form and manner prescribed in this article. The application shall include the information required on all license returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  No license for a spa establishment shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the foregoing information and exhibits with regard to each employee, independent contractor agent and partner, general or limited associated with the operation of the massage therapy establishment. 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall, in addition to the foregoing information, submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations, and provide the name and address for its registered agent in the city. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in Georgia. 
(5)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must submit a copy of a valid driver license or a valid I.D. card as reliable proof thereof. Additionally, if the applicant does not reside in the city, the applicant must provide the name and address for an agent who resides in the city authorized to receive legal process and notices under this article on behalf of the applicant. 
(c)  No person, firm or corporation or its officers shall be granted a license for a massage or spa establishment unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee that such person, partners in the firm, officers and directors of the corporation have not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, disorderly conduct, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of the ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate and has been released from parole or probation. No person, partner or officer under the age of 18 shall be granted a license for massage establishment or spa. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-133) 
Sec. 14-179. - Regulatory fee; expiration and renewal. 
(a)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each massage and spa establishment licensed within the City of Peachtree Corners in the amount of $250.00. The regulatory fee shall be paid with the license application. 
(b)  All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file application, with the requisite fee heretofore provided, with the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal applications received after November 30 shall pay in addition to said annual fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If license application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(c)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full regulatory fee must be paid for a license application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full regulatory fee shall be paid for a license application filed after July 1 of the license year. 
(d)  Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-134) 
Sec. 14-180. - Work permits required. 
Prior to the issuance of a license the on premise owner(s), manager(s) and employee(s) desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of massage therapy shall be required to obtain a work permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-135) 
Sec. 14-181. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license under this article to annually file, along with the renewal application for the license, the name of all employees, their home address, home telephone number and place of employment. The holder of a license issued under the provisions of this article must additionally report changes in the list of employees with the names and require supplement information for new employees to be filed with the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee within ten days from the date of such change. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the name and address of the persons receiving treatment at such establishment; the type of treatment administered; and the name of the person at the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee, or the Gwinnett County Chief of Police or his designee. 
(c)  The establishment shall have an owner, manager, or supervisor on premise at all hours the establishment offers massage therapy. If during an inspection there is no owner, manager, or supervisor on premise the establishment must cease operations and close to the public until an owner, manager or supervisor is on premise. 
(d)  Records required to be maintained under this article shall be kept for a minimum of two years beyond the expiration date of a license. Records shall be made available to the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee, during business hours, at the certificate holder's business location in the city, within ten business days of any such request. 
(e)  The establishment shall be subject to inspection at any time during business hours by the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee and by the Gwinnett County Chief of Police or his designee, to ensure compliance with this article. 
(f)  All employees, massage therapist and other persons on the premises, with the exception of the customers, shall be completely clothed at all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this article "completely clothed" shall mean having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and said paints or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this article shall be entirely non-transparent. 
(g)  No business of a massage therapist shall be engaged in and no place of business shall be open for business except within and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(h)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment. Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this Code. 
(i)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, and additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth. 
(j)  Ordinary beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any establishment. 
(k)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of the license must be in compliance with all applicable building and life safety codes, and the building to be occupied must have a valid, current certificate of occupancy. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any massage establishment unless such person carries with him/her at the time of such patronage, a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly licensed physician or written permission of the underage person's parent or guardian. It shall be the duty of the holder of a license to determine the age of the person attempting to patronize a massage establishment and to prohibit such patronage by an underage person. 
(m)  No massage practitioner, or any of his employees, shall manipulate, fondle or handle the sexual organs or anus of any person. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-136) 
Sec. 14-182. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  When a license application is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required herein and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted and a review of the application and an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee. The City of Peachtree Corners or its designee shall transmit a copy of the completed application to the Gwinnett County Police Department. Upon the payment by the applicant of the required fees, the Gwinnett County Police Department, or its designee, shall cause to be conducted a background investigation of the police record of the applicant, and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the background investigation, and completion of review of the application in accordance with the terms of this article, the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee shall act on the application. The City of Peachtree Corners or its designee shall deny any application that: 
(1)  Fails to meet each of the application requirements specified herein. 
(2)  Fails to meet each of the minimum standards specified in section 14-180 of this article. 
(3)  Contains false information in the application or attached documents. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-137) 
Sec. 14-183. - Grounds for revocation and suspension of license. 
The license of a massage establishment or spa may be revoked or suspended upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license. 
(2)  The holder is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit in his/her being issued the license for the practice of massage. 
(3)  The holder is engaged in the practice of massage under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another therapist of a like or different name. 
(4)  The holder has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, disorderly conduct, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony. 
(5)  Any of the holder's employees, independent contractors or agents has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, or disorderly conduct in connection with the operation of the massage establishment or on or about the premises of the massage establishment. 
(6)  Failure of the holder to maintain correct and accurate records as required by this article. 
(7)  Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, independent contractors, agents, customers, or others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the customers. 
(8)  The holder, his/her employees, agents, or independent contractors associated with the establishment have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this article. 
(9)  The holder has violated any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-138) 
Sec. 14-184. - Hearings. 
No license for a massage or spa establishment shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(1)  The City of Peachtree Corners or its designee shall provide written notice to the applicant or license holder of his/her order to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or license holder of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or license holder who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee may have a review thereof by appeal to the City of Peachtree Corners Mayor and Council. Such appeal shall be by written petition filed in the office of the City of Peachtree Corners within 15 days after the final order or action of the City of Peachtree Corners or its designee and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $50.00. The City of Peachtree Corners Mayor and Council or its designee, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it is determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing such appeal. The City of Peachtree Corners Mayor and Council or its designee may, at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee. 
(2)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the City of Peachtree Corners Mayor and Council or its designee unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the City of Peachtree Corners Mayor and Council or its designee. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. 
(3)  The findings of the City of Peachtree Corners Mayor and Council or its designee shall be reduced to writing within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and notify the appellant and the Gwinnett County Chief of Police or his designee of the action of the City of Peachtree Corners Mayor and Council or its designee. 
(4)  The findings of the City of Peachtree Corners Mayor and Council or its designee shall not set aside unless found to be: 
a.  Contrary to law or ordinances; or 
b.  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole; or 
c.  Unreasonable. 
(5)  The findings of the City of Peachtree Corners Mayor and Council or its designee shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of such finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. An aggrieved party shall have all other remedies provided by law or at equity to all ordinances. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-139) 
Sec. 14-185. - Severability. 
(a)  Should any section or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole nor any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(b)  Should any section or provision of this article be in conflict with any other ordinance, rule regulation, provision, requirement or law then the more restrictive ordinance, rule, regulation, provision, requirement or law shall control. 
(c)  All ordinances or resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict with this article are repealed. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-140) 
Secs. 14-186—14-208. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FORTUNE-TELLING AND RELATED PRACTICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local government authorized to require a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation to pay a regulatory fee when local government performs investigation or inspection of such businesses or practitioners of such profession or occupation as protection of the public health, safety, or welfare or in the course of enforcing a state or local building, health, or safety code, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 

Sec. 14-209. - Occupation tax certificate required, application. 
(a)  All persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of fortune-telling, astrology, phrenology, palmistry, clairvoyance, or related practices where a charge is made, or a donation is accepted for services shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, make application for an occupation tax certificate in the form and manner prescribed by the city or its designee. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the information required on all occupation tax returns, along with a certificate certifying as to the good moral character of the applicant, signed by three currently qualified and registered voters of good moral character of the city. The letter shall not be required for annual renewals of the occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-151) 
Sec. 14-210. - Work permits required. 
Prior to the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, a work permit shall be required for the owners, managers and employees. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-152) 
Sec. 14-211. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding an occupation tax certificate under this article to annually file, along with the renewal application for the occupation tax certificate, the names of all employees, their home address, home telephone number and places of employment. The holder of an occupation tax certificate issued under the provisions of this article must additionally report changes in the list of employees with the names and required supplemental information for new employees to be filed with the city or its designee within ten days from the date of such change. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a certificate under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the name and address of the persons receiving services at such establishment, the type of services administered, and the name of the person at the establishment administering the services. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the city or its designee, or the county chief of police or his designee. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any fortune-telling or related establishment unless such person carries with him at the time of such patronage, written permission of the underage person's parent or guardian. It shall be the duty of the holder of an occupation tax certificate to determine the age of the person attempting to patronize an establishment and to prohibit such patronage by an underage person. 
(d)  Records required to be maintained under this article shall be kept for a minimum of two years beyond the expiration date of an occupation tax certificate. Records shall be made available to the city or its designee, at a location in the city, within ten business days of any such request. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-153) 
Sec. 14-212. - Inspection of registered establishments. 
Sworn officers of the county police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments registered under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. Such inspection shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article. This section is not intended to limit the authority of the city or its designee or any other county officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the Code. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-154) 
Sec. 14-213. - Applicant disqualification. 
No occupation tax certificate shall be granted to any person under the age of 18 or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate, and has been released from parole or probation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-155) 
Secs. 14-214—14-234. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local governments authorized to license, regulate, and tax dealers in precious metals or gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-235. - Applicability of certain sections. 
(a)  Section 14-240 shall not apply to any precious metals or goods containing precious metals obtained from industrial producers, manufacturers, licensed dealers, or distributors. 
(b)  Sections 14-237 and 14-238 shall not apply to registered pawnbrokers, scrap metal processors, or secondhand dealers. Pawnbrokers, scrap metal processors, and secondhand dealers are not, however, relieved from compliance with section 14-240 when the purchase of precious metals or goods containing precious metals are from persons or sources other than industrial producers, manufacturers, or licensed dealers or distributors. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-181) 
Sec. 14-236. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nonpermanent location means any location designated to be used to conduct the aforementioned business, in any movable vehicle, and temporary or movable structure, including, but not limited to, vans, mobile homes, trailers, hotels and motels, lodges, or any similar nonpermanent structure designed by applicant to be used to conduct such business for a limited or specific time. 
Permanent location means a business domiciled within a properly constructed building which must be located within a properly zoned area according to the planning and zoning ordinance. 
Precious metals means any metals, including, but not limited to, in whole or in part, silver, gold, and platinum. 
Precious metals dealer means any person, partnership, sole proprietorship, corporation, association, or other entity engaged in the business of purchasing, selling, bartering, or acquiring in trade any precious metals from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers for resale in its original form or as changed by melting, reforming, remolding, or for resale as scrap, or in bulk. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-182) 
Sec. 14-237. - Occupation tax certificate required, application. 
(a)  All persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of a precious metals dealer shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, make application for an occupation tax certificate in the form and manner prescribed by the city or its designee. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the information required on all occupation tax returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  Full name, date of birth, address, and Social Security number of applicant. 
(2)  Full names, dates of birth, and Social Security numbers of any other persons having an ownership interest in the proposed business. In the case of a corporation, this list shall include owners of ten or more percent of the common or preferred stock. 
(3)  Full names, dates of birth, and Social Security numbers, and titles of corporate officers where appropriate. 
(4)  Full name, address, telephone number, date of birth, title, and Social Security number of individuals to be employed. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-183) 
Sec. 14-238. - Work permits required. 
Prior to the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, a work permit shall be required for the owners, managers, and employees. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-184) 
Sec. 14-239. - Applicant disqualifications. 
No occupation tax certificate shall be granted to any person under the age of 18 or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, or attempts to commit any of these listed offenses. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-185) 
Sec. 14-240. - Records and information to be maintained; display of transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage. 
Engaging in the business of buying used or previously owned precious metals in the city is hereby declared to affect the public interest due to the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. In the public interest, and as set forth herein, all precious metals dealers shall maintain records documenting all precious metals transactions. 
(1)  All precious metals dealers shall maintain records documenting accurate descriptions of all property purchased. Such description shall include, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and all other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The precious metals dealers shall assign a transaction number documenting each transaction, and ensure each item received is tagged with the transaction number. 
(2)  The tag bearing the transaction number must remain attached to the item until the property is disposed of by sale, trade, or other lawful means. This subsection does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however, the precious metals dealer shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this subsection. 
(3)  The precious metals dealer shall require all persons selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a transaction. Proper identification is defined as a government issued photo identification card, such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. 
(4)  The precious metals dealer shall also document the name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and Social Security number of the person selling the property, along with the date and time of transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(5)  The precious metals dealer shall photograph, with a digital camera or web camera, the person selling the property. The photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the transaction number and a photograph of the item being sold. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(6)  The precious metals dealer shall obtain from each person selling any property, the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person selling the property. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature will be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property. 
(7)  Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging cannot be accepted by the precious metals dealer unless the customer can supply a copy of the original sales receipt, or other proof of purchase from the place of purchase, to the precious metals dealers who shall retain the receipt or proof of purchase on file. 
(8)  The precious metals dealer shall store the above records, digital images, and fingerprints for a period of four years and make them available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(9)  Every precious metals dealer shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the county police department. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-186) 
Sec. 14-241. - Daily report to Gwinnett County police; required format. 
Every precious metals dealer shall make a daily report, in such form as may be prescribed by the county chief of police, of all pawnshop transactions that occurred during 24 hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. 
(1)  Daily reports shall list all property sold, the transaction number for each transaction, and a description of the property, including, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and any other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The daily report shall also list the name, address, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and Social Security number on the automated reporting system along with the date and time of the transaction. 
(2)  Every precious metals dealer shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the county police department. 
(3)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, precious metals dealers will be notified as soon as possible by the county police department. In this event, the precious metals dealer will be required to make records of transactions in paper form as prescribed by the county police department. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in section 14-240. Precious metals dealers shall be responsible for maintaining an adequate inventory of these forms. 
(4)  The county chief of police or his designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system and required equipment needed. There will be a fee assessed to the precious metals dealer for each reported transaction. Said fee may be assessed against the persons selling property. The accessed fee shall not exceed 50 percent of the actual cost charged by the police department or the third party administrator. This fee will be invoiced to the precious metals dealers and collected by the county chief of police or his designee, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-187) 
Sec. 14-242. - Property not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition; location of property; police holds. 
(a)  All property received through any precious metals dealer transaction shall be held for at least 30 days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise. 
(b)  All property purchased shall be held and maintained by the precious metals dealer on the premises of the precious metals dealer or, if impracticable, at such other location as may have been previously approved in writing by the county chief of police or his designee. The county chief of police shall not approve any off-premises storage facilities located outside the city. 
(c)  The county police department has the authority to place property that is the subject of police investigation on "police hold." In that event, the county police department shall notify the precious metals dealer of the need for a police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the precious metals dealer to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from police hold status or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(d)  No occupation tax certificate shall be granted to any applicant for a nonpermanent location as defined in section 14-236. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-188) 
Sec. 14-243. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any precious metals dealers, his agents or employees, to receive through any precious metals dealer any property from minors. A minor, for the purpose of this section, is an individual 17 years of age or under. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-189) 
Sec. 14-244. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The county police department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. Sworn officers of the county police department and civilian employees designated by the county chief of police shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city or county officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of the county code. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-190) 
Sec. 14-245. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, company, corporation or other entity who violates any provision of this article may be subject to arrest or summoned to appear in the city municipal court and, upon conviction or other finding of guilt, be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment, or both. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-191) 
Secs. 14-246—14-268. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ESCORT AND/OR DATING SERVICE 

Sec. 14-269. - Occupation tax certificate required, application. 
(a)  All persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of providing and/or arranging dates, escorts, or partners for persons shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, make application for an occupation tax certificate in the form and manner prescribed by the city or its designee. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the information required on all occupation tax returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  Full name, date of birth, address, and Social Security number of applicant. 
(2)  Full names, dates of birth, and Social Security numbers of any other persons having an ownership interest in the proposed business. In the case of a corporation, this list shall include owners of 20 or more percent of the common or preferred stock. 
(3)  Full names, dates of birth, and Social Security numbers, and titles of corporate officers, where appropriate. 
(4)  Full name, address, telephone number, date of birth, title, and Social Security number of individuals to be employed. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-211) 
Sec. 14-270. - Work permits required. 
Prior to the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, a work permit shall be required for the owners, managers and employees. It shall be the responsibility of the occupation tax certificate holder to ensure that the provisions of this section are complied with and that no one is employed until the prospective employee possesses such work permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-212) 
Sec. 14-271. - Applicant disqualification. 
No occupation tax certificate shall be granted to any person under the age of 18 or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual-related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate, and has been released from parole or probation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-213) 
Sec. 14-272. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding an occupation tax certificate under this section to annually file, along with the renewal application for the occupation tax certificate, the names of employees, their home address, home telephone number and places of employment. The holder of an occupation tax certificate issued under the provisions of this article must additionally report changes in the list of employees with the names and required supplemental information for new employees to be filed with the city or its designee within ten days from the date of such change. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a certificate under this section to maintain correct and accurate records of the name and address of the persons receiving escort and/or dating services and to provide the name of the employee providing such service. The records shall be subject to inspection, at any time, by the city or its designee, or the county chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-214) 
Sec. 14-273. - Unlawful or prohibited activities. 
No person under 18 years of age shall be employed by an escort and/or dating service in any capacity and each prospective employee shall be fingerprinted and permitted by the county police department. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-215) 
Secs. 14-274—14-294. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CANVASSER OR SOLICITOR[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; exception from local peddler or itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6. 

Sec. 14-295. - Intent. 
The intent of the mayor and city council in enacting this article is to regulate the sale of goods and services by canvassing or soliciting at residences in the city, to the end that criminal activity in the city and abusive techniques utilized by any such canvassers or solicitors which adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare in the city will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of door-to-door solicitation, nor is it an attempt to adversely affect interstate commerce. Instead, this article is intended to balance competing interests, reduce criminal activity and protect city citizens from abusive sales techniques versus the conduct of proper commercial sales activity. This article is not intended to allow any business activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-231) 
Sec. 14-296. - Definition. 
For purposes of this article, the term "canvasser" or "solicitor" includes any person who solicits orders door-to-door or house-to-house on behalf of a business, individual, vocation or occupation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-232) 
Sec. 14-297. - Exempt activities or organizations. 
(a)  Persons, businesses and organizations exempted from local regulation by operation of state or federal law or by the Constitution of the United States, or of the state, are exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations whose field sales representatives are under the age of 15 are not required to obtain an occupation tax certificate, canvasser's or solicitor's permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-233) 
Sec. 14-298. - Occupation tax certificate required, application. 
(a)  All persons, firms, companies, corporations or other entities engaging or offering to engage in business as a canvasser or solicitor involving going from door-to-door or house-to-house, without an appointment or invitation, in residential areas or businesses of the city, for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions, or conducting business of any kind, shall file an application in the required form, and obtain an occupation tax certificate for such activity from the city or its designee; provided, however, that nonprofit agencies, entities, or organizations which are certified as exempt from payment of U.S. Income Taxes by the Internal Revenue Service may canvass or solicit without permits, upon registering with the city and furnishing the county police department written confirmation of their tax exempt status and a list of their representatives, including names, addresses, dates of birth, Social Security numbers, and telephone numbers. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the information required on all occupation tax returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  Full name, date of birth, address, and Social Security number of applicant. 
(2)  Full names, dates of birth, and Social Security numbers of any other persons having an ownership interest in the proposed business. In the case of a corporation, this list shall include owners of 20 or more percent of the common or preferred stock. 
(3)  Full names, dates of birth, and Social Security numbers, and titles of corporate officers, where appropriate. 
(4)  Full name, address, telephone number, date of birth, title, and Social Security number of individuals to be employed. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-234) 
Sec. 14-299. - Work permits required, annual list. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, a work permit shall be required for the owners, managers and employees. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding an occupation tax certificate under this section to annually file, along with the renewal application for the occupation tax certificate, the names, home address, and home telephone number, date of birth, Social Security number and place of employment for all employees so engaged in canvassing or soliciting. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-235) 
Sec. 14-300. - Applicant disqualification. 
No occupation tax certificate shall be granted to any person under the age of 18 or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession or sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate, and has been released from parole or probation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-236) 
Sec. 14-301. - General operating provisions. 
It shall be the duty of any person granted a certificate under this article to maintain correct and accurate records concerning proposed method of operation in the county, including the dates and times and area of operation, and employee's assignments by geographic area and dates. Such record shall be kept for a minimum of 12 months beyond the expiration date of the occupation tax certificate and shall be made available for inspection by the county chief of police or his designee or the city or its designee. A copy of such record shall be forwarded to the county chief of police or his designee quarterly. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-237) 
Sec. 14-302. - Suspension or revocation of occupation tax certificate or permit. 
(a)  The work permit of any canvasser or solicitor charged with any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sex crime, theft or violence against person or property, criminal solicitation to commit any of these offenses, or violation of this article or any other of the city ordinance while canvassing or soliciting shall be deemed suspended and subject to seizure from the time of lawful arrest by the county police department, or an arrest for any violation of the Georgia Criminal Code by any law enforcement agency within the county. Such suspension shall remain in effect until the canvasser or solicitor is convicted or acquitted, or until the charge is dismissed, "dead-docketed," "nolle prossed," or "no-billed." It shall be the responsibility of the canvasser or solicitor to present the county police department with proof that the arrest which led to the suspension was dismissed, "dead-docketed," "nolle prossed," or "no-billed." Upon presentation of proof of such dispositions, the certificate or the canvasser or solicitor permit will be reinstated and will be valid until date of original expiration. 
(b)  The certificate or permit of any canvasser or solicitor who is convicted, has entered a plea of guilty, or has received a nolo contendere to a felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sex crime, theft or violence against person or property, or criminal solicitation to commit any of these offenses, shall be deemed revoked and subject to seizure by the county chief of police or his designee or the city or its designee from the time of such conviction, guilty, or nolo contendere sentencing. 
(c)  The certificate or permit of any canvasser or solicitor who is convicted, has pled guilty, or received nolo contendere sentencing for any violation of this article shall be deemed revoked and subject to seizure by the county chief of police or his designee or city or its designee from the time of such sentencing. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-238) 
Sec. 14-303. - Unlawful or prohibited activities. 
The following are prohibited practices for canvassers and solicitors and any violation shall constitute grounds for suspension, revocation, or denial of renewal of certificate or permit, and/or arrest: 
(1)  Canvassing or soliciting on Sunday, or between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(2)  Canvassing or soliciting at any location where a sign is posted at or near the main entrance or driveway to the residence or business prohibiting such activity. 
(3)  Using any entrance, or part of the building, other than the main entrance to the residence or business. 
(4)  Entering a residence except at the express invitation of the occupant. 
(5)  Failure of the canvasser or solicitor to inform the occupant in plain terms of the purpose of the call. 
(6)  The canvasser or solicitor to represent that they are participating in any contest, game or other competitive endeavor, or that they are offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game or endeavor. 
(7)  The canvasser or solicitor to use vulgar, insulting or threatening language in the course of any solicitation. 
(8)  The canvasser or solicitor to remain upon the property of the residence or business after the occupant has verbally indicated that they do not wish to make a purchase or donation. For the purpose of this article, a solicitation shall be deemed to continue until the solicitor has left property of the residence or business. 
(9)  Canvassing or soliciting anyone under the age of 18. 
(10)  Failure of canvasser or solicitor to have a valid permit prominently displayed on their person (upper front portion of the body commonly referred to as the top of the shoulders down to the waist) or refuse any customer or prospective customer's request to examine same. All canvassers or solicitors of nonprofit organizations who solicit funds without a certificate or permit shall have prominently displayed documentation identifying themselves, their organization, including tax exempt status, and shall not refuse any customer or prospective customer the right to examine same upon request. Except that canvassers or solicitors of nonprofit organizations who are under the age of 15 are not required to display or produce for examination any documentation. 
(11)  For more than two canvassers or solicitors to engage in solicitation upon any residence or business at the same time for the same goods or services. 
(12)  Canvasser or solicitor to make more than one solicitation call at the same residence within any consecutive two-week period without receiving prior invitation from the occupant of such residence. 
(13)  Canvasser or solicitor to violate any of the provisions of this article, or to violate any other city ordinance while engaging in any of the activities described. 
(14)  Canvasser or solicitor to engage in any of the conduct described in this article during a period in which their certificate or permit is denied, suspended, or revoked. 
(15)  Canvasser or solicitor to lend, rent, or sell their certificate or permit card to another, or canvass or solicit using the certificate or permit card of another. 
(16)  The canvasser or solicitor to deviate from the stated guidelines as set out in the certificate or permit application or amendments thereto filed by applicant or certificate holder. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-239) 
Secs. 14-304—14-324. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PERFORMANCES AND PROMOTIONS 

Sec. 14-325. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Athletic show means any sporting event or display of sporting goods where an admission fee is charged. 
Concert means any musical event where an admission fee is charged. 
Cultural event means any work of art exhibit where an admission fee is charged. 
Educational event means any gathering for the purpose of learning about a specific subject where an admission fee is charged. 
Exposition means any display of goods or services where an admission fee is charged. 
Performance means any nonrecurring event for which an admission fee is charged. 
Promoter means the organizer of any performance, show, concert, event or exposition. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-261) 
Sec. 14-326. - Exemption provisions. 
No flat fee or occupation tax shall be imposed and no certificate shall be required for any event sponsored or conducted by the U.S. Government, the state or any political subdivision, including any local school system board of education. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-262) 
Sec. 14-327. - Occupation tax certificate required, application. 
(a)  Except as provided for herein, all persons, firms or corporations desiring to conduct a performance or nonrecurring concert, exposition, show, or similar event, or any athletic, cultural or educational event, shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, make application for an occupation tax certificate in the form and manner prescribed by the city or its designee. 
(b)  The application shall include the information required for all general occupation tax certificates. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-263) 
Sec. 14-328. - Permits required. 
No occupation tax certificate shall be issued until the applicant has the county planning and development department's approval for the location along with the county fire marshal's approval. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-264) 
Sec. 14-329. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any person operating as a promoter or organizer under this article to furnish accurate and complete information to the city or its designee. Failure to comply with these requirements may be punishable as provided for in section 14-34. 
(b)  Independent vendors participating as part of a promoter-sponsored event, exposition, performance, concert or show shall not be required to apply for or obtain an occupation tax certificate; provided, however, that: 
(1)  The promoter of any such undertaking shall have in effect at the time of the undertaking a valid occupation tax certificate for the appropriate line of business. 
(2)  The promoter shall have first, prior to commencing the undertaking, have furnished the city or its designee with a true and accurate list of the name and address of each vendor, along with the location and dates of operation. 
(3)  The promoter shall have paid an administrative fee for each participating vendor and an occupation tax on the total aggregate taxable receipts for all participants or vendors operating or conducting business at such undertaking. The administrative fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(4)  Such undertaking shall be for a period not to exceed ten consecutive days. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-265) 
Sec. 14-330. - Unlawful or prohibited activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any organizer of a performance or promotion to knowingly allow any criminal activity in connection with such performance or promotion involving larceny, burglary or theft or any description as defined in the Georgia Criminal Code Title 26; or any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or crime against a person or property. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-266) 
Secs. 14-331—14-348. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, AND DENIAL OF OCCUPATION TAX CERTIFICATE, MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE, BUSINESS PERMIT, OR EMPLOYEE WORK PERMIT; PROCEDURE FOR APPEAL 

Sec. 14-349. - Suspension or revocation of business permit. 
A business permit may be suspended or revoked by the city or its designee or the county chief of police or his designee where a business or employee of a business furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a permit, fails to meet all qualifications set forth under the provisions of this chapter, or fails to comply with any requirements of this chapter or any other applicable law or regulation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-312) 
Sec. 14-350. - Hearings for suspension or revocation of a business permit. 
Unless otherwise stated elsewhere in this chapter, no permit shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(1)  The city or its designee or the county chief of police or his designee shall provide written notice to the business of his order to suspend or revoke the permit. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the business of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any business that is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city manager or his designee or the county chief of police or his designee may have a review thereof by appeal to the city mayor and council established pursuant to the city alcoholic beverage ordinance. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city within 15 days after the final order or action of the city manager or the county chief of police and, in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $50.00. The city mayor and council or the county chief of police, at their discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it is determined the fee would create a hardship on the business filing such appeal. 
(2)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the city or the county chief of police or his designee unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city manager or his designee or the county chief of police or his designee. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. Should the applicant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. Before hearing an appeal, the city mayor and council shall sign an affidavit to be part of the record that they are not related to or personal friends with any owner of the establishment in question in the appeal. Should any member be unable to sign such an affidavit, that member of city council shall not serve on that appeal and the case shall be heard by the other members of city council. 
(3)  The findings of the city mayor and council shall be forwarded to the county chief of police within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the county chief of police or his designee to notify the appellant of the action of the city mayor and council. 
(4)  The findings of the city mayor and council shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
a.  Contrary to law or ordinances; 
b.  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole; or 
c.  Unreasonable. 
(5)  The findings of the city mayor and council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of mailing of decision to appellant of such finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-313) 
Sec. 14-351. - Suspension or revocation of occupation tax certificate or massage establishment license, procedure. 
(a)  Unless otherwise stated elsewhere in this chapter, an occupation tax certificate or massage establishment license may be suspended or revoked by the city manager or his designee where the applicant furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a certificate or omits information required in the application for a certificate; for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter; for conviction of any of the applicable crimes set forth in each article; or for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Suspension or revocation of occupation tax certificate. 
(1)  If any holder of a city occupation tax certificate or massage establishment license issued by the city is engaged in unlawful activities which violate laws of the state, appropriate county ordinances, applicable zoning regulations, applicable city ordinances or applicable heating, electrical, health or building codes, the occupation tax certificate shall be revoked in the manner provided herein. 
(2)  Where it is reported to the city manager or his designee that the holder of a city occupation tax certificate or massage establishment license is engaged in unlawful activities as set forth in the applicable articles of this chapter, a preliminary hearing shall be conducted in order to determine whether there is a basis for revocation or suspension of the occupation tax certificate. 
a.  The occupation tax certificate or massage establishment license holder will be notified to appear before the city manager and show cause on a date certain why his occupation tax certificate or massage establishment license should not be revoked or suspended. The certificate holder may appear in person at the hearing or be represented by counsel. 
b.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager or his designee, based upon evidence submitted at the hearing, shall enter a decision making a finding of fact and then: 
1.  Find that the evidence does not authorize revocation or suspension; 
2.  Issue a warning to the certificate or license holder; 
3.  Suspend the certificate or license and probate suspension; 
4.  Revoke the certificate or license and probate revocation; 
5.  Suspend the certificate or license; or 
6.  Revoke the certificate or license. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-314) 
Sec. 14-352. - Hearings for suspension or revocation of occupation tax certificate and massage establishment license, procedure. 
(a)  Unless otherwise stated elsewhere in this chapter, no occupation tax certificate or massage establishment license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for hearing as hereinafter provided. This provision does apply to work permits for owners, managers, and employees. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to provide written notification to the individual of the decision to deny, suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such actions and shall notify the individual of the right to appeal under the provision of this article. Any individual, who is aggrieved or adversely affected by the final actions of the city manager or his designee, may have a review thereof by appeal to the city mayor and council or its designee. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city, within 15 days after the final decision or actions of the city hearing officer, and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee for tax certificate appeals or $50.00 for work permit appeals. The city mayor or council, at its discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it is determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing said appeal. 
(c)  If any individual, firm or corporation subject to the payment of an occupation tax deems the tax to be unlawful, discriminatory or inequitable, it may pay the occupation tax imposed by the mayor and council under protest and then file a written request for review with the city. The request for review must be filed within 45 days from the date the tax is paid. The city manager shall, within 30 days from the date of receipt of the request for review from the occupation tax certificate holder, schedule a conference with the occupation tax certificate holder to review those matters set forth in the certificate holder's request for review. Within ten days from the date of the conference, a determination shall be made by the manager in writing and a copy of the determination shall be sent to the certificate holder by certified mail. In the event the certificate holder is dissatisfied with the determination made by the city manager it may, within 15 days from the date of receipt of the determination of the city manager, file its appeal to the city mayor and council in the manner outlined in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  A hearing shall be conducted on each certificate or work permit appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the city, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city manager or his designee. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing. 
(e)  Before hearing an appeal, the city hearing officer shall sign an affidavit to be part of the record that they are not related to or personal friends with any member, owner, officer or stockholder of the appellant or the appellant's representative. No hearing officer hearing the appeal shall have a financial interest in the outcome of the appeal. Should the hearing officer be unable to sign such an affidavit, that hearing officer shall not serve on the appeal and the case shall be heard by another hearing officer. 
(f)  The findings of the city hearing officer shall be forwarded to the city or its designee, within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city or its designee to notify the certificate or permit holder of the action of the hearing officer. 
(g)  The findings of the city hearing officer shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; 
(2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole; or 
(3)  Unreasonable. 
(h)  The findings of the city hearing officer shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. An aggrieved party shall have all other remedies provided by law or at equity to all ordinances. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-315) 
Sec. 14-353. - Severability. 
If any portion or subsection of this article or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-316) 
Secs. 14-354—14-379. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - APPLICANT BACKGROUND REVIEWS, BUSINESS PERMITS, AND EMPLOYEE WORK PERMITS 

Sec. 14-380. - Review of applicants for certain occupations, businesses or professions. 
(a)  A review of criminal history records is required prior to the issuance of an occupation tax certificate for the following businesses, trades, or professions: 
(1)  Burglar/security alarm installer. 
(2)  Escort and/or dating service. 
(3)  Fortune-telling and related practices. 
(4)  Locksmith. 
(5)  Massage practitioner/therapist. 
(6)  Passenger carrying vehicles. 
(7)  Pool room employee or owner/manager. 
(8)  Precious metals. 
(9)  Solicitor/canvasser. 
(10)  Spa/owners. 
(b)  In addition to a review of criminal history, the applicants must provide the following items listed: 
(1)  Positive identification (only official United States government-issued pictured identification accepted; e.g., valid driver's license, military ID card or valid state ID card). 
(2)  Fingerprints may be required on occasion for positive identification. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the county chief of police, or his designee, to perform a search of criminal history records, and to furnish such information to the city or its designee. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-331) 
Sec. 14-381. - Regulations as to owner, manager and employee work permits. 
(a)  A work permit is required for all owners, managers, and employees for the following: 
(1)  Burglar/security alarm installer. 
(2)  Escort and/or dating service. 
(3)  Fortune-telling and related practices. 
(4)  Locksmith. 
(5)  Massage practitioner/therapist. 
(6)  Operating vehicles for hire. 
(7)  Pool room employee or owner/manager. 
(8)  Precious metals. 
(9)  Solicitor/canvasser. 
(b)  No person shall be employed by any business listed in subsection (a) of this section until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the county chief of police or his designee, indicating that the person is eligible for such work permit. 
(c)  No work permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the county chief of police or his designee, and upon paying a fee which shall be established by the county board of commissioners, and a search of the criminal records of the person completed. Such application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, home address, date of birth, Social Security number and prior arrest record of the person. The arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(d)  The county chief of police or his designee shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. In the event there is no evidence of a disqualifying violation, the county chief of police or his designee shall issue a work permit to the person by mail, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for employment, the county chief of police or his designee shall notify the person, in writing by certified mail that they are not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and their right to appeal. 
(e)  No certificate holder shall allow any employee or manager required to hold a work permit to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in his possession a valid city work permit. For new employees, a receipt issued by the county police permit unit may be used for a maximum of 30 days from the date of issue except for a canvasser or solicitor. A canvasser or solicitor must have on his person a valid city issued work permit before conducting business in the city. Certificate holders are required by this article to inspect and verify that each employee or manager required to do so have in his possession a valid work permit. Issuance of this fee receipt shall allow the applicant to work in the position applied for only until such time as the required criminal history background investigation is completed. The temporary privilege conferred by issuance of this fee receipt shall expire immediately upon completion of such background investigation. If the background investigation indicates that the applicant does not meet the requirements for issuance of a work permit, the applicant may appeal the denial of the work permit as provided in this chapter. However, issuance of this fee receipt and the temporary privilege granted thereby shall not be construed as conferring any right or privilege to the applicant to continue working in the position for which the work permit is sought during the pendency of any appeal from the denial of a work permit. 
(f)  No person shall be granted a work permit unless it appears, to the satisfaction of the county chief of police or his designee, that such person has not been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violation against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of five years prior to the date of application for such work permit, and has been released from parole or probation. These requirements will apply unless other requirements are provided for specific businesses. 
(g)  For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilt or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which defendant who was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(h)  No person shall be issued a work permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed, or covered up any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application to the county police department for a work permit under this section. If it is determined that a person is in violation of this subsection and a work permit is denied for this reason, then 15 calendar days must elapse from date of application before a new application and fee may be resubmitted. 
(i)  All work permits will expire annually on the date established generally for expiration of the occupation tax certificate and are transferable within same profession. The work permit must be in the possession of the employee while the employee is at work and available for inspection by the members of the county police department or the city or its designee's staff. 
(j)  Any person granted a work permit and practices his trade outside the business location is required to display the work permit on the upper front portion of the body, commonly referred to as the top of the shoulder down to the waist. Also the work permit will be available for inspection upon request. 
(k)  All work permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer or designee of the county police department or employee of the city office. 
(l)  No person shall lend, rent, or sell his work permit to another or use the work permit of another. 
(m)  Replacement work permits will be issued within 30 days of original date, upon paying one-half of the fee charged for work permits. After 30 days of original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(n)  All work permits issued through administrative error may be terminated and seized by the county chief of police or his designee, or the city or its designee or his designee. 
(o)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a work permit to file with the county chief of police or his designee, the name of the establishment, the work permit number and a list of all employees, including their name, date of birth, Social Security number, home address and home telephone number twice annually; during the month of June and again during the month of December. 
(p)  Any persons convicted of any violations of this section shall receive a minimum fine of $200.00. 
(q)  Burglar/security alarm installers; escort and/or dating services; fortune-telling and related practices; locksmith; massage practitioner; pool room operators. No person shall be granted a work permit unless it appears to the satisfaction of the county chief of police or his designee that such person has not been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violation against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of five years prior to the date of application for such work permit, and has been released from parole or probation. No person under 18 years of age shall be employed by an escort and/or dating service in any capacity. No person shall be granted a work permit without a valid state driver's license or a valid state I.D. card. 
(r)  Passenger carrying vehicles. No person shall be granted a work permit under the age of 21 or unless it appears to the satisfaction of the county chief of police or his designee that such person has not been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of five years prior to the date of application for such work permit, and has been released from parole or probation. All operators must post their work permit in public view within the interior of the vehicle and possess a valid state driver's license. 
(s)  Precious metals dealers. No person shall be granted a work permit unless it appears to the satisfaction of the county chief of police or his designee that such person has not been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, larceny, burglary or theft of any description as defined in the Georgia Criminal Code Title 26, criminal trespass, fraudulent practices, theft or violence against person or property, illegal gambling, any felony or any felony possession or sale of controlled substances, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime. 
(t)  Solicitors/canvassers. No person shall be granted a work permit unless it appears to the satisfaction of the county chief of police or his designee that such person has not been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, criminal trespass, theft or violence against person or property, illegal gambling, any felony, any felony possession or sale of controlled substances, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime within a period of five years of the date of conviction, and has been released from parole or probation. The applicant must provide a detailed statement of the kind of canvassing or soliciting contemplated and the methods to be employed thereby, including area and hours of operation. The applicant must also provide proof of, or application for, a city occupation tax certificate. Work permits for any canvasser or solicitor no longer employed shall be surrendered to the county police department within 15 days of their termination. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-332) 
Sec. 14-382. - Work/business permit fee scale. 
Costs of work/business permits shall be the fees established by the county board of commissioners and set forth in the county police department's work/business permit fee schedule. These fees are nonrefundable in the event an applicant, for any reason, is not issued an occupation tax certificate, business permit, and/or work permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-333) 
Secs. 14-383—14-407. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - MISCELLANEOUS ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE OF OCCUPATION TAX CERTIFICATE 

Sec. 14-408. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of this Code, the following businesses shall meet the listed additional requirements before the certificate may be issued as prescribed in sections 14-26 and 14-27: 
(1)  Ambulance service: State license. 
(2)  Auctioneer: State license. 
(3)  Auto parts (used or reconditioned): State license. 
(4)  Auto salvage yard: State license. 
(5)  Automobile dealer: State license. 
(6)  Barber shop: State license. 
(7)  Beauty shop: State license. 
(8)  Bondsman: Sheriff's approval. 
(9)  Burglar/security alarm installers: Low voltage state license/county police department permit. 
(10)  Carnivals/amusement rides: Proof of liability insurance. 
(11)  Catering (including trucks): Health department approval. 
(12)  Chemical Mfg or sales: Fire department approval. 
(13)  Day care center: State license (state department of human resources). 
(14)  Day care home: State certificate of registration (state department of human resources). 
(15)  Delicatessen: Health and fire department approval. 
(16)  Electrical contractor: State license. 
(17)  Employment agency: State license if fee paid by employee (state department of labor). 
(18)  Explosives sales/distribution: State license (state fire marshal). 
(19)  Fire alarm installation: Notify fire department. 
(20)  Guns, firearms, ammunition: State and federal license. 
(21)  Hatchery: State license (state department of agriculture). 
(22)  HVAC contractor: State license. 
(23)  Ice cream shop: Health department approval. 
(24)  Locksmith: County police department permit. 
(25)  Lodginghouses and roominghouses: Certificate from state department of human resources. 
(26)  Manicurist: State license. 
(27)  Manufacturer's reps: County police department permit (when going door-to-door without appointment). 
(28)  Meat packing plant: State license (state department of agriculture). 
(29)  Meats/retail from truck: State license (state department of agriculture). 
(30)  Meats/wholesale: State license (state department of agriculture). 
(31)  Mechanical contractor: State license. 
(32)  Nail salon: State license. 
(33)  Nursing home/convalescent home: Certificate from state department of human resources. 
(34)  Operating vehicles for hire: County police department permit/proof of insurance (Limousines: Certificate from PSC). 
(35)  Pest control: State license. 
(36)  Plumbing contractor: State license. 
(37)  Polygraph examiner: State license. 
(38)  Private detective/investigator: State license. 
(39)  Professionals: State license. 
(40)  Restaurant: Health and fire department approval. 
(41)  Sanatoriums: Certificate from (state department of human resources). 
(42)  Septic tank contractor: Certificate from health department. 
(43)  Shooting gallery: Fire department approval. 
(44)  Skating rink: Fire department approval. 
(45)  Spa: Letter of contract compliance from state department of consumer affairs. 
(46)  Tattoo parlor: Health department approval. 
(47)  Utility contractor: State license. 
(48)  Wrecker service: Amber light permit (all)/contract and county police department approval (only those providing services to the county). 
(b)  Business owners and operators who offer public play on bona fide Class B coin-operated amusement machines as defined by O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70(b)(4)) are authorized to exceed the limitation of nine machines as otherwise provided in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(b)(2). 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 18-351) 
Secs. 14-409—14-429. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Governing authority has power to enact legislation to restrict operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1. 

Sec. 14-430. - Purpose; findings and rationale. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the City. The provisions of this ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings and Rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the City Council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); Sewell v. Georgia, 435 U.S. 982 (1978); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); City of Dallas v. Stanglin, 490 U.S. 19 (1989); and Flanigan's Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County, 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); Peek-a-Boo Lounge v. Manatee County, 630 F.3d 1346 (11th Cir. 2011); Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); Jacksonville Property Rights Ass'n, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 635 F.3d 1266 (11th Cir. 2011); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 331 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Williams v. Pryor, 240 F.3d 944 (11th Cir. 2001); Williams v. A.G. of Alabama, 378 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2004); Williams v. Morgan, 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); Gary v. City of Warner Robins, 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350 (11th Cir. 2002); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry, 187 F3d 1251 (11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 200 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker, 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); International Food & Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale, 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); 5634 E. Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), aff'd, 2008 WL 4276370 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curiam); Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County, 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33 (1998); World Famous Dudley's Food & Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson, 242 Ga. 214 (1978); Imaginary Images, Inc. v. Evans, 612 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 2010); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Ocello v. Koster, 354 S.W.3d 187 (Mo. 2011); 84 Video/Newsstand, Inc. v. Sartini, 2011 WL 3904097 (6th Cir. Sept. 7, 2011); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 360 (6th Cir. 2009); Entm't Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County, 588 F.3d 372 (6th Cir. 2009); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids, 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); Fantasy Ranch, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 459 F.3d 546 (5th Cir. 2006); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Knox County, 555 F.3d 512 (6th Cir. 2009); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales, Inc. v. Montgomery County, 256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols, 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); City of New York v. Hommes, 724 N.E.2d 368 (N.Y. 1999); Taylor v. State, No. 01-01-00505-CR, 2002 WL 1722154 (Tex. App. July 25, 2002); Fantasyland Video, Inc. v. County of San Diego, 505 F.3d 996 (9th Cir. 2007); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); Starship Enters. of Atlanta, Inc. v. Coweta County, No. 3:09-CV-123, R. 41 (N.D. Ga. Feb. 28, 2011); High Five Investments, LLC v. Floyd County, No. 4:06-CV-190, R. 128 (N.D. Ga. Mar. 14, 2008); 10950 Retail, LLC v. Fulton County, No. 1:06-CV-1923, R. 62 Order (N.D. Ga. Dec. 21, 2006); 10950 Retail, LLC v. Fulton County, No. 1:06-CV-1923, R. 84 Contempt Order (N.D. Ga. Jan. 4, 2007); Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. v. City of Littleton, Civil Action No. 99-N-1696, Memorandum Decision and Order (D. Colo. March 31, 2001); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion's Den, Inc., Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale, No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Houston, Texas - 1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979, 1995-98; Tucson, Arizona - 1990; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Spokane, Washington - 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Littleton, Colorado - 2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Ft. Worth, Texas - 2004; Kennedale, Texas - 2005; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; Jackson County, Missouri - 2008; Louisville, Kentucky - 2004; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); Dallas, Texas - 2007; "Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Businesses," 19 Criminal Justice Policy Review 153 (2008); "Correlates of Current Transactional Sex among a Sample of Female Exotic Dancers in Baltimore, MD," Journal of Urban Health (2011); "Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence," by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Fulton County, Georgia - 2001; "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000; Memphis, Tennessee - 2005-11; and Assorted Reports Concerning Secondary Effects, the City Council finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. Alcohol consumption impairs judgment and lowers inhibitions, thereby increasing the risk of adverse secondary effects. 
(2)  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
(3)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the City has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the City's rationale for this ordinance, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the City's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the City. The City finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this ordinance are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
The City hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such secondary effects. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 1) 
Sec. 14-431. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this ordinance, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." A "principal business activity" exists where the commercial establishment meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
(a)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of said items; or 
(b)  At least 25 percent of the retail value (defined as the price charged to customers) of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of said items; or 
(c)  At least 25 percent of the establishment's revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of said items; or 
(d)  The establishment maintains at least 25 percent of its floor space for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in "floor space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); or 
(e)  The establishment maintains at least five hundred square feet (500 sq. ft.) of its floor space for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in "floor space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); or 
(f)  The establishment regularly offers for sale or rental at least two thousand (2,000) of said items; or 
(g)  The establishment regularly features said items and regularly advertises itself or holds itself out, in any medium, by using "adult," "adults-only,' "XXX," "sex," "erotic," or substantially similar language, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests; or 
(h)  The establishment maintains an "adult arcade," which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features live conduct characterized by semi-nudity. No establishment shall avoid classification as an adult cabaret by offering or featuring nudity. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this ordinance, no business shall be classified as a sexually oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
City means Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 
Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, lessee, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Establish or establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(a)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(b)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(c)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
Floor space means the floor area inside an establishment that is visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. 
Hearing officer means an attorney, not otherwise employed by the City, who is licensed to practice law in Georgia, and retained to serve as an independent tribunal to conduct hearings under this ordinance. 
Influential interest means any of the following: (1) the actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business, (2) ownership of a financial interest of 30 percent or more of a business or of any class of voting securities of a business, or (3) holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In the case of an employee, it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually oriented business employee license has been issued. 
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
Operator means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who manages, supervises, or controls the business or a portion thereof. A person may be found to be an operator regardless of whether such person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a sexually oriented business license. 
Regularly means the consistent and repeated doing of an act on an ongoing basis. 
Semi-Nude or Semi-Nudity means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Semi-Nude Model Studio means a place where persons regularly appear in a state of semi-nudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. This definition does not apply to any place where persons appearing in a state of semi-nudity did so in a class operated: 
(a)  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(b)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(c)  In a structure: 
(1)  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
(2)  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class. 
Sexual Device means any three dimensional object designed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, buttocks, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt plugs, nipple clamps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexual Device Shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. This definition shall not be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, or any establishment that does not regularly advertise itself or hold itself out, by using "adult," "adults-only,' "XXX," "sex," "erotic," "novelties," or substantially similar language, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests. 
Sexually Oriented Business means an adult bookstore or adult video store, an adult cabaret, an adult motion picture theater, a seminude model studio, or a sexual device shop. 
Specified Anatomical Areas means and includes: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(b)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified Criminal Activity means any of the following specified crimes for which less than five years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
(a)  Rape, child molestation, sexual assault, sexual battery, aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual battery, or public indecency; 
(b)  Prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, or pandering; 
(c)  Obscenity, disseminating or displaying matter harmful to a minor, or use of child in sexual performance; 
(d)  Any offense related to any sexually-oriented business, including controlled substance offenses, tax violations, racketeering, crimes involving sex, crimes involving prostitution, or crimes involving obscenity; 
(e)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; or 
(f)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Georgia, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
Specified Sexual Activity means any of the following: 
(a)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(b)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsection (1) of this definition. 
Transfer of Ownership or Control of a sexually oriented business means any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
Viewing Room means the room, booth, or area where a patron of a sexually oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 2) 
Sec. 14-432. - License required. 
(a)  Business License. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the City without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  Employee License. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an employee, as defined in this ordinance, of a sexually oriented business in the City without a valid sexually oriented business employee license, except that a person who is a licensee under a valid sexually oriented business license shall not be required to also obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the City Clerk a completed application made on a form provided by the City Clerk. A sexually oriented business may designate an individual with an influential interest in the business to file its application for a sexually oriented business license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be signed as required by subsection (d) herein and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in this subsection (c), accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five (5) years. 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license, a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by a governmental agency, or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(4)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business. 
(5)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(6)  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this ordinance, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
(7)  A statement of whether any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
(i)  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
(ii)  Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking. 
(8)  An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor area occupied by the business and a statement of floor area visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration requirements of this ordinance shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable regulations. The City Clerk may waive the requirements of this subsection (8) for a renewal application if the applicant adopts a legal description and a sketch or diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
The information provided pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the City Clerk within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  Signature. A person who seeks a sexually oriented business employee license under this section shall sign the application for a license. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license under this section is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the sexually oriented business or in a legal entity that controls the sexually oriented business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this ordinance and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this ordinance shall be maintained by the office of the City Clerk on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by governing law or court order. Any information protected by the right to privacy as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to such disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 3) 
Sec. 14-433. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Business License. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the City Clerk shall immediately issue a Temporary License to the applicant if the completed application is from a preexisting sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating in the City and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business license. The Temporary License shall expire upon the final decision of the City to deny or grant an annual license. Within twenty (20) days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business license application, the City Clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The City Clerk shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this ordinance for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this ordinance has not been paid. 
(4)  The sexually oriented business, as defined herein, is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this ordinance. 
(5)  The sexually oriented business, as defined herein, is not in compliance with locational requirements of this article or the locational requirements of the Peachtree Corners 2012 Zoning Resolution. However, this ground for denial of a license to operate a sexually oriented business shall not prevent issuance or renewal of a license for a sexually oriented business that was lawfully existing in all respects under law prior to the effective date of this ordinance, provided that the sexually oriented business has not been extended to occupy greater area, has not discontinued for twelve (12) months or more, and has not had its structure damaged to an extent exceeding fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost of the above-ground structure at the time of the destruction. 
(6)  Any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
(i)  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
(ii)  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(7)  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this ordinance. 
(b)  Employee License. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the City Clerk shall immediately issue a Temporary License to the applicant if the applicant seeks licensure to work in a licensed sexually oriented business and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business employee license. The Temporary License shall expire upon the final decision of the City to deny or grant an annual license. Within twenty (20) days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business employee license application, the City Clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The City Clerk shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this ordinance has not been paid. 
(4)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
(i)  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
(ii)  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this ordinance. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 4) 
Sec. 14-434. - Fees. 
The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses shall be as follows: one hundred dollars ($100) for the initial fee for a sexually oriented business license, and fifty dollars ($50) for annual renewal; fifty dollars ($50) for the initial sexually oriented business employee license and twenty-five dollars ($25) for annual renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 5) 
Sec. 14-435. - Inspection. 
Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall permit the City Clerk and his or her agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this ordinance, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the City to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this ordinance, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 6) 
Sec. 14-436. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this aricle. 
(b)  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least ninety (90) days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made less than ninety (90) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current license will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 7) 
Sec. 14-437. - Suspension. 
(a)  The City Clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly or recklessly violated this ordinance or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this ordinance. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business employee license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the employee licensee has knowingly or recklessly violated this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 8) 
Sec. 14-438. - Revocation. 
(a)  The City Clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly or recklessly violates this article or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this ordinance and a suspension of the licensee's license has become effective within the previous twelve-month (12-mo.) period. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the sexually oriented business license or the sexually oriented business employee license; 
(2)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(4)  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; 
(5)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity or specified criminal activity to occur in or on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(6)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to consume alcohol on the premises of the sexually oriented business; or 
(7)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to appear in a semi-nude condition or in a state of nudity on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this ordinance, the City revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license for one (1) year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 9) 
Sec. 14-439. - Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal. 
(a)  When the City Clerk issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the City Clerk shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this ordinance for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the City Clerk for the respondent. The notice shall also set forth the following: The respondent shall have ten (10) days after the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office of the City Clerk, a written request for a hearing. If the respondent does not request a hearing within said ten (10) days, the City Clerk's written notice shall become a final denial, suspension, or revocation, as the case may be, on the thirtieth (30th) day after it is issued, and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this Section. 
(1)  If the respondent does make a written request for a hearing within said ten days, then the City Clerk shall, within ten days after the submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days after the date that the hearing notice is issued. The City shall provide for the hearing to be transcribed. 
(2)  At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the City Clerk's witnesses. The City Clerk shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two (2) days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The Hearing Officer shall issue a final written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this ordinance, to the respondent within five (5) days after the hearing. 
(3)  If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall advise the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction, and the decision shall not become effective until the thirtieth (30th) day after it is rendered. If the Hearing Officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the Hearing Officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the City Clerk to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the City Clerk shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(b)  If any court action challenging a licensing decision is initiated, the City shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within thirty (30) days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The City shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating as a sexually oriented business, or any sexually oriented business employee that is lawfully employed as a sexually oriented business employee, on the date on which the completed business or employee application, as applicable, is filed with the City Clerk: Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the City's enforcement of any denial, suspension, or revocation of a Temporary License or annual license, the City Clerk shall immediately issue the respondent a Provisional License. The Provisional License shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the City's enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 10) 
Sec. 14-440. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 11) 
Sec. 14-441. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 12) 
Sec. 14-442. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films on premises. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video cassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The City Clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no specified sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
(i)  That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than 150 square feet is limited to one person. 
(ii)  That specified sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
(iii)  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
(iv)  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
(v)  That violations of these regulations are unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in subsections (5)a. though d of this section. 
(7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from an operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. If the premises has two (2) or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that no porous materials are used for any wall, floor, or seat in any booth or viewing room. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(8) to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(c)  No patron shall knowingly or recklessly enter or remain in a viewing room less than 150 square feet in area that is occupied by any other patron. 
(d)  No patron shall knowingly or recklessly be or remain within one foot of any other patron while in a viewing room that is 150 square feet or larger in area. 
(e)  No person shall knowingly or recklessly make any hole or opening between viewing rooms. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 13) 
Sec. 14-443. - Loitering, exterior lighting and monitoring, and interior lighting requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to: 
(i)  Ensure that at least two conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on the premises are posted on the premises; 
(ii)  Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on the premises by visually inspecting the premises at least once every ninety (90) minutes or inspecting the premises by use of video cameras and monitors; and 
(iii)  Provide lighting to the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. Said lighting shall be of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1.0) foot candle as measured at the floor level. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to ensure that the interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot candles as measured at the floor level and the illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer is present in or on the premises. 
(c)  No sexually oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or similar barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment from being visible from a public right of way. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 14) 
Sec. 14-444. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by fines not to exceed one thousand ($1,000.00) per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be fined as such. 
(b)  The City's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this ordinance to enjoin, prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings shall be brought in the name of the City, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this ordinance, or any of the laws in force in the City or to exempt anyone violating this code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 15) 
Sec. 14-445. - Applicability of article to existing businesses. 
All preexisting sexually oriented businesses lawfully operating in the City in compliance with all state and local laws prior to the effective date of this article, and all sexually oriented business employees working in the city prior to the effective date of this ordinance, are hereby granted a De Facto Temporary License to continue operation or employment for a period of ninety (90) days following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. By the end of said ninety (90) days, all sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees must conform to and abide by the requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 16) 
Sec. 14-446. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No patron, employee, or any other person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or engage in a specified sexual activity. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, remains at least six (6) feet from all patrons and on a stage at least eighteen (18) inches from the floor in a room of at least six hundred (600) square feet. 
(c)  No employee who regularly appears semi-nude in a sexually oriented business shall knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(d)  No person shall possess, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(e)  No person shall knowingly or recklessly allow a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(f)  No operator or licensee of a sexually oriented business shall knowingly violate the regulations in this section or knowingly or recklessly allow an employee or any other person to violate the regulations in this section. 
(g)  A sign in a form to be prescribed by the City Clerk, and summarizing the provisions of subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) of this section, shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. No person shall cover, obstruct, or obscure said sign. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 17) 
Sec. 14-447. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
This ordinance does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this ordinance. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this ordinance, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this ordinance, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 18) 
Sec. 14-448. - Failure of City to meet deadline not to risk applicant/licensee rights. 
In the event that a City official is required to act or to do a thing pursuant to this ordinance within a prescribed time, and fails to act or to do such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required of the City official under this ordinance, and not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by the City of an applicant or licensee's application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee's license (including a renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the City's action has passed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 19) 
Sec. 14-449. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in Peachtree Corners, unless said sexually oriented business is at least: 
(1)  1,000 feet from any parcel zoned RA-200, R-140, R-LL, R-100, R-75, R-60, R-TH, R-ZT, R-SR, RM, RMD, RM-6, RM-8, RM-10, RM-13, HRR, RL, MH, or MHS; 
(2)  1,000 feet from any parcel occupied by a house of worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, college campus, public park, children's day care facility, or any residence; 
(3)  500 feet from any parcel occupied by an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises; and 
(4)  1,000 feet from any parcel occupied by another sexually oriented business. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions from the structure or tenant space of the applicable sexually oriented business to the closest property line of the zoned property or uses outlined in subsection (a), above. Where property conditioned for residential purposes is part of a mixed use development, the distance shall be measured to the closest boundary of the area shown on the approved site plan as conditioned for residential purposes. Where a use listed in subsection (a) is located in a structure or tenant space in a multi-tenant development, the distance shall be measured to the structure or tenant space of that use rather than the property line of the overall development, so as to maximize the number of locations available to sexually oriented businesses. The zoning and/or use of land in adjacent jurisdictions shall not disqualify any location within the City of Peachtree Corners from being available to a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 20) 
Sec. 14-450. - Severability. 
This ordinance and each section and provision of said ordinance hereunder, are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this ordinance be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 21) 
Sec. 14-451. - Conflicting Code provisions repealed. 
Any provisions in this Code specifically in conflict with any provision in this ordinance is hereby deemed inoperative and repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-57, § 22) 
Secs. 14-452—14-470. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 14-471. - High level jobs beneficial to community. 
The city recognizes that certain targeted businesses in fields, such as technology and life sciences, bring high level jobs to the city and are especially beneficial to the community. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-07, § 1, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 14-472. - In city's best interest to offer strategic inducements. 
In order to compete for targeted businesses it is in the city's best interest to have the availability of offering strategic inducements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-07, § 2, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 14-473. - Targeted business defined. 
The city shall define targeted business as any preferred business or industry type as identified by the city, Partnership Gwinnett or a special impact project of such magnitude as may be determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-07, § 3, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 14-474. - Businesses eligible for inducements determined by city manager. 
Targeted businesses meeting defined threshold levels (as outlined in section 14-476), may be eligible for inducements as determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-07, § 4, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 14-475. - Types of inducements; city manager authorized. 
The city manager shall be authorized to offer inducements to targeted businesses meeting threshold requirements and those inducements may include the following: 
(1)  Reduction of development permit fees. 
(2)  Reduction of building permit fees. 
(3)  Reduction of inspection and re-inspection fees. 
(4)  Reduction of application fees for public hearings. 
(5)  Reduction of business occupation taxes. 
(6)  Reduction of any current or future impact fees. 
(7)  Acceleration of the plan review and permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-07, § 5, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 14-476. - Threshold levels for inducements. 
Inducements may be offered to targeted businesses which meet the following threshold levels: 
(1)  Tier 1: Targeted business adds at least 25 new jobs and the jobs pay an average salary at least 1.25 times the county average for that industry. 
(2)  Tier 2: Targeted business adds at least 100 new jobs and the jobs pay an average annual salary of at least 1.25 times the county average for that industry or $60,000 plus health benefits, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-07, § 6, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 14-477. - Funding commitment from state. 
In determining whether to offer inducements, the city manager may consider whether the targeted business has received a funding commitment from the state contingent upon the business' relocation or expansion within the state. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-07, § 7, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 14-478. - New building or three-year commitment to space within the city. 
In determining whether to offer inducements, the city manager may consider whether the targeted business builds a new building or makes a lease commitment of at least three years for space within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-07, § 8, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 14-479. - Targeted business receiving an inducement must not relocate. 
Any targeted business which receives any inducement under the provisions of this article shall agree to not relocate out of the city for the entire period during which the inducement is granted. Should the targeted business relocate outside the city or fall below 80 percent of any threshold requirement, the targeted business shall immediately reimburse the city for the full value of all inducements it received. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-07, § 9, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 14-480. - City manager authorized to sign confidentiality agreements with businesses. 
The city manager or his designee are authorized to sign confidentiality agreements with prospective businesses pursuant to this article, provided that those confidentiality agreements are made subject to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02-07, § 10, 3-5-2013) 
Secs. 14-481—14-499. - Reserved 
ARTICLE XVI. - PROGRAM FOR TAX EXEMPTIONS FOR NEW AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY BUSINESSES 

Sec. 14-500. - Purpose of the program. 
(a)  The purpose of the City of Peachtree Corners' Program for Tax Exemptions for New and Emerging Technology Businesses (the "program") is to encourage new businesses that operate in certain fields related to high technology, life sciences, and intellectual property by providing exemption from administrative fees and a portion of taxes imposed by the City of Peachtree Corners Occupation Tax Ordinance. 
(b)  The program is designed to encourage the creation of new businesses in emerging markets and technologies whether developed at public or private business incubator facilities or by the efforts of individual entrepreneurs. The development of technology into a commercial product by going through the process of business planning, product development, securing funding, and other steps necessary to get the technology to the marketplace can be made easier by tax exemption and reduced cost of regulatory compliance. The city wishes to reduce the start-up costs to new businesses by providing specific regulatory and taxation relief until such business ventures become ready to compete in the marketplace. 
(c)  Three public benefits characterize the purpose of the program: 
(1)  Tax exemptions and reduced cost of regulatory compliance creates a lower cost environment for new and emerging technology businesses and encourages the selected types of businesses to locate their operations and develop their business within the city; 
(2)  Tax exemptions and reduced cost of regulatory compliance tends to have a positive impact on the city's economic health by encouraging and maximizing the success of new and emerging businesses in targeted fields that tend to provide higher paying jobs and encourage growth in related sectors; 
(3)  The program encourages registration of new and emerging businesses in targeted fields by allowing such businesses to be able to openly solicit capital investment and business advice before actively earning revenues or receiving gross receipts. 
(d)  This program is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(f) and any part of this division which is not authorized by said section or the general law is a specific limitation of this division without regard to whether it is set forth herein and such general law may be relied upon for enforcement of this division or this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-501. - Definitions. 
Business entity means any sole proprietorship; corporation and foreign corporation; nonprofit corporation and foreign nonprofit corporation; profit and nonprofit unincorporated association; business trust, estate, general partnership, limited partnership, trust, two or more persons having a joint or common economic interest; limited liability company and foreign limited liability company; limited liability partnership and foreign limited liability partnership. 
Initial registration year means the first tax year that the exemption provided by this division is made available or the tax year in which a qualifying business is organized. 
Qualifying business means a business entity (i) not previously doing business in the jurisdiction of the city in any other form; (ii) that applies for a business license in a type of business classification that has been designated as consistent with the intent of this division through reference to a classification in the North American Industry Classification System ("NAICS") or an equivalent standard industrial classification that can reasonably be cross-referenced to the NAICS that is from time to time approved for an exemption by the governing authority; and (iii) the application for business license or renewal is made in an operating year that qualifies for an exemption. 
Revenue means the same as gross receipts which are defined elsewhere in this article. 
Start-up means a business entity whose business form is in the initial registration year. 
Start-up exemption means an exemption provided to a start-up business whose operations are conducted primarily at a certified business incubator location and whose operating characteristics meet the requirements of this division. 
Tax year means any year in which taxes imposed under chapter 14 should have been paid without regard to whether the taxpayer was registered with the office of revenue. 
Year of operations means a calendar year in which a qualifying business conducts business in the jurisdiction of the City of Peachtree Corners including those years when such business was not registered with the office of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-502. - NAICS classifications approved for exemptions. 
The governing authority has adopted by ordinance and may from time to time add or delete those NAICS classifications considered to support the intent of this division. The city shall maintain a record of the NAICS classifications which are approved to provide start-up exemptions for qualifying businesses. The removal of an NACIS classification from the list of businesses for which an exemption can be granted shall not cause a business which received an exemption to lose such exemption until after its third year of operations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-503. - Registration and renewal required. 
(a)  Pursuant to article I of this chapter, registration and renewal of the business license is required even for a business which is included in the NAICS classifications which are approved to provide start-up exemptions for qualifying businesses and it shall remain a violation of this article for any business, even when entitled to an exemption under this division, to fail to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Determination of whether a business is a qualifying business is solely reserved to the city or its designee and it shall be a violation of this article for a business which would be a qualified business if properly registered to operate without a business license. 
(2)  It shall not be a defense to a citation for failure to register for a business which would be a qualified business if properly registered to operate without a business license and such business may still be cited for violation of article I of this chapter even if it is granted a start-up exemption. The city may, but is not required to, dismiss a citation upon a determination that no tax would be due after the initial registration provided that the business is in its first year of operations. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the determination that business is determined to be a qualifying business upon its initial registration, the timely renewal of the registration in compliance with article I of this chapter is required. 
(1)  Renewal is required in order to determine if gross receipts of the qualifying business exceed the level to which the exemption applied such that some tax is due; 
(2)  Renewal is required to determine if the qualifying business has exhausted its right to exemptions which is limited in all case to three tax years 
(c)  A business which is organized solely to make investments which might be exempt from some or all taxes imposed by this article by virtue of the exemptions granted by this division shall nevertheless be required to register and renew its business license. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-504. - Administrative fees exempted. 
No qualifying business shall be charged an administrative fee in connection with its registration or renewal in those operating year when exemptions available. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-505. - Amount of tax exempted. 
No qualifying business shall be taxed on the first $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts for the first three years of operations, specifically including the year of registration. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-506. - Per employee tax exempted. 
No qualifying business shall be taxed on the number of employees for the first three years of operations, specifically including the year of registration, except where the business has more than $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts in which case, the per employee exemption shall only apply to five employees. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-507. - Operating years when exemptions available. 
(a)  A qualifying business that is newly formed is eligible for an exemption in the year of its formation and for the following two years of operations. 
(b)  A qualifying business that would have been eligible for the exemption had such exemption had been available in the first three years of its operations is eligible for an exemption in first and/or second year after this division is effective; provided however that no exemption is available in the fourth year of operation of any qualifying business. 
(c)  A qualifying business that was in operation but was not registered with the office of revenue shall have the years of operation prior to registration counted as a part of the operating years used to calculate if exemptions could be available. 
(d)  Under no circumstance shall any business entity be entitled to an exemption in more than three tax years. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-508. - Change of business form or name. 
A change of business form or name by a business entity in business for three previous years shall not be sufficient for a business entity to be classified as a qualifying business even if such business operates in a field that has been designated as consistent with the aim of this division through reference to a classification in the North American Industry Classification System ("NAICS"). The city is authorized to make a determination as to whether a business entity which has applied for an exemption is in fact operating as a start-up business or has operated under a different business form or business name. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-509. - Transfer of revenues to or from other entities. 
It is the intent of this division that an exemption from taxes be provided only for those qualifying businesses on gross receipts of up to $1,000,000.00 received in connection with their operations in an operating year when such exemptions would be available. The transfer of gross receipts or revenue to other business entities to avoid the payment of tax shall result in the 
Transfers of revenues earned by other business entities to a qualifying business in an operating year when exemptions are available shall not eligible for an exemption. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-510. - Gains from investments in qualified businesses. 
(a)  In recognition of the fact that investment is a crucial component of encouraging the creation of new businesses in emerging markets and technologies, it is the intent of this division that an exemption from taxes also be provided for gains from the sale of stocks, bonds, partnership shares or instruments of indebtedness that are given in exchange for funding the creation of a qualifying business. 
(b)  A business entity receiving stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness that are given in exchange for a cash investment in a qualifying businesses, shall be exempt from taxes on the first $1,000,000.00 received above the amount of the initial cash investment where such gain is in connection with the sale of such stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness, provided that cash is received as payment for the sale thereof within three years of the date of the cash investment or the date of registration of the qualifying business, whichever is earlier. 
(1)  For the purpose of this division, gain from an investment in a qualifying business that is no longer included in the list of NAICS classifications approved to provide start-up exemptions when the stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness received in exchange for the initial cash investment are sold, shall still receive the exemption provided by this section so long as the cash that is received as payment for the sale of such investment is received within the time provided in this section. 
(c)  No exemption is allowed for gains resulting from investment in any type of business entity other than in a qualified business in its initial registration year and that was registered with the office of revenue within 30 days of the date that such investment was made or the date of initial registration whichever is later. 
(d)  In order to encourage reinvestment in new qualifying businesses, gain resulting from the exchange of stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness given in exchange for a cash investment in a qualifying businesses for stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness, the amount of gain recognized shall not be exempt from taxes imposed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-511. - Refunds for fees or taxes paid for prior operations. 
Under no circumstance shall any part of this division or this article be construed to authorize refunds for a business entity which has paid any tax or fee prior to the enactment of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-512. - Penalties for filing false applications or renewals. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of the occupation tax ordinance to file false documents in order to be determined to be a qualifying business or to receive any type of exemption. 
(1)  The city shall have without exclusion all powers delegated under article I of this chapter to make a determination that this section has been violated and to impose any penalty provided by this division. 
(2)  The penalty for violation of this section shall be the immediate revocation of the exemption in addition to any taxes, penalties and interest which are determined to be due. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-513. - Requesting additional data authorized. 
The city is authorized to issue a business license to a start-up business that grants permission for operation in the City of Peachtree Corners in the same manner an any other business license; provided however that gathering of such additional information as deemed necessary by the office of revenue for efficient management of the exemptions may be made a part of the application process. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-514. - Penalties for filing false applications or renewals for start-up business exemption or filing false returns. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this division and the occupation tax ordinance to file false documents in connection with a start-up business exemption. 
(1)  Any business which has been granted an exemption as a start-up business and which claims such exemption through filing a false application or renewal shall be in violation of this division and the occupation tax ordinance. 
(2)  The city shall have without exclusion all powers delegated under section article I of this chapter to make a determination that this section has been violated. 
(3)  The penalty for violation of this division shall be the immediate revocation of the exemption. The revocation of the start-up business exemption shall cause any tax and administrative fee due in the year of revocation to be fully payable as if the business was not qualified for an exemption. 
(4)  The penalty for filing a false application for exemption and/or the underpayment of taxes shall be the same as that set forth in article I of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-515. - Enforcement provisions. 
Any provision of this division may be administered or enforced through the use of any and all other regulations set forth elsewhere in this article or in the general law. It is the specifically intended that any method of enforcement which could be used to determine if an occupation tax was correctly paid can be used to determine whether an exemption will be or was correctly granted or whether the amount of the exemption taken by a taxpayer was proper in amount. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-516. - Appeals. 
An appeal of a decision of the city or its designee as to whether an exemption will be or was correctly granted or whether the amount of the exemption taken by a tax payer was proper in amount is an administrative decision which shall be appealed in the same manner as decisions and in the method that is set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-517. - Compliance with other laws. 
The approval of a start-up business exemption by the office of revenue shall not excuse any business from any type of filing or certification required by state law or this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-518. - Severability. 
In the event that any part of this division is declared invalid for any reason such that the exemption provided in division cannot be granted, this division is intended to be fully severable from the levy of the occupation tax and all parts of this article which support collection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06-74, § II, 7-19-2016) 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Green regulations and policies. 
(a)  The City of Peachtree Corners Green Regulations and Policies is hereby adopted. 
(b)  The regulations and policies contained within The City of Peachtree Corners Green Regulations and Policies shall become effective immediately upon adoption. 
(c)  The City of Peachtree Corners Green Regulations and Policies document may be modified from time to time, if needed, without requiring an amendment to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03-42, §§ 1—3, 4-21-2016) 
Editor's note— The City of Peachtree Corners Green Regulations and Policies has been adopted by reference and the document referenced above has not been set out. Copies are on file and available in the city offices. 
Secs. 18-2—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04-91, §§ I—XI, adopted May 16, 2017, effective April 19, 2017, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 18-19—18-29, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of July 1, 2012, §§ 42-96—42-106. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

Sec. 18-19. - Title. 
This article will be known as "Peachtree Corners Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-91, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-20. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) . These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board . The board of natural resources. 
Buffer . The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel . A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands . Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission . The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC . Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut . A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface, also, known as excavation. 
Department . The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional . A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director . The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District . The Gwinnett Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division . The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure . A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion . The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan . A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protection at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 18-22(c) of this article. 
Fill . A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization . All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade . The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading . Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation . The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity . Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 18-21(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale . A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority . The governing authority of the City of Peachtree Corners which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) . A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface . The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) . Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI . A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT . A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator . The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall . The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit . The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person . Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased . Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project . The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed . Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure . A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment . Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation . The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan . An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Gwinnett Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization . The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit . The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
State waters . Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices . Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams . All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov . Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures . Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse . Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands . Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-91, § II, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-21. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of subsection 18-22(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-91, § III, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-22. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions . Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsection 18-22(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs . 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsection 18-22(b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection (c)(15)—(17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 18-22(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed ; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to [O.C.G.A. §] 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to [O.C.G.A. §] 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act [April 19, 2-17] and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsection 18-22(b) and (c) of this article. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-91, § IV, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-23. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General . The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements . 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Peachtree Corners without first obtaining a permit from the community development department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Peachtree Corners and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 18-23(c) of this article. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsection 18-22(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 18-22(c)(15)—(17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 18-23(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements . 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection 18-22(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits . 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsection 18-22(c)(15)—(17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 18-23(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-91, § V, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-24. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The City of Peachtree Corners will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. The City of Peachtree Corners shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The City of Peachtree Corners shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-91, § VI, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-25. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity . If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders . 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture . If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 18-23(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties . Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-91, § VII, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-26. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-91, § VIII, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-27. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies . The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city manager within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review . Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the City of Peachtree Corners, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-91, § IX, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-28. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity . This article shall become effective on the 19 th day of April, 2017. 
(b)  Validity . If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability . 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-91, § X, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-29. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or invalidate the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-91, § XI, 5-16-2017) 
Secs. 18-30—18-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04-89, §§ 1—11, adopted May 16, 2017, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 18-47—18-57, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-01-39, §§ 1—11, March 17, 2015. 

Sec. 18-47. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  Findings . Whereas, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Peachtree Corners finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources. 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater. 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation. 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks. 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff. 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams. 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem. 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat. 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat. 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity. 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)  Purposes . It is the purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones and impervious setbacks along the streams of City of Peachtree Corners for the protection of water resources; and, 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers and development within such impervious setbacks by establishing buffer and setback zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-89, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-48. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by subsection 18-50(a) below). 
City means the City of Peachtree Corners. 
Community development director means the community development director of the city or his/her designee. 
Ephemeral stream means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which temporary runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. 
Impervious cover means those areas, which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to land development. Impervious cover includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, parking lots, driveways, streets, roads, decks (other than elevated slatted decks), swimming pools, patio areas, paved storage areas, compacted gravel areas, awnings and any concrete or asphalt areas. 
Impervious setback means the setback area defined in section 18-51 below. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development or land disturbance activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability company, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by subsection 18-50(a)(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
State waters means, any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon a parcel. 
Stream means any natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground, 
Stream channel means the confining cut of ground surface that contains the base flow of a stream and is identified at a point where the water flow has wrested the vegetation. 
Unusual circumstances means (i) the shape, topography or other physical conditions of the parcel prevents land development in a manner consistent with similar situated properties within the proximity of the parcel; (ii) circumstances constituting force majeure; or (iii) any rehabilitation or reconstruction by a parcel owner of an impervious cover existing within the buffer described in section 18-50 below. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a stream. 
Wrested vegetation means the point adjacent to the edge of the base flow of a stream or the water surface of a lake where vegetation has been moved or wrested as a result of normal stream flow or wave action. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-89, § 2, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-49. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land development and land disturbance activity on any parcel containing a stream protection area. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions . This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
b.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, and other land disturbance activities not requiring permits under this article or any other provision of the Code; provided, however, any new land development or land disturbance activities on such properties shall be subject to this article. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(2)  Exemptions . The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
2.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a parcel; 
4.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
6.  Activities to restore and enhance stream channel and bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used; or 
7.  The removal of dead, dying, diseased, or hazardous trees, provided, however, no grading or stump removal shall be conducted. 
b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (1)b., above. 
c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the Peachtree Corners Community Development Department on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time-period as may be determined by the Peachtree Corners Community Development Department to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
g.  Projects defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(3) that would be considered minor land-disturbing activities that are exempt from the Georgia Soil and Sedimentation Act: 
"Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion." 
After the effective date of this article, the buffer requirements and the setback requirements stipulated herein shall apply to new subdivisions and site plans or any other construction, land development or land disturbances in the proximity of a stream, whether or not the stream is located within the parcel where the activity is proposed. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to subsection 18-50(b) below. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-89, § 3, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-50. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements . All land development and land disturbance activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)  Variance procedures . Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this article, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the Peachtree Corners Community Development Department finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of Peachtree Corners may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of Peachtree Corners shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the zoning board of appeals. The City of Peachtree Corners shall give public notice of each such public hearing in the city's legal organ. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and, 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and, 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-89, § 4, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-51. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence, which includes but is not limited to the following: 
Metropolitan River Protection Act and Chattahoochee Corridor Plan 
Requires a 50-foot undisturbed vegetative buffer and 150-foot impervious surface setback on the Chattahoochee River and its impoundments and a 35-foot undisturbed vegetative buffer (all measured from the edge of the water) on perennial tributary streams in a corridor extending 2,000 feet from either bank of the river and its impoundments. The corridor extends from Buford Dam to the downstream limits of the Atlanta region (Douglas and Fulton Counties). 
DNR Part 5 Criteria for Small (under 100 square miles) Water Supply Watersheds 
Authorized under Part V of the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, these criteria require 100-foot undisturbed buffers and 150-foot setbacks on all perennial streams within seven miles upstream of a public water supply reservoir or public water supply intake. Beyond seven miles, the required buffer is 50 feet and the required setback is 75 feet. 
DNR Part 5 Criteria for River Protection 
Authorized under the 1991 Mountains and River Corridors Protection Act of 1991, these criteria require a 100-foot buffer along rivers with average annual flows of greater than 400 cfs (excepting the portion of the Chattahoochee referenced above). The buffer is measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-89, § 5, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-52. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the parcel or on adjacent parcels within 75 feet of the boundary of the subject parcel; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the parcel; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
f.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and setback and of all proposed land disturbance within the setback; and 
g.  Tree save fencing at the limits of the proposed disturbance where the proposed disturbance is within or adjacent to the stream protection area. 
(2)  A written description of the need for all proposed land development within the buffer and setback and land disturbance in the setback; and, 
(3)  Any other documentation that the city may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-89, § 6, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-53. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its elected officials, officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. All permits issued by the city which do not comply with this article are ultra vires and the work permitted thereby is subject to both a stop work order and order to remediate the land disturbance so permitted without the imposition of any liability upon the city, its elected officials, officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-89, § 7, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-54. - Inspection. 
The city may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The holder of the permit shall assist the city in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development or land disturbance activities within the protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-89, § 8, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-55. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation . If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the parcel. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety; 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Enforcement . In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
a.  Stop work order . The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy . The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit . The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties . In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the city deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties . For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-89, § 9, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-56. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal . Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of Peachtree Corners Community Development Department, may appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the city manager and shall be entitled to a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of Peachtree Corners within 90 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review . Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-89, § 10, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 18-57. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or invalidate the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-89, § 11, 5-16-2017) 
Secs. 18-58—18-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREAM BUFFER MITIGATION BANK 

Sec. 18-90. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Stream Buffer Mitigation Bank Ordinance of Peachtree Corners." 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-171) 
Sec. 18-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a property owner, public agency or private entity seeking participation in the Stream Buffer Mitigation Bank by meeting the specifications of this article and the criteria and procedures in the Peachtree Corners Stream Buffer Mitigation Bank procedures guide, a chapter of the Gwinnett County Storm Water Design Manual. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of a stream in its existing or enhanced state of vegetation as defined by the stream buffer protection article. 
Conservation easement means a legal agreement or dedication in favor or a government agency or qualified land conservation organization, recorded in the county real property records by the property owner to place restrictions on present and future use of land. 
Creation means the development of a forested buffer in an area were a buffer did not previously exist. Successful creation results in a net gain in buffer acres. 
Department means the department of water resources of the county. 
Director means the director of the department of water resources or the director's designee. 
Enhancement means activities conducted within existing forested buffer that heighten, intensify, or improve its function to protect the aquatic resource. Enhancement may include management and control of exotic species, such as privet or improving diversity thorough replanting. Enhancement results in improved function, but does not result in a gain in buffer area. 
Floodplain means those lands subject to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Impervious cover or impervious surface means any paved, hardened or structural surface, including, but not limited to, buildings, dams, decks, driveways, parking areas, patios, streets, swimming pools, tennis courts, walkways, and other structures. 
Land development means: 
(1)  Verb: All activities associated with the conversion of land or the expansion or replacement of an existing use to any new use intended for human operation, occupancy or habitation, other than for agricultural purposes devoted strictly to the cultivation of the land, dairying or animal husbandry. Such activities include land disturbance (clearing and grubbing the land of vegetation and stumps, and grading) and the construction of improvements, such as, but not limited to, streets, driveways or parking areas, water or sewer mains, stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks or other structures permanently placed on or in the property. 
(2)  Noun: Where appropriate to the context, the term "development" also may be used to denote a specific subdivision or project which is a single entity or intended to be constructed as in interrelated whole, whether simultaneously or in phases. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, clearing and grubbing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Lot or parcel means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Mitigation means the use of any or all of the following actions listed in descending order of preference: 
(1)  Avoiding the impact by not taking a certain action; 
(2)  Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce the impact; 
(3)  Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected stream buffer; 
(4)  Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation or maintenance operations during the life of the development proposal; 
(5)  Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing or providing substitute stream buffer protection areas or other activities that restore, maintain or protect stream buffer functions within the city; 
(6)  Monitoring the impact and taking appropriate corrective measures. 
Mitigation bank means a property that has been protected and approved by the city expressly for the purpose of providing compensatory mitigation for authorized impacts through the restoration, creation, and/or enhancement of stream buffers or water quality, and, in exceptional circumstances, preservation of adjacent stream buffers, and/or other resources contributing toward the proper function of a stream buffer or water quality, or property that is utilized to implement other types of activities that restore, enhance, and protect stream buffer functions or water quality within the city. 
Mitigation banking means the process of restoring or creating self-sustaining, functioning stream buffers or water quality, or, in exceptional circumstances, preserving high-quality and threatened buffers, or other activities that directly contribute to the restoration, enhancement, and protection of stream buffer functions or water quality as a prior replacement for stream buffers that are expected to be unavoidably impacted by development. 
Mitigation costs means the costs as determined by the county for restoration of a riparian buffer and may include planning, design, construction, and property costs. Gwinnett County Mitigation Banking costs are provided in the procedures guide, a chapter of the Gwinnett County Storm Water Design Manual, and are adjusted as needed by the department. 
Mitigation credit means a unit of value generally equivalent to one acre of created or restored functioning stream buffer. 
Mitigation plan means a written document developed based on the criteria in the Gwinnett County Stream Buffer Mitigation Bank procedures guide, a chapter of the Gwinnett County Storm Water Design Manual, and supplemented with graphics (including as-built drawings), that describes in detail the implemented mitigation site, the goals established for the project, how it was implemented, how it will be monitored, the amount of mitigation in the site (credits, acres, etc.), and the criteria by which its success will be determined. 
Monitoring means evaluating the impacts of development proposals on biologic, hydrologic and geologic systems and assessing the performance of required mitigation. 
Off-site means outside the limits of the project area. 
On-site means within the limits of the project area. 
Perennial stream means a watercourse having a source, terminus, banks and channel through which water flows on a continuous basis as depicted on the most recent United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute quadrangle map (scale 1:24,000). 
Permit means the permit issued by the department of planning and development required for undertaking land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Procedures guide means the Gwinnett County Stream Buffer Mitigation Bank procedures guide, a chapter of the Gwinnett County Storm Water Design Manual, which provides a standardized process for preparing a mitigation plan, coordinating with the department, obtaining the proper permits, determination of mitigation requirements, conducting a completeness review of the design, monitoring the success of the project, cost of mitigation credits, and payment procedures when utilizing the stream buffer mitigation bank. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream as established by the city stream buffer protection article. 
Restoration means the re-establishment or rehabilitation of a buffer with the goal of returning natural or historic functions and characteristics. Restoration may include the conversion of a pasture area to a forested area and result in a gain in buffer function value for protecting aquatic resources. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by the city stream buffer protection article as extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location where the normal stream flow has wrested the vegetation. The normal stream flow is any flow that consists solely of base flow or consists of both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. Base flow results from the groundwater that enters the stream channel through the soil. This includes spring flows into streams. Direct runoff is the water entering stream channels promptly after rainfall or snow melts; 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 20 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 20 acres, the department of water resources may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stormwater capital project means the project created to finance and operate, in perpetuity, the Peachtree Corners Stream Buffer Mitigation Bank. 
Stream bank means the confining cut of a stream channel. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Utility means a public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by the city. 
Variance means an adjustment in the application of standards as defined in section 18-50(b). 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial waterway, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently having a definite channel, bed and bank, and includes any area adjacent thereto which is subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-172) 
Sec. 18-92. - Establishment of the stream buffer mitigation bank and stormwater capital project. 
There is hereby created a Peachtree Corners Stream Buffer Mitigation Bank and a stormwater capital project. The mitigation bank will be administered by the county department of water resources. The county department of financial services will administer the stormwater capital project. 
(1)  Source of funds. All monies generated by the sale of credits through the in-lieu fee mitigation option described in section 18-96(2) shall be deposited into the stormwater capital project. All monies received from penalties described in section 18-55 shall be deposited into the project. 
(2)  Use of funds. Funds shall be budgeted and maintained separately from all other city service funds, for the sole purpose of financing and supporting the creation and perpetual operation of a stream buffer mitigation bank to serve the city. Funds may be used to implement projects that will replace the functional loss (for both water quality and quantity) of the forested stream buffer, including, but not limited to, design and construction of stream restoration projects, property acquisition, engineering and planning studies, and design and construction of stormwater best management practices. 
(3)  Real property. All purchases or transfers of real property pursuant to this article shall be brought before the county commission for approval. The director of the department of water resources may accept, with county commission approval, donations of real estate, easements and revenue for use in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-173) 
Sec. 18-93. - Peachtree Corners Stream Buffer Mitigation Bank procedures guide. 
A Peachtree Corners Stream Buffer Mitigation Bank procedures guide shall be developed and updated as needed by the department of water resources as a chapter of the Gwinnett County Storm Water Design Manual. The procedures guide will provide a standardized process for preparing a mitigation plan, coordinating with the department, obtaining the proper permits, determination of mitigation requirements, conducting a completeness review of the design, monitoring the success of the project, cost of mitigation credits, and payment procedures when utilizing the stream buffer mitigation bank. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-174) 
Sec. 18-94. - Applicability. 
This article applies to persons who wish to impact a stream buffer protection zone as defined in the city stream buffer protection article. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable mitigation requirements established under state or federal law. The terms of this article apply when an applicant has either: 
(1)  Received approval from the department of water resources for a proposed impact to a stream buffer protection zone that is "allowable with mitigation," as defined in the procedures guide; or 
(2)  Received a variance pursuant to section 18-50(b)(4)e and is required to perform mitigation as a condition of a variance approval. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-175) 
Sec. 18-95. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-176) 
Sec. 18-96. - Stream buffer mitigation requirements. 
To achieve stream buffer mitigation that is proportional to the extent of the impact and consistent from project to project, all applicants requesting mitigation must follow the standardized processes as described in the Peachtree Corners Stream Buffer Mitigation Bank procedures guide, available as a chapter of the Gwinnett County Storm Water Design Manual. The applicant will use the criteria outlined in the procedures guide to determine the amount of creation, restoration, enhancement, and/or preservation required relative to the degree of impact. An applicant has two options for mitigating impacts to an existing stream buffer protection zone as defined in the city stream buffer protection article. The first option is to perform the mitigation on-site in accordance with the procedures described in subsection (1) of this section. The second option is for the applicant to pay a fee to the Peachtree Corners Stormwater Capital Project in accordance with the procedures described in section 18-50(b). 
(1)  On-site mitigation. An applicant may mitigate impacts to an existing stream buffer by performing an amount of mitigation that is equivalent to the mitigation requirement on-site in accordance with the on-site mitigation procedures in the procedures guide. If the amount of on-site mitigation is not sufficient to satisfy the mitigation requirement, then the applicant will be required to purchase credits from the Peachtree Corners Stream Buffer Mitigation Bank as described in section 18-50(b). 
(2)  In-lieu fee mitigation. An applicant may mitigate impacts to an existing stream buffer by paying a fee to the stormwater capital project in accordance with the fee schedule. The fee will be based on the actual costs of stream buffer restoration and will be approved by the city commission. The fee schedule will be reviewed and revised as necessary to reflect the actual costs of restoration and submitted to the city commission for review and approval. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-177) 
Sec. 18-97. - Additional information requirements for mitigation of buffer zone properties. 
As described of in the city stream buffer protection article and stream buffer mitigation bank procedures guide, any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than two-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the department of water resources may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. All buffer and setback areas must be recorded following the plan approval process. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-178) 
Sec. 18-98. - Inspection of on-site mitigation projects. 
(a)  Either the department of water resources or the department of planning and development may perform inspections of the on-site mitigation project and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist representatives of either department in making such inspections. Both the director of the department of water resources and the director of the department of planning and development or the directors' designee shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to carry out the duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-179) 
Sec. 18-99. - Enforcement and administrative appeal. 
This article shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by both the director of the department of water resources and the director of the department of planning and development or the director's designee. Any action or inaction that violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved plan or permit shall be subject to the enforcement actions or penalties outlined in sections 18-55 and 18-56. Any such action or inaction that is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and also may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the enforcement actions or penalties described herein shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-180) 
Sec. 18-100. - Fees. 
(a)  Application filing, permit, inspection, in-lieu and other fees shall be as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Permit fees, if any, shall be submitted as a prerequisite to issuance of the permit. Nonpayment as a result of submission of a check having insufficient funds on account, or for any other reason, shall cause the permit to be voided and re-issuance subject to penalty as may be established by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Application fees, if any, shall be submitted with the application and upon acceptance of said submission for review and consideration shall not be refundable. Failure to pay a required application fee shall cause the application to be returned to the applicant without acceptance for review or consideration by the city. 
(d)  Following the approval of development plans, and prior to authorization to begin construction, the developer shall provide the department of water resources such fees as may be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. Such fees shall not be refundable following issuance of a development permit, except upon approval of the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Prior to approval of a final plat or certificate of occupancy, the developer shall provide to the department of water resources such fees and performance and/or maintenance bonds as shall be required by this article or established from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-181) 
Sec. 18-101. - Adoption and amendment. 
(a)  Effective date. 
(1)  These regulations shall be in full force and effect on July 1, 2012, following the adoption by the board of commissioners of the county, and shall apply to any land disturbance permit for which an application is received after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to affect the validity of any building permit lawfully issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Amendments. 
(1)  These regulations may be amended from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners of the city. Such amendments shall be effective as of their date of adoption unless otherwise stated in the adopting resolution. 
(2)  Any subdivision or other project for which a valid and complete application for a development permit shall have been received prior to the adoption of an amendment to these regulations may, at the developer's option, proceed to completion and building permits may be issued as though no amendment had been approved, provided that the development permit is or can be issued within 90 calendar days of said amendment and all time frames associated with said permit are observed. 
(3)  Any subdivision or other project for which a development permit has been issued prior to the adoption of an amendment to these regulations may, at the developer's option, proceed to completion and building permits may be issued as though no amendment had been approved. 
(4)  Any subdivision or other project for which only a clearing, clearing and grubbing, or grading permit shall have been issued prior to adoption of an amendment to these regulations shall be brought into conformance with the amendment (if applicable) prior to issuance of a development permit. 
(5)  No amendment to these regulations shall be construed to affect the validity of any building permit lawfully issued prior to the adoption of said amendments. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-182) 
Secs. 18-102—18-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-11-36, adopted Jan. 20, 2015, did not specify manner of inclusion, hence, codification as §§ 18-131—18-137 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 18-131. - General provisions. 
(a)  Title . This article shall be known as the "Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance". 
(b)  Authority . The authority for this article is based on home rule provisions of the Georgia Constitution, Article IX, Section 2, Paragraph 3(a)(6). 
(c)  Findings . It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The city's separate storm sewer system was designed and installed to manage stormwater so as to prevent localized flooding, damage to property and risk to public safety; 
(2)  The city's separate storm sewer system was not designed or installed as a receiving system for non-stormwater discharges; 
(3)  Discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(4)  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the city's storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments; 
(5)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact local waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters; 
(6)  The impacts of these non-stormwater discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(7)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the city's separate storm sewer system; 
(8)  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of non-point source pollution caused by non-stormwater discharges into the city's separate storm sewer system; 
(9)  The Clean Water Act requires the management and maintenance of the city's separate storm sewer system and the management of discharges into that system; 
(10)  Therefore, in order to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system, it is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(d)  Purpose and intent . The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of non-stormwater discharges into the city's separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Comply with all Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act; and 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city's separate storm sewer system; and 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city's separate storm sewer system; and, 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(e)  Applicability . The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the geographic area of the City of Peachtree Corners. The city may enter into agreements with Gwinnett County or other municipalities, to carry out the purpose of this article. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, and cooperative monitoring and management of the separate storm sewer system and management programs. 
(f)  Compatibility with other regulations . This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article constitute a minimum standard, should not be deemed to limit or repeal any other local requirements, and are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(g)  Severability . If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(h)  Responsibility for administration . 
(1)  The city shall have the power to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article and any procedures, standards and guidelines established under authority of this article. Such power shall include the right to maintain an action or procedure in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(2)  The city shall be responsible for the conservation, management, maintenance (where applicable), extension and improvement of the city's separate storm sewer system, including activities necessary to control stormwater and activities necessary to administer and implement the stormwater management programs incorporated by reference into the city's general NPDES stormwater permit. 
(3)  The city may develop, and update periodically, a stormwater management design manual for the guidance of persons preparing stormwater management plans, designing or operating stormwater management systems, and designing or operating facilities that may contribute non-stormwater discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
(4)  The city may: 
a.  Establish or oversee the establishment of standards and guidelines for controlling stormwater; and 
b.  Determine the manner in which conveyances should be operated; and 
c.  Inspect private systems which discharge to the city's separate storm sewer system; and 
d.  Advise other city departments on issues related to stormwater; and 
e.  Protect facilities and premises controlled by the city and prescribe how they are to be used by others; and 
f.  Require facilities or activities that create new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater contributions to the city's separate storm sewer system to comply with the terms of this article; and 
g.  Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the city's separate storm sewer system. 
(i)  Stormwater design standards . 
(1)  Short title, authority and applicability . This subsection shall be known and may be cited as the City of Peachtree Corners Development Regulations in combination with Gwinnett County's Stormwater Systems and Facilities Installation Standards and Specifications Ordinance. 
(2)  Authority to adopt . The City of Peachtree Corners has the authority to adopt this subsection pursuant to Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph III (a)(6) and Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph III (c), (d) of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and O.C.G.A., §§ 36-82-61(4)(C)(ii) and 36-82-62(a)(2). 
(3)  General policy . All extensions of or additions to the stormwater system shall be designed and built in accordance with standards of the Peachtree Corners Community Development & Public Works Departments. The standards shall be those stated in the latest edition of the City of Peachtree Corners Development Regulations along with the Stormwater Systems and Facilities Installation Standards and Specifications for Gwinnett County, which have been developed, published and made available to the public at the City of Peachtree Corners. No installation of pipe or other materials used for construction of extensions of or additions to the stormwater system shall be allowed until the required information is received and the design is approved by the Peachtree Corners Community Development and Public Works Departments. Inspection and acceptance procedures shall be specified in these standards. 
(4)  Performance standards . The Community Development Department and Public Works Department of the City of Peachtree Corners shall require that all materials specified for construction of extensions of or additions to the stormwater system shall have equal performance, i.e., approximately equal economic life. 
(5)  Compliance with other regulations . Design and construction of extensions of or additions to the stormwater system shall comply with all local, state, and federal rules and regulations pertaining to stormwater facility installation, including but not limited to rules and regulations for safety, erosion and sediment control, stream buffer protection, wetlands, and water quality standards. 
(6)  Authority to issue standards and specifications . The Peachtree Corners Community Development Department Director is hereby authorized to issue and from time to time amend, update and revise the City of Peachtree Corners Development Regulations. All such rules, procedures and policies shall be consistent with the provisions of this subsection and shall be effective 30 days after being signed by the director and placed in the central files of the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11-36, § 100-21, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-132. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, unless specifically defined below, words or phrases shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article it's most effective application. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the word "shall" connotes "mandatory" and not "discretionary"; the word "may" is permissive. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified, or it is apparent from the context, definitions herein will be the same as those in other city codes. 
(c)  For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases and words, and their derivates, shall have the meaning given herein: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article that occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Conveyance shall mean an aboveground or underground natural or manmade drainage feature, that provides for the collection and movement of stormwater, and shall include but not be limited to concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, drainage channels, reservoirs, rights of way, storm drains, culverts, street gutters, oil/water separators, modular pavements and other similar drainage structures. 
County shall mean Gwinnett County and such of its departments, employees and agents. 
City shall mean the City of Peachtree Corners and such of its departments, employees and agents as may have duties and responsibilities for administering and enforcing all stormwater management activities and implementation of the provisions of this article. 
City's separate storm sewer system means any conveyance of system of conveyances which is: 
(1)  Owned or operated by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
Department shall mean, unless otherwise specified, the city department responsible for stormwater management activities and implementation of the provisions of this article. 
Director shall mean either the director of the city department responsible for stormwater management activities and implementation of the provisions of this article or any of that person's duly authorized representatives. 
Discharge shall mean the direct or indirect release of water, fluid, materials or other matter to a conveyance or surface that drains to a conveyance. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
Illegal connection shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, which is used exclusively to drain a non-stormwater discharge to the city's separate storm sewer system; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, that was designed, installed or redirected for the purpose of draining a non-stormwater discharge into the city's separate storm sewer system; or 
(3)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, which is connected to the city's separate storm sewer system and which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or other conduit, whether natural or manmade, was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time the connection was made, or has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the city or any other authorized enforcement agency. "Illegal connection" expressly includes, without limitation, those connections made in the past. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, drainage, or discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater and which may include pollutants, but that excludes: 
(1)  Water from those sources described in subsections 18-133(a)(2)a. and (a)(2)b. of this article; and/or 
(2)  Any discharge permitted under NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; process waste water and wash water; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution shall mean the man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, thermal and radiological integrity of water. 
Premises shall mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Procedure shall mean a procedure adopted by the department, by and through the director, to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this Code or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of the city or other agencies. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, but which also includes: 
(1)  Water from those sources described in subsections 18-133(a)(2)a. and b. of this article; and/or 
(2)  Any discharge permitted under NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
Stormwater management design manual shall mean the most recent version of the stormwater design manual. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
Variance shall mean the modification of the minimum stormwater requirements for specific circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11-36, § 100-22, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-133. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges . 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city's separate storm sewer system anything other than stormwater. 
(2)  Discharges from the following sources are exempt from the prohibition provision in subsection (1) above: 
a.  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, dechlorinated and unpolluted swimming pool discharges, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
b.  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections . 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to construct, connect, use, maintain, or suffer or allow the continued existence of any illegal connection to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
(2)  Illegal connections must be disconnected. The department may require that illegal connections be disconnected and redirected if necessary, to an approved on-site sewage management system or the sanitary sewer system. Such redirected connections must be approved by the agency responsible for administering and operating those systems. 
(3)  The department may require any underground or above ground pipe, drain or other conduit, that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the city's separate storm sewer system, to be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice from the department. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the department. Failure to comply with the terms of the written notice mentioned within this subsection shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11-36, § 100-23, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-134. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11-36, § 100-24, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-135. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
(a)  Access and inspection . The director or her designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect premises, properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the director or her designee. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the director or her designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, investigation, observation, monitoring, measurement, recording, enforcement, sampling and testing, photography and videotaping for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this article. The owner or operator shall allow the director or her designee to examine and copy any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit. The director or her designee shall duly notify the owner of said property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(3)  The director or her designee shall have the right to set up on any premises, property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the department to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of discharges. 
(4)  The director or her designee may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the department. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. Measurements, tests and analyses performed shall be completed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, unless the director approves another method. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises, property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the director or her designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director or her designee access to a facility, property or premises shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the director or her designee has been refused access to any part of a premises, property or facility from which stormwater is or would likely be discharged, and the director or her designee is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the department may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Schedule . The director or her designee may determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11-36, § 100-25, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-136. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of non-stormwater from that facility or operation which is resulting or may result in a discharge of that non-stormwater into the city's separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the department by phone, facsimile or in person within 24 hours of discovering the discharge. Such notification shall detail the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the department within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release or discharge as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11-36, § 100-26, 1-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-137. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations . It shall be a violation of this article for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person, who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. The department may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this article. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the department from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the department has the right but not the duty, to enter upon the subject private property or premises, without giving prior notice, and take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The department is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) below. 
(b)  Notice of violation . Whenever the department finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the department may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; and 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure, premises or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; and 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; and 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; and 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice of violation may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violations of this article shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement of non-stormwater discharges, the remediation of land or the effects of pollution, and the restoration of any affected property to its unaffected condition; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices; 
g.  The development and provision to the department of written remediation or action plan's; 
h.  The development and provision to the department of documents showing the location and discharge points of conveyances, pipes, channels, or drains; and 
i.  Any other actions that will lead to the remedy of a condition of violation of this article. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation . Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the director or her designee. The notice of appeal must be received by the department within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the director shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the director shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures . If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within three days of the decision of the director upholding the decision of the director or her designee, then, in addition to any other remedies that may be available, representatives of the department or its contractors may enter upon the subject private premises, property or facility, where they are then authorized to take any and all actions or measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. Such measures or actions shall include but not be limited to repairs, maintenance, containment, cleanup and remediation. It shall be a violation of this article for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises, property or facility to refuse to allow the department or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation . Within ten working days after abatement of the violation by the department or its contractors, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within ten working days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Criminal penalties . For violations of this article, the department may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in a court of competent jurisdiction to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)  Violations deemed a public nuisance . In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(h)  Remedies not exclusive . The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the department may seek cumulative remedies. The department may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of a notice requiring payment of such costs, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11-36, § 100-27, 1-20-2015) 
Secs. 18-138—18-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER MAINTENANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-01-40, §§ 1—18, adopted March 17, 2015, did not specify manner of inclusion, hence, codification as art. VI, §§ 18-171—18-188 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 18-171. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-172. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a landowner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Director means the director of the city community development department. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. The term "impervious cover" includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries that regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a byproduct of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant that is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Postdevelopment refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish predevelopment conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof, on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. The term "stormwater better site design" includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, stream bank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 2, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-173. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction that is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in subsection (2) of this section shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation . If the city community development department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation is served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city community development department by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties . In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city community development department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice is sufficient), to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city community development department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order . The city community development department may issue a stop work order that is served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy . The city community development department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit . The city community development department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties . In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city community development department shall deem appropriate (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice is sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties . For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city community development department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. Each act of violation and each day upon which any act of violation shall occur shall constitute a separate violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 3, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-174. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria, or as otherwise required by the director: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of 5,000 square feet or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of 5,000 square feet or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the director to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 4, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-175. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The director or a designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 5, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-176. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 6, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-177. - Stormwater design manual. 
The City of Peachtree Corners will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Management Manual, and any relevant local addenda to the Gwinnett County Stormwater Systems and Facilities Installation Standards and Specifications (or equivalent city stormwater management design manual) that is not in conflict with specifications and standards in the Georgia Management Manual, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 7, 3-17-2015; Ord. No. 2015-09-53, § I, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-178. - Permit—Required; application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the City of Peachtree Corners Community Development Department a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
(c)  Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 18-180. 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 18-181. 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 18-181 if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond [in accordance with] section 18-183, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with sections 18-179 and 18-184. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 8, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-179. - Same—Application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for land development permits are filed with the city community development department. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 18-180. Two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, is included. 
(c)  The city community development department shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(d)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city community development department shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the city community development department that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city community development department may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person is subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project is conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The city community development department is allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city community development department; and 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 18-187. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 9, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-180. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(a)  Discussion of post-development stormwater management . Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the landowner or developer shall meet with the city community development department for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(b)  Information to be submitted . To accomplish this goal, the following information shall be included in the concept plan that is submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions; proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans which illustrate, at a minimum, existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
(4)  Local watershed plans and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 10, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-181. - Stormwater management plan requirements 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 18-186. 
(b)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklists found in the stormwater design manual. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  The common address and legal description of the site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using guidelines established by the director for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Postdevelopment hydrologic analysis. The postdevelopment hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 18-186; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 18-186 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 18-186; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Postdevelopment downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis that includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.) or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city community development department as provided in section 18-182, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section 18-182. 
(12)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and nonlocal permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city community development department that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 11, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-182. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the City of Peachtree Corners requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city community development department, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the City of Peachtree Corners prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(c)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(e)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city community development department may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 18-188. 
(f)  The city community development department, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 12, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-183. - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
The City of Peachtree Corners will require maintenance and performance bonds as stated in the city's development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 13, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-184. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the City of Peachtree Corners and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 14, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-185. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city community development department that shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of the state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 15, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-186. - Postdevelopment stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Water quality . All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the development regulations in combination with the standards and specifications set forth in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Volumes 1, 2 and 3; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the development regulations in combination with the standards and specifications set forth in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Volumes 1, 2 and 3; and, 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city community development department are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection . Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection . Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection (1) of this section is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection . Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls . All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the development regulations in combination with the standards and specifications set forth in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Volumes 1, 2 and 3. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the development regulations in combination with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Volumes 1, 2 and 3, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city community development department before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. Applicants shall consult the regulations for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures . The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (1) of this section. The applicant may, if approved by the city community development department, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements that identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the regulations. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines . Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(8)  Dam design guidelines . Any land disturbing activity that involves a site that proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.) and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 16, 3-17-2015; Ord. No. 2015-09-53, § II, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-187. - Construction inspections of postdevelopment stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction . Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city community development department or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the City of Peachtree Corners. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections are documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as-built plans . Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city community development department is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 17, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 18-188. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices . 
(1)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(2)  A stormwater management facility or practice is inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city community development department shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures are completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Peachtree Corners, may correct the violation as provided in subsection (d) hereof. 
(3)  Inspection programs by the city community development department may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection . The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities . Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city community development department. 
(d)  Failure to maintain . If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Peachtree Corners, after 30 days' written notice (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City of Peachtree Corners may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01-40, § 18, 3-17-2015) 
Secs. 18-189—18-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 18-200. - Short title, authority and applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be known and cited as the Peachtree Corners Stormwater Utility Ordinance. 
(b)  The City of Peachtree Corners is authorized by the Georgia Constitution of 1983, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph III, and O.C.G.A. § 36-82-62 to provide stormwater management service systems and facilities throughout the corporate boundaries of the City of Peachtree Corners (hereinafter "the city" or "Peachtree Corners") and to collect fees for provision of those services. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-201. - Findings. 
The Mayor and City Council of Peachtree Corners, Georgia makes the following findings: 
(1)  Stormwater management services as well as stormwater management systems and facilities will assist the city in protecting the public health, safety and welfare and the environment. Provision of stormwater management services, stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of the use thereof renders and/or results in both service and benefit to individual parcels, parcel owners, citizens and residents of the city and to all parcels, parcel owners, citizens and the environment in a variety of ways although those benefits may be indirect or immeasurable. 
(2)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this section, the city is acting pursuant to authority granted by the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and its City Charter to provide for stormwater management collection and disposal services. A stormwater system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater services provides services to all properties within the city limits. 
(3)  The city is required under federal and state regulations [i.e. the Federal Clean Water Act and the city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (hereinafter "NPDES") Phase II Stormwater Permit] to provide enhanced management of stormwater runoff quality to mitigate the impacts of pollutants which may be discharged from the public municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) into State of Georgia or United States' waters. Therefore, it is appropriate for the city to establish a stormwater utility and impose a stormwater service fee charge upon improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public MS4, or receive stormwater services from the city, either directly or indirectly, whether or not the property is private or public in nature. 
(4)  Peachtree Corners presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater management systems and facilities in the city in concert with the management of other public utilities in the city. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program's operating needs and capital program. 
(5)  Stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities are needed throughout the corporate limits of the city because many of those areas are developed. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the unincorporated area of the city is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(6)  The provision of stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities in the city promotes an essential regulatory purpose by influencing where stormwater runoff flows and how it is managed, thereby reducing flooding, erosion and water pollution caused by stormwater runoff. 
(7)  The cost of operating and maintaining the city's stormwater management system and the funding of necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services provided by the city's stormwater management program and the demand imposed by improved property on the city's drainage system and stormwater management program. 
(8)  Given the stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities and funding strategy identified in the aforementioned stormwater program assessment and financial analysis, it is appropriate that the city authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of storm water management services, systems, and facilities within the city in concert with other water resources management programs. Therefore, it is appropriate for the city to establish a stormwater utility and impose a stormwater service fee charge upon all improved/developed properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public MS4 and stormwater conveyance system, whether the property is private or public in nature. 
(9)  The stormwater management services rendered may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management systems and programs, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among the owners and/or tenants of improved properties in proportion to the demands the properties impose on the city's stormwater management systems and facilities which result in services to such properties and the owners and/or tenants thereof. The fair and equitable apportionment of costs via the stormwater service fee charge correlates to the stormwater management services provided to that property and the runoff demand that the property imposes on the public drainage system and the city stormwater management program. 
(10)  A stormwater management program provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services throughout the city. The imposition of a stormwater service fee charge is the most equitable means to allocate the costs to users of the stormwater management services and to generate revenue to implement the defined level of service for the city's stormwater management program. 
(11)  The presence and amount of impervious surfaces on each improved property is the most important factor influencing the stormwater runoff contribution of that property; the corresponding demand the property imposes on the stormwater management program; and the cost of providing stormwater management services to that property by the city. Therefore, the amount of impervious surface on each property is the most significant parameter for calculating a periodic stormwater service fee charge; and the city deems it appropriate to impose a stormwater service fee charge upon all improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public drainage system whether the property is private or public in nature. 
(12)  A schedule of stormwater utility service fee charges based primarily on the amount of impervious surface located on each improved property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services throughout the city. Stormwater utility service fee charges may be designed with specific modifiers to further enhance customer equity, as well as customer understanding of the service fee charge rate structure, while at the same time minimizing the city's customer account management and maintenance efforts. 
(13)  Stormwater utility service fee charges may be supplemented by other funding which addresses specific needs, including, but not limited to, special district service fees, general fund allocations, revenue bonds, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes (SPLOST) and other forms of revenue, as deemed appropriate by the mayor and city council. 
(14)  The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site stormwater control facilities, activities or assets which reduce, or otherwise mitigate, the impact of a particular property on the city's stormwater management program, and the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities, should be taken into account to reduce the service fee charge on that property in the form of a credit, and such credit should be conditioned upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the stormwater utility. Credits for privately owned and maintained stormwater management systems, facilities, activities or assets shall be generally proportional to the effect that such systems have on the reduction and mitigation of the stormwater runoff impacts from the property. 
(15)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the governing authority of Peachtree Corners hereby exercises its authority to establish a stormwater utility, as the best available means of addressing the foregoing stormwater management program needs and priorities. By means of this article, the city will enact a stormwater service fee rate structure and a procedure for the establishment of a service fee charge billing rate related to the provision of stormwater management services. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-202. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this article. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in this Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Act shall mean and refer to the Clean Water Act codified at 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq., and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant thereto. 
Credit shall mean a conditional reduction allowed against the stormwater service fee charged to an individual parcel based upon the technical requirements and the design and performance standards contained in Gwinnett County's Storm Credits Manual or other such storm credits manual as may be adopted by the city, as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
City standards shall mean the city ordinances that govern water quality and water quantity including but not limited to the development regulations, the floodplain management ordinance, the soil erosion and sediment control ordinance, the illicit discharge and illegal connection ordinance, the, stream buffer protection ordinance, the zoning resolution, the stormwater design manual, and all procedures, rules and policies pertaining thereto as these may be updated or amended from time to time. 
Customer shall mean all persons, parcels, and entities served by the stormwater utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities, and activities related thereto, and persons, parcels, and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Developed land shall mean all parcels not deemed as undeveloped land, as defined herein. 
Direct lien shall mean a lien enforced against an individual or parcel prior to obtaining a judgment against the individual or parcel, such as liens established by operation of law for unpaid taxes. 
Director shall mean the City Manager of the City of Peachtree Corners or his/her designee. 
Hydrologic response defines the manner and means whereby stormwater runoff collects, remains, diverts, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. Hydrologic response is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious surface, the parcel's size, the parcel's shape, the parcel's topography, the parcel's vegetative canopy, the parcel's groundwater characteristics, the parcel's on-site operations, the parcel's stormwater controls, the parcel's antecedent moisture as well as the parcel's geologic and hydro-geologic characteristics. 
Impervious surfaces shall mean any paved, hardened or structural surfaces, including but not limited to, buildings, decks, driveways, parking areas, patios, streets, swimming pools, tennis courts, walkways or other structures which prevent or impede the infiltration of rainfall and stormwater into the soil. 
Improved property (or developed property ) means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than 100 square feet of impervious surfaces. 
Parcel shall mean a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Partial impervious surface shall mean those areas which allow for limited infiltration of rainfall and surface water runoff into the soil in the manner that is more similar to natural conditions than "impervious surface" as defined above. Partial impervious surfaces influence and affect stormwater runoff such that the runoff is collected, concentrated and/or flows in a manner that is materially different from what would occur if the land were in an unaltered natural condition. Common partial impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, compacted gravel and/or compacted soils. 
Private stormwater management systems and facilities shall mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality, which are not public. 
Public stormwater management systems and facilities (or Peachtree Corner's Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or MS4 ) shall mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, public streets, curbs and gutters, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence either the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality, which are either owned by the city or over which the city has accepted an offer of dedication of an easement or other legally binding permanent right of use for stormwater drainage, and for which the city has the obligation of maintenance for stormwater drainage purposes. 
Stormwater management services may address the quality and the quantity of stormwater runoff and include all services provided by the city which relate to the: 
(1)  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the incorporated portions of the city; 
(2)  Operation, maintenance, repair, enhancement and replacement of existing public stormwater management systems and facilities; 
(3)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
(4)  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services or of stormwater management systems and facilities; 
(5)  Education of the public as to stormwater management issues; 
(6)  Development plan review to require compliance with applicable city standards; 
(7)  Inspection and/or monitoring for water quantity and water quality to assess compliance with applicable city, state and federal water quality standards and stormwater management program requirements; and 
(8)  Other services as the city manager or his/her designee may deem appropriate. 
Stormwater service fees shall mean the periodic service charge imposed by the city to a parcel of developed land pursuant to this article for providing the stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities, which fees shall be used only for the purpose of funding the Peachtree Corners Stormwater Utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities. Stormwater service fees shall be based on the relative contribution of each parcel to the demand for stormwater management services, shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable and shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities. The cost of operating expenses, capital investments and reserve accounts may be included in the stormwater service fees. 
Stormwater utility shall mean the City of Peachtree Corners stormwater utility as established in section 18-203 of this article. 
Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural condition or which is modified to such a minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural condition shall be deemed undeveloped. For purposes of this article, undeveloped land includes property altered from its natural condition by the existence and/or installation of 100 square feet or less of impervious surface. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-203. - Establishment of a stormwater utility. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility to be known as the City of Peachtree Corners Stormwater Utility, which shall be responsible for use and enhancement of the city's stormwater management systems and facilities and stormwater management program services. 
(b)  The city shall establish a stormwater utility enterprise fund within the city accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding generated by the stormwater utility service fee charge to the operation of the stormwater management program and stormwater utility, including, but not limited to, rates, charges, and fees as may be established by the mayor and city council from time to time, and other funds that may be allocated to the stormwater utility. 
(c)  All revenues and receipts generated from the storm water service fee charges shall be segregated and placed into the stormwater utility enterprise fund to be held in trust, and be expended solely for stormwater management purposes; provided, however, such fund may also pay a reasonable allocation of costs provided to the stormwater utility by the city's general fund, or other utilities of the city, in order to account for applicable overhead costs. Stormwater utility service fee charge revenue shall be used only for the operating expenses and/or capital investments of the stormwater utility. However, other forms of revenue and/or financial resources, not accounted for in the stormwater utility service fee revenue, may be allocated as deemed appropriate by the city, to provide supplemental funding to the stormwater management program and stormwater management services. 
(d)  It is required that the revenue proceeds from all service fee charges for stormwater management services, systems or facilities, together with any other supplemental revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, systems or facilities, be dedicated solely to those purposes. Such service fee revenue proceeds, and other supplemental revenues, shall be deposited into the City of Peachtree Corners Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund. The service fee proceeds and other supplemental revenues shall remain in the enterprise fund, and be dispersed only for stormwater management capital improvements, facilities, equipment, operating and non-operating costs, lease payments, debt service payments, or other indebtedness related to the stormwater management program. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-204. - Stormwater utility service area. 
There shall be one stormwater utility service area in the city which shall encompass the municipal boundaries of Peachtree Corners. The city has established that all developed parcels within the municipal boundaries receive stormwater management program services from the city. Improved/developed properties within the defined service area will receive a stormwater service fee charge bill because they contribute stormwater runoff to the public drainage system, are directly or indirectly connected to the city's drainage system, and/or receive stormwater management services from the city to varying degrees. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-205. - Scope of responsibility for the stormwater utility. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall provide stormwater management services for existing and proposed public stormwater management systems and facilities as defined in this article, subject to funding availability and to policy determinations made in the best interest of public health, safety and general welfare. Additionally, the stormwater utility may accept the responsibility for providing stormwater management services to private stormwater management systems and facilities, acceptance of which conforms to policies established by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  The city owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow the stormwater utility to provide stormwater management services and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  On property owned by, or within the possession and control of the city; 
(2)  Within public road rights-of-way of the municipal street system and, where the city has by agreement with the county or state agreed to maintain public roads and highways on the county road system and/or state highway system; 
(3)  On private property but within legally dedicated easements that have been granted to and accepted by the city, or where the city is otherwise permitted to undertake activities on such private property by written agreements for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions; 
(4)  On public land which is owned by another governmental entity with whom the city has a written agreement providing for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon. 
(c)  Stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private property or on public property not owned by the city or leased to the city by another political subdivision of the State of Georgia, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements which have been dedicated to and accepted by the city, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the city for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management systems and facilities, shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by applicable state and federal laws. 
(d)  The city shall place responsibility with the city manager or his/her designee for operation, maintenance and regulation of the stormwater utility and stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated, or maintained by the city, and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties, other than road rights-of-way, upon which such stormwater management systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. 
(e)  The stormwater utility may provide periodic inspection, testing, or engineering assessment of privately owned stormwater management systems and facilities to ascertain that said facilities are functioning as designed and approved. After notice to the property owner, the stormwater utility may provide for remedial maintenance of said private facilities based upon the severity of stormwater problems and potential hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare and the environment. In cases where such remedial maintenance is required to be performed by the city, the city shall have the right to bill the owner of said private facility for the costs of such maintenance. 
(f)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of people, property and the environment, in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific parcel within or outside the corporate limits of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its mayor and city council, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(g)  If any permit, plan approval, inspection, or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any land disturbance or construction activity upon property not owned by the city pursuant to this or any other regulatory code, ordinance, regulation or rule of the city, or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit, negligent issuance of a permit, negligent plan approval, negligent construction of permitted system or facility, or negligent maintenance of any permitted stormwater management system or facility not expressly dedicated to and accepted by the city for further maintenance in an action seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the city, its mayor and city council members, officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-206. - Rates of stormwater service fees to be established. 
(a)  In order to recover the cost of providing stormwater services and stormwater management systems/facilities while fairly and reasonably apportioning the costs among developed properties throughout the corporate limits of the city, the mayor and city council shall establish by adoption of the city's annual fee schedule a stormwater service fee rate, which shall apply uniformly throughout the stormwater utility service area encompassing the corporate limits of the city pursuant to the jurisdiction granted by this article. 
(b)  The billing rates may be modified by the mayor and city council from time to time to meet the financial and operational needs of the Peachtree Corners Stormwater Utility. At a minimum, the mayor and city council shall increase the service fee rate by no less than the consumer price index (CPI) on an annual basis. In setting or modifying such rates, it shall be the goal of the city to establish rates that are fair, equitable and reasonable, and which, together with other funding sources available to the Peachtree Corners Stormwater Utility for services, systems, and/or facilities related to stormwater management are sufficient to support the cost of the stormwater management program, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, non-operating expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other stormwater utility related costs as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(c)  The area of impervious surfaces on each parcel shall be calculated as of the date of the most recent aerial photography available to the stormwater utility. However, the city manager or his/her designee is authorized to make adjustments to the impervious area calculations as necessary to address the stormwater utility operational needs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-207. - Effective date of stormwater service fee charges. 
The stormwater utility service fee shall accrue beginning January 1, 2018 in an amount to be established by resolution of the mayor and city council, as may be amended from time to time, and shall thereafter be billed periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-208. - Stormwater service fee exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no developed public or private property located in the incorporated area of the city shall be exempt from the stormwater service fee charges. The stormwater utility service fee charge is not a tax and no exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater service fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion, disability, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management program services and facilities. 
(b)  Exemptions to the stormwater service fee charges are as follows: 
(1)  Parcels which contain 100 square feet, or less, of impervious surfaces shall be exempt from stormwater service fee charges. 
(2)  Linear railroad rights-of-way (i.e. tracks, rails, roadbed) outside of the defined yard limits shall be exempt from stormwater service fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by the rail road company associated with rights-of-way and drainage conveyance systems. However, railroad stations, rail yards, maintenance buildings, and/or other improved property used for railroad operations shall not be exempt from stormwater service fee charges. 
(3)  City of Peachtree Corners streets and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater service fee charges and the stormwater utility shall not charge the city a service fee charge for the city's impervious surface area resulting from the city's impervious surfaces which are owned and/or maintained by the city within the public rights-of-way. This exemption is in consideration of the city allowing the stormwater utility to utilize the city's existing streets, curbs, gutters, drainage ways and ditches, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural and man-made within and owned by the city which controls and diverts surface water for the purposes of collecting, diverting, transporting and controlling surface and storm waters. All other developed property owned by the city shall be subject to the imposition of stormwater service fee charges in accordance with this article. 
(4)  Gwinnett County roads and rights-of-way located within the city limits shall be exempt from stormwater service fee charges in situations where Gwinnett County has legal responsibility to perform all drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities with respect to such roads and rights-of-way. This exemption is in recognition of the drainage system maintenance and capital construction responsibilities undertaken by Gwinnett County. All other developed property owned by Gwinnett County that is within the service area shall be subject to the imposition of stormwater service fee charges in accordance with this article. 
(5)  Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) roads and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater service fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by GDOT in association with GDOT rights-of-way road and drainage conveyance systems. However, maintenance buildings and/or other developed property used for GDOT purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service fee charges. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-209. - Credits. 
(a)  Owners of developed land may apply for and receive a stormwater service fee credit for designated on-site stormwater management systems/facilities and for other approved activities that reduce the city's cost to provide stormwater management services to the customer. The city manager or his/her designee shall determine such stormwater service fee credits based on the technical requirements, design and performance standards contained in the city's stormwater credits manual, to be adopted by the mayor and city council pursuant to this article, as it may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(b)  Existing stormwater service fee credits previously secured from the Gwinnett County stormwater utility shall remain in effect under the Peachtree Corners stormwater utility until as such time as those credits expire or are renewed by the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-210. - Stormwater service fee, billing, delinquencies and collections. 
(a)  Billing . 
(1)  A bill for stormwater service fee charges shall be sent through the United States Postal Service or by alternative means reasonably calculated to provide notice as may be determined by the billing authority notifying the owner of the property being billed of the amount of the stormwater service fee charge, less credits, the date the payment is due and the date when payment is past due. 
(2)  The city council authorizes the city clerk to bill and collect the Peachtree Corners Stormwater Service fee charge as part of the annual property/ad valorem tax bill, or other method of billing as deemed appropriate by the city. The city council further authorizes the city clerk to charge and collect penalties and interest as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(3)  If a bill for a stormwater service fee charge for a particular parcel is generated, failure of the customer to receive the bill shall not be justification for nonpayment. 
(4)  Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of the property, as identified from the public land records of Gwinnett County, shall be obligated to pay the appropriate stormwater service fee charge for that property and any interest and/or penalties that have accrued. 
(5)  If a property is unbilled, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of improved property, the city's stormwater utility may back bill for a period of up to three years, but shall not be entitled to any interest or any penalty charges during the back billed period. 
(b)  Delinquencies and collection . 
(1)  A penalty or late charge in the amount of ten percent of the amount due and unpaid on the due date shall be assessed against the customer. 
(2)  In addition to the penalty stated above, interest in the amount of one percent per calendar month (12 percent annually) shall accrue on all unpaid amounts beginning on December 1 of the year in which the payment is due. 
(3)  The city shall assess all costs of collection, including attorneys' fees and court costs, against the property owner. 
(4)  Unpaid stormwater service fee charges shall be collected in any manner permissible by Georgia law, including but not limited to: utilizing the services of a collection agency, by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account, or by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. Unless reduced to a judgment and a Writ of Fieri Facias (FiFa) issued, the unpaid service fee charge shall not constitute a direct lien against the owner and/or the property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-211. - Stormwater utility inspections and enforcement. 
(a)  All property owners of improved property within the incorporated areas of the city shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater runoff in a safe manner consistent with all applicable city development regulations, ordinances, and state and federal laws. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a violation of this article and be subject to citation and prosecution in the City of Peachtree Corners Municipal Court. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In the event a public nuisance is deemed to exist by the mayor and city council, the city may elect to sue in municipal court to abate such nuisance. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the property owner fails to abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the City of Peachtree Corners Municipal Court, the city may enter upon the property and cause work as is reasonably necessary to be performed to remove any imminent threats to the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the property owner in a similar manner as a tax levied against the property. From date of filing of such abatement action, the city shall have lien rights which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the City of Peachtree Corners Municipal Court. 
(c)  The city shall have the right for its employees or designated agents to inspect on-site stormwater management systems within the city to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, and state and federal law. Such inspections shall generally be limited to the following purposes: 
(1)  Inspecting or conducting engineering analyses on existing stormwater management systems and facilities located on-site; 
(2)  Verification and review of information contained within a stormwater utility credit manual application; and 
(3)  Determining that stormwater management systems and facilities need to be constructed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-212. - Stormwater service fee adjustments. 
(a)  Adjustments . 
(1)  The city manager or his/her designee shall administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the stormwater service fee charge. 
a.  If a customer believes his stormwater service fee is incorrect, the customer may seek an adjustment of the stormwater service fee charge allocated to a property at any time by submitting the request in writing to the city manager or his/her designee on forms provided by the city and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. The customer's stormwater utility account must be paid and current prior to consideration of an adjustment request by the city, except during the period prior to issuance of the first bill. 
b.  Customers requesting an adjustment shall be required, at their own expense, to provide accurate impervious area and other supplemental information to the city manager or his/her designee, including, but not limited to, a survey certified by a registered land surveyor or a professional engineer, unless otherwise allowed by the city. Submittal of this information will be required if the city staff cannot make a determination based on field inspection and/or review of existing city aerial photography. Failure to provide the required information within the time limits established by the city manager or his/her designee, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the customer's adjustment request. 
c.  Once a completed adjustment request and all required information has been received, the city manager or his/her designee shall within 30 calendar days render a written decision. 
d.  In considering an adjustment request, the city manager or his/her designee shall consider whether the calculation of the stormwater service fee charge for the property is correct. 
e.  The city manager's (or his/her designee) decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. 
f.  If the result of an adjustment is that a refund is due the applicant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the applicant's next stormwater service fee charge bill. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 18-213. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the city manager within 30 days of the decision that is appealed. In the case of service fee appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared and sealed by a land surveyor or professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia containing information on the total parcel area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the parcel to rainfall events, unless an alternate means of providing the required information is authorized by the city manager or designee. 
(2)  The city manager shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the parcel and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days of receipt. 
(3)  In response to an appeal, the city manager may adjust the stormwater service fee applicable to a parcel in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(4)  All decisions by the city manager shall be final. 
(b)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the city manager may be further appealed by application for writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Gwinnett City, filed within 30 days of the date of receipt of service of the decision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11-107, § I, 12-19-2017) 
Chapter 22 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-2 et seq.; authority to enact ordinances or fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-2 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; electronic security systems installed and serviced by counties or municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODES 

Sec. 22-19. - Adoption of fire safety law. 
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion those certain codes known as the National Fire Codes, volumes 1 through 11, as amended by Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. ch. 120-3-3 of the rules and regulations of the state, under authority of O.C.G.A. §§ 25-2-4, 25-2-12, and 50-13-21. There shall be not less than one copy of such codes filed in the office of the city and the codes are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out completely in this article. From the date on which the ordinance from which this article is derived shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-26) 
Sec. 22-20. - Construction of codes. 
All codes, ordinances, standards and pamphlets adopted in this article shall be construed as the standard for fire codes' compliance among buildings within the city and shall prevail in matters of life safety over all other local or city codes, ordinances or standards which apply to the same building components or systems covered by this article. Final approving authority for fire codes' compliance covered in this section shall be the county fire marshal's office. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-27) 
Sec. 22-21. - Enforcement of article. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by authorized personnel of the county fire and emergency services, or by authorized officers of the county division of police services. In addition, the provisions of this article may be enforced by authorized officers of the police department of any municipality within the county. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-28) 
Sec. 22-22. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or the codes adopted by reference in this article or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made pursuant to this article, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the board of commissioners within the time set forth in this article, shall constitute a violation of a county ordinance. Any person violating this article or any of the codes and/or laws incorporated in this article shall be deemed guilty of violating a county ordinance and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and by imprisonment in the common jail of the county not to exceed 60 days, or by both fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty shall not excuse the violation nor permit it to continue, and such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a specified time. When not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(b)  The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of the prohibited conditions. 
(c)  Upon written notice from the fire marshal or his designee, work on any project that is being performed contrary to the provisions of this article and the codes adopted in this article, or otherwise being done in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall cease immediately. Such notice shall be given to the owner of the property, his agent, or the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(d)  Permits or approvals may be revoked by the fire marshal or his designee when there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to any materials or facts contained in plans or other information on which the permit or approval has been based. 
(e)  Whenever any of the officers or inspectors of the department of fire and emergency services find conditions which are unsafe and/or in violation of the provisions or intent of the codes or ordinances enforced by the fire marshal's office, written notice, which has been approved by the fire marshal, shall be given to the owner, the owner's agent or the occupant or occupant's representative requiring that any activities impacted by the conditions shall cease until the condition is corrected. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-29) 
Sec. 22-23. - Establishment and duties of the fire prevention section. 
(a)  The fire prevention codes shall be enforced by the fire prevention section in the department of fire and emergency services of the county. The fire prevention section shall also be known as the office of the fire marshal. 
(b)  The fire marshal in charge of the fire prevention section shall be appointed by the chief of the department of fire and emergency services in accordance with the county merit system rules and regulations. 
(c)  The chief of the department of fire and emergency services may detail such members of the fire service as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the department of fire and emergency services shall recommend to the board of commissioners the employment of technical inspectors, who shall be selected in accordance with the county merit system rules and regulations. 
(d)  A report of the fire prevention section shall be made annually and transmitted to the board of commissioners. It shall contain a report of all activities and inspections undertaken pursuant to this article, with such statistics as the chief of the department of fire and emergency services may wish to include therein. The chief of the department of fire and emergency services shall also recommend any amendments to the code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-30) 
Sec. 22-24. - Establishment of district limits in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited. 
Locations used for the storage of explosives and blasting agents shall comply with the rules promulgated by the fire safety commissioner of the state entitled, "Rules and Regulations for Explosives for Blasting Agents." 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-31) 
Sec. 22-25. - Establishment of district limits in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is provided. 
Permanent installations for the storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks shall comply with section 1311 of the county zoning resolution, as amended, as well as NFPA Pamphlet 30 titled, "Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code." A fee will be charged when a final inspection is made of all flammable liquid storage tanks conducted by the department of fire and emergency services. Fees shall be payable, by check only, to the county fire marshal. The final inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-32) 
Sec. 22-26. - Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is restricted. 
Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas shall comply with section 1311 of the county zoning resolution, as amended, as well as NFPA Pamphlet 58 titled, "Standard for the Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases." A fee will be charged when a final inspection is made of all liquefied petroleum gas installations conducted by the department of fire and emergency services. Fees shall be payable, by check only, to the county fire marshal. The final inspection fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-33) 
Sec. 22-27. - Modifications of code. 
The fire marshal, or his assistant, shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of this article and any codes enforced by the fire marshal's office, upon written application by the owner or leasee of property, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in carrying out the provisions of the article, provided that the spirit of this article shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The details of such modifications, when granted or allowed, and the decision shall be entered upon the records of the department of fire and emergency services, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-34) 
Sec. 22-28. - Variances. 
A committee comprised of the fire marshal, plan review supervisor and the field inspection supervisor shall have the power to implement systems, methods, or devices of equivalent or superior quality, strength, fire resistance, effectiveness, durability, and safety as alternatives to those prescribed by the codes, provided technical documentation is submitted to the committee to demonstrate equivalency, and the system, method, or device is approved for the intended purpose. The decision of the committee or chief of the department of fire and emergency services may be appealed to the county board of construction adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-34.5) 
Sec. 22-29. - Waivers. 
The chief of the department of fire and emergency services or the fire marshal are authorized to grant exemptions from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq., with regard to the access and use of facilities by persons with disabilities. The decision of the chief of the department of fire and emergency services or the fire marshal on such exemption may be appealed to the board of construction adjustments and appeals. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-35) 
Sec. 22-30. - Appeals. 
Any appeal or request for a variance from the provisions of the codes set out in this article shall be submitted in writing to the fire marshal's office with the explanation and reason why the variance should be granted. In response thereto, the fire marshal's office shall furnish a statement as to the purpose of the requirement along with a response which approves or denies the request. Should the affected party wish to appeal the decision of the fire marshal or the chief of the department of fire and emergency services, the appeal shall be submitted in writing on forms provided by the department of fire and emergency services and shall be accompanied by a fee to be submitted to the board of construction adjustments and appeals. The appeal fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-36) 
Sec. 22-31. - Standards for minimum size water mains and spacing of fire hydrants for all new construction and additions and renovations on private property. 
(a)  Subdivisions of freestanding single-family homes shall have eight-inch water mains with three-way fire hydrants spaced no more than 450 feet apart. 
(b)  Approved subdivisions of multifamily residential units shall have eight-inch or larger water mains installed. Three-way type fire hydrants shall be located to permit all portions of all buildings to be reached with hose lays not to exceed 400 feet by road travel. All hydrants shall be capable of providing a minimum flow of 1,000 gallons per minute (GPM). Verification of water flow GPM shall be conducted as set forth in NFPA #291. Exception: Hose lays may be extended to 500 feet in fire sprinklered projects. 
(c)  Industrial and commercial developments shall have 12-inch or larger mains installed with three-way fire hydrants spaced no more than 300 feet apart along dedicated roadways. 
(1)  Exception: This shall not apply to private driveways giving access from a public way to three or less buildings totaling a maximum of 500,000 square feet. 
(2)  Exception: Fire hydrants and water mains of a minimum of eight inches with a flow of 1,250 gallons per minute shall be placed so that all portions of all buildings shall be reached with hose lays not to exceed 400 feet by road travel. 
(d)  Existing six-inch or larger water mains and fire hydrants may be continued in use that meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The existing fire hydrant is in compliance with specified hose lay requirements. 
(2)  Any additional water mains and fire hydrants to be installed to meet hose lay requirements shall be supplied by a minimum of an eight-inch or larger water main. 
(3)  The existing fire hydrant shall provide a minimum of 1,000 gallons of water per minute. Verification of water flow shall be in accordance with NFPA #291. 
(e)  Commercial or industrial buildings provided with automatic fire sprinkler or standpipe systems shall have a three-way type fire hydrant placed within 150 feet of the fire department Siamese connection. 
(f)  Residential multifamily occupancies provided with automatic fire sprinkler protection or standpipe systems shall have a three-way fire hydrant placed within 250 feet of the fire department Siamese connection. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the approach or visibility of any fire hydrant or fire department connection, closer than five feet in any direction, parallel with street access. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-37) 
Sec. 22-32. - Location of hydrants and hydrant specifications. 
(a)  Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed, be under water pressure, and ready for fire service use prior to beginning construction with combustible materials. Exception: Materials used in forming for footings and foundations on grade. 
(b)  Hydrants, fittings, valves, and fire department connections shall be approved by the department of fire and emergency services. Connections shall not be less than 18 inches nor more than 36 inches above the level of the adjoining finished grade. The thread of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the department of fire and emergency services. 
(c)  Hydrants shall meet the requirements of NFPA #24 "Fire Hydrants for Outside Protection," and have not less than a six-inch connection with the mains. The number, size, and arrangement of the outlets, the size of the main valve opening and size of barrel shall be suitable for the protection to be provided and shall be approved by the department of water resources and the department of fire and emergency services. 
(d)  The size and the shape of the operating nut as well as the direction the hydrant stem operates shall be uniform with hydrants as provided in the city and county water distribution system specifications. 
(e)  The department of fire and emergency services shall be allowed to conduct periodic checks of fire hydrants to verify their operable condition and to apply paint to those fire hydrants. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-38) 
Sec. 22-33. - Obstruction of approach or visibility of fire hydrants and connections. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the approach or visibility of any fire hydrant or fire department connection, closer than five feet in any direction, parallel with street access. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-39) 
Sec. 22-34. - Requirements pertaining to fire protection systems. 
(a)  Buildings classified as office occupancies, with four or more floor levels, including basements and/or parking levels, shall be equipped with the approved NFPA Class I wet standpipe systems installed in accordance with NFPA standard #14. 
(b)  Hotels, motels, roominghouses or lodginghouses and health care facilities of combustible construction shall have complete automatic fire sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA standard #13. Exception: Where each suite or room has direct access to the exterior at grade level. 
(c)  Hotels, motels, roominghouses or lodginghouses and health care facilities with three or more floor levels, regardless of type of construction, shall have complete, automatic fire sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA standard #13. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-40) 
Sec. 22-35. - Requirements for tenant separations and attic fire barrier—Within multi-tenanted commercial and industrial buildings. 
(a)  Tenant separations shall have a minimum fire resistance rating of one hour. Rated walls shall extend from the floor of the lowest level to the underside of the roof deck. All rated assemblies, both walls and floor/ceiling assemblies, shall have been tested by an approved, accredited testing laboratory and shall be listed as such. All openings and/or penetrations within rated assemblies shall be tightly sealed using an approved, listed material complying with ASTM-E814. 
(b)  Attic fire barriers shall be constructed of wood or metal studs with one layer of fire rated sheetrock on each side to divide combustible attic spaces into areas of 3,000 square feet or less. Access panels, 24 inches by 36 inches in size, shall be located leading into each area from the floor level immediately below the compartmentalized area. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-41) 
Sec. 22-36. - Same—Within multifamily residential buildings. 
(a)  All tenant separations shall have a minimum fire resistance rating of one hour. All tenant separation walls shall extend from the floor of the lowest level to the underside of the roof deck, unless the top floor ceiling has a one-hour fire resistance rating consisting of two layers of fire resistant sheetrock, in which event attic draft stops shall be installed at 3,000 square foot intervals or at every other tenant line, whichever is less. Attic fire barriers shall run with the roof trusses and be placed to create compartments covering no more than two units. All rated assemblies, both walls and floor/ceiling assemblies, shall have been tested by an approved, accredited testing laboratory and shall be listed as such. All openings and/or penetrations within or through rated assemblies shall be tightly sealed using an approved, listed material complying with ASTM-E814. Tenant separations may be constructed of not less than one-half-inch gypsum wallboard, provided the building is equipped with an automatic fire suppression system designed and installed in compliance with the county fire marshal's criteria. All openings and penetrations within or through tenant separations shall be tightly sealed to resist the passage of smoke. Attic areas shall be draft stopped at 3,000 square foot intervals or every other tenant line, whichever is less. 
(b)  Access panels, 24 inches by 36 inches in size, shall be located leading into each area from the floor level immediately below the compartmentalized area. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-42) 
Sec. 22-37. - Accessibility for firefighting equipment and personnel. 
(a)  When access to or within a structure or project is unduly difficult because of secured openings, the owner and/or tenant shall be responsible for ensuring quick access into the area for fire services' use. 
(b)  An all-weather access drive shall be provided to or around all buildings, if so specified by fire services in the permit process. 
(c)  Accessibility shall be maintained throughout all stages of construction. 
(d)  Minimum widths of a development's interior access driveways, excluding parking, shall be 20 feet. Dead-end roadways more than 150 feet in length shall be provided at the closed end with a cul-de-sac having a 50-foot radius at the outside curbline, or other approved means for turning around. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-43) 
Sec. 22-38. - Submission of plans and specifications required. 
Owners, their agents or designees of all buildings and tenant spaces covered by this article are required to submit plans and specifications of the project to the fire marshal's office prior to obtaining the required fire marshal's construction permits. A final inspection and occupancy permit must be obtained from the fire marshal's office prior to conducting business. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-44) 
Sec. 22-39. - Required plans and drawings. 
The seal of an architect or engineer currently licensed by the state shall be affixed to the plans of the following projects: 
(1)  All places of assembly with a calculated occupant load of 100 or more persons using occupant load calculations as set forth in the NFPA Life Safety Code. 
(2)  All healthcare facilities as defined by NFPA Life Safety Code #101. 
(3)  All penal and correctional institutions. 
(4)  All educational facilities. 
(5)  All personal care facilities with a calculated occupant load of 16 or more persons as set forth in the NFPA Life Safety Code #101. 
(6)  Any structure or tenant space with a cumulative construction area of 5,000 square feet or more or $100,000.00 in cost or three stories in height. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-45) 
Sec. 22-40. - Revision of plans. 
(a)  All drawings, specifications and/or pertinent documents required to bear the stamp, seal and signature of a registered designer shall be revised by the designer of record and bear his stamp or seal and signature on all revisions and details. Required revisions to stamped plans are subject to the designer of record's approval, which shall be in the form of hardline drawings. Fax transmittals or written correspondence may be deemed acceptable alternatives subject to the approval of the fire marshal and/or building official. 
(b)  Certain minor corrections to plans, i.e., relocation of exit signs, sprinkler heads, smoke detectors or change of door swings, etc., may be "redlined" as granted by each department. Redlined corrections shall be shown on all required sets of plans and/or specifications and shall bear the name and signature of the individual submitting the project for code compliance review. 
(c)  Examples of items not allowed to be redlined are as follows: 
(1)  Changes to the means of egress as in direction of travel, number of the means of egress, etc. 
(2)  Changes to the number of exits. 
(3)  Changes to features necessary for accessibility for the disabled. 
(4)  Changes to fire alarm systems, except as stated in the above subsection. 
(5)  Changes to sprinkler systems to include site plans except as stated in the above subsection. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-46) 
Sec. 22-41. - Inspections required. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction work pertaining to fire codes and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, site or facility. 
(b)  Owners, their agents or designees of all buildings, tenant spaces, and/or commercial sites covered by this article are required to submit plans and specifications of the project to the fire marshal's office prior to obtaining the necessary construction permits. An 80 percent completion inspection, a 100 percent final inspection and a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained from the fire marshal's office prior to the occupancy of the facility. Exception: Projects consisting of multifamily residential projects mandate 50 percent inspections in order to inspect the methods of sealing penetrations within and through walls. 
(c)  Upon a satisfactory final inspection, the necessary certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-47) 
Sec. 22-42. - Collection of fees and issuance of permits and approvals. 
(a)  The fire marshal's office shall collect fees as follows for construction permits and certificates of occupancy: 

 
(b)  Permits for shell buildings construction shall be issued for a flat fee of $200.00. A shell building has rough-in plumbing up to slab only; no HVAC and no electrical. 
(c)  All certificates of occupancy shall be issued for a fee for all projects that receive approval from the fire marshal's office. The certificate of occupancy fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-48) 
Sec. 22-43. - Governmental and religious organization facilities exemptions. 
Facilities owned by any city, county, state or federal government and facilities owned by religious organizations which are used exclusively for religious services are exempt from fee charges in section 22-42. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-49) 
Sec. 22-44. - Temporary occupancy. 
(a)  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for portions of a facility. The fire marshal's office shall forward written comments to the building official of the city allowing or disallowing occupancy of a partially completed facility. 
(b)  All facilities described in this section shall be equipped with the following minimum features in order for a temporary certificate of occupancy to be issued: 
(1)  All required portions of the means of egress shall be complete which does not include carpet, wall covering, etc. 
(2)  All exit signage shall be in place and in proper working order. 
(3)  All emergency lighting fixtures shall be in place and in proper working order. 
(4)  All required exits shall be installed and equipped with approved hardware. 
(5)  All automatic sprinkler systems (if so equipped) shall be installed, tested, and in proper working order. 
(6)  All fire barriers shall be installed and properly sealed. 
(c)  Any facility where a temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued shall be in compliance with the above features. If necessary, certain portions of a facility may be issued a temporary certificate of occupancy as long as all the above criteria have been met for that particular area. The field inspection supervisor and the field inspector conducting the inspection shall agree upon the terms of the temporary certificate of occupancy and the document shall bear the names and signatures of both parties granting the approval. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-50) 
Sec. 22-45. - Persons allowed in the vicinity of a fire. 
No persons except firefighters, police officers, members of the governing body of the city, the owners of the subject property or their agents, and the agents of insuring companies shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of any fire without being requested there by the fire chief or the officer in charge at the time. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the officer in charge of a fire may be arrested for violation of this section and, on conviction thereof, be punished for the violation of a city ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-51) 
Sec. 22-46. - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in response to a fire alarm. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the officer in charge of a fire may be arrested for violation of this section and, on conviction thereof, be punished as provided by general law. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-52) 
Sec. 22-47. - Crossing fire hose prohibited. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the department of fire and emergency services when laid down on any street, roadway, or private driveway without the consent of the fire service official in command. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the officer in charge of a fire may be arrested for violation of this section and, on conviction thereof, be punished for the violation of a city ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-53) 
Sec. 22-48. - Rules and regulations for outdoor and open burning. 
(a)  Permits and fees. 
(1)  Permits for opening burning at or on development sites for the purpose of clearing land for new construction shall be obtained from the county department of fire and emergency services, office of the fire marshal. Permits shall be registered with the fire services communications center by the fire marshal's office. 
(2)  The applicant shall complete an application for an open burning permit issued by the fire marshal's office. The applicant shall submit a plat or site plan showing the proposed location of the pit and information relating to the proximity of any occupied or unoccupied structure. 
(3)  The application, if approved, shall be accompanied by a check. The check shall be made payable to the county department of fire and emergency services. The application fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(4)  No burning shall commence prior to an inspection of the site and the pit by a representative of the county fire marshal's office. Upon approval of the pit, the permit shall be valid for a period of 30 days. Permits may be extended for increments of 15-day periods without additional fees, maximum of two extensions. 
(b)  Fires requiring written permits. 
(1)  The only type of fires permitted for the purpose of land clearing are pit fires. Non-pit fires are not permitted for land clearing in the city. All pit fires shall be conducted in strict accordance with the "Air Curtain Destructor Operating Guide and Procedures," as published by the North Georgia Region of the Environmental Protection Division, attached hereto as Exhibit A (not set out herein; Exhibit A is on file with the county). 
(2)  Pit fires shall comply with the following stipulations: 
a.  The pit shall be at least 300 feet from any occupied or habitable structure. This distance may be increased if need is assessed by the fire marshal's office and validity exists. 
b.  Where a site cannot be excavated to the recommended depth due to high water table and/or subsurface rock, the pit may be constructed above ground level, subject to the same state standards and procedures for a pit below ground level. 
c.  Only wood wastes consisting of trees, logs, large brush, stumps, leaves, and untreated lumber may be burned in the pit. 
d.  Leaves, sawdust or other densely packed wood wastes, paper (any type), chemically treated, coated or impregnated wood, or non-wood construction materials shall not be burned. The amount of dirt/soil mixture shall be kept to a minimum. 
e.  No more than one air curtain destructor is allowed to be operated within a ten-acre permitted site at one time. The air curtain destructor must be under the supervision of a trained operator at all times during operation. In the event there is a need for multiple burning pits, there shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet between each burning pit. 
f.  Air curtain destructors shall be able to pass an even, non-turbulent flow of air across the top of the pit. Air curtain destructors with an air duct or manifold that has been altered by bends, dents, holes, etc., and are incapable of providing an even and non-turbulent flow of air across the top of the pit shall not be approved for use. 
g.  The air curtain destructor shall be operated in a manner to prevent air, land or water pollution, safety/health hazards, or nuisances. 
h.  Tires or other rubber products, plastics, heavy oils or asphaltic base or impregnated materials shall not be used to start or maintain air curtain destructor operations. 
i.  No smoke emissions exceeding 40 percent opacity may be produced during operation except for a reasonable period during ignition and charging of the pit. 
j.  When the pit is cleared of ash, airborne particulate is to be minimized by wetting or mixing the ashes with dirt. 
k.  Diesel fuel or kerosene may be used to start pit fires. 
(c)  Types of burning allowed without a written permit. The following types of burning are allowed without a written permit: 
(1)  Burning of leaves and limbs and natural vegetation that may fall on one's property. 
(2)  Fires for the purpose of keeping warm. Warming fires shall be contained within a metal barrel of 55-gallon capacity or less. Untreated wood or lumber shall be the only material or substance permitted to be burned. The container for the warming fire shall not be less than 50 feet from any structure. No on-ground warming fires shall be permitted. (Note: The outside temperature shall be 50 degrees Fahrenheit or less.) 
(3)  Fires for the purpose of cooking food for human consumption. 
(4)  Bonfires. Permit required; no fee. 
a.  No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any private or public land unless the location is no less than 50 feet from a structure with a size not to exceed four cubic feet of combustible materials and 100 feet from a structure with a size not to exceed five cubic feet of combustible materials. 
b.  For purposes of clarification, bonfires shall be limited to activities sponsored by civic, educational, religious or other groups for purpose of celebration, etc. An example would be a high school pep rally. 
c.  Bonfires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such fire is extinguished. Such person shall have a garden hose connected to a water supply, or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use. Access to communications to the fire department shall be maintained within 500 feet of the bonfire. 
(d)  Burning restrictions. The following rules govern all burning in the county, whether or not a written permit is required: 
(1)  The fire marshal's office may temporarily prohibit any and/or all outdoor fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. 
(2)  No burning is permitted on Sundays or nights. Burning at construction sites for the clearing of land for new development shall not be conducted before or after daylight hours. 
(3)  No burning is permitted when prevailing winds are in excess of 15 miles per hour in the direction of populated areas immediately adjacent to the permitted site. 
(4)  No burning is permitted during an air pollution episode, such as an air pollution alert/warning/emergency declared by proper authorities. 
(5)  No burning is permitted when there is a fog, rain, or cloud bases that are diffused, or ill defined, or for at least one day following the passage of a cold front. 
(6)  No burning of solid waste or household garbage is allowed. 
(7)  No burning of any materials that emit a heavy dark smoke, such as rubber products, oils, roofing material, petroleum-based products, etc. 
(8)  No burning when smoke presents a health hazard to persons in the vicinity of the fire. 
(9)  No burning shall be conducted within 20 feet of flammable, combustible or explosive materials unless otherwise specified by NFPA or standard fire prevention codes. 
(10)  Burning of leaves, limbs, etc., that fall on a person's own property can only be conducted during daylight hours. 
(11)  Prior notification shall be given to the state forestry commission before any agricultural burning is conducted. The term "agricultural" refers to land zoned RA-200, as defined by the county zoning ordinance. 
(12)  All fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until extinguished. 
(13)  There shall be a garden hose connected to a water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use. 
(e)  Summary abatement. The staff of the fire marshal's office and personnel of the county department of fire and emergency services shall have the authority to summarily abate any conditions which are in violation of any of the provisions of this section, and which may constitute an immediate threat to life and property. In no event shall a pit fire or other open burning continue after the fire marshal's office has revoked the permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-54) 
Sec. 22-49. - Setting fire to motor vehicle; notice required. 
No person shall set fire to an automobile, truck, or any other type of motor vehicle without first obtaining written permission from the chief of the department of fire and emergency services. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-55) 
Sec. 22-50. - Burning of certain materials prohibited. 
No material or substance which emits noxious or poisonous gases such as nitrogen dioxide, hydrogen cyanide or chlorine, or other poisonous gases that will not readily dissipate in the atmosphere, may be burned within the city limits. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-56) 
Sec. 22-51. - Certain officers vested with police authority. 
The chief of the department of fire and emergency services or other authorized officers acting pursuant to his authority shall be sworn in as police officers with the powers to make arrests pertaining to arson within the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-57) 
Sec. 22-52. - Authority to cut electric wires. 
The chief of the department of fire and emergency services or other authorized officers acting pursuant to his authority are hereby authorized to cut any electrical wire which shall be deemed necessary on the occurrence of any fire, without expense to the county for so doing, provided that nothing contained in this section shall imply that the county has authorized any person to undertake the risk of cutting any such wires or renders itself liable for any injury to the person so doing. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-58) 
Sec. 22-53. - Obstructing a fire station. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to put any obstruction of any nature whatsoever in front of any fire station or location where fire service equipment is located. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-59) 
Sec. 22-54. - False alarms. 
No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or report a false alarm of fire or false report for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such an act. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-60) 
Sec. 22-55. - Response to malfunctioning fire alarms. 
When emergency response to a malfunctioning fire alarm system exceeds two in a 30-day period, a fee shall be levied for each additional incident. Fees shall be payable, by check, to the fire marshal's office. The additional incident fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-61) 
Sec. 22-56. - Fire extinguishing equipment installation in restaurants or other public facilities having cooking equipment. 
(a)  Approved fire extinguishing equipment shall be installed in restaurants or other public food facilities having cooking appliances, such as ranges, deep fat fryers, grills or broilers. 
(b)  The standards for approval of such facilities shall be based on NFPA #96 or an equivalent measure deemed acceptable to the fire marshal or assistant fire marshal. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-62) 
Sec. 22-57. - Combustible roof construction. 
Plans for the construction of all roofs shall comply with NFPA pamphlets 203M, 220, 251 and 256. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-63) 
Sec. 22-58. - Portable buildings. 
(a)  All portable buildings open to the public shall provide adequate measures to prevent the superstructure from sliding, uplift, rotation and overturning. 
(b)  Such portable buildings shall be provided with anchors and tiedowns, such as cast-in-place, concrete dead-men eyelets embedded in concrete slabs, runways, screwaugers, arrowhead anchors, or other devices to be used to stabilize the portable building. 
(c)  Anchors and tiedowns shall be placed at each corner of the portable building and shall be able to sustain a minimum load of 4,800 pounds. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-64) 
Sec. 22-59. - Designated fire lanes. 
(a)  Streets or drives adjacent to the following locations shall have designated fire lanes: 
(1)  Any building 22,500 square feet or more with storage facilities, except for storage warehouse occupancies which are equal to or greater than 80 percent of the total building area and which comply with subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Places of assembly with occupant load of 300 or more. 
(3)  The area five feet on each side of fire hydrants and associated appliances used for fire protection. 
(4)  All points of exit from nursing homes, hospitals, multistoried office buildings and places of assembly. 
(b)  Buildings not required to have fire lanes shall maintain fire service access to at least one side. 
(c)  Where designated fire lanes are required, they shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The curbing shall be painted traffic yellow. Where curbing is not present, there shall be designated a 20-foot-wide, cross hatched, traffic yellow way of access kept free of obstructions. 
(2)  Signs meeting the specifications described in this article shall be spaced no less than 30 feet apart and legible from both directions of travel. 
Specifications for fire lane signs shall be as indicated on the official diagram maintained in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners entitled "Specifications for Fire Lane Signs." 
(d)  Building driveways shall be kept clear of any obstruction which would hinder access by fire services equipment. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-65) 
Sec. 22-60. - Unlawful ignition of combustible materials. 
Any persons smoking or attempting to light or smoke a cigarette, cigar, pipe or tobacco in any form for which lighters, matches, flammable liquids or chemicals are used, and who sets fire to any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes, house or household furnishings, in any hotel, roominghouse or multifamily house, as a result of such smoking or attempting to smoke, shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-66) 
Sec. 22-61. - Reporting of fires. 
Any damage by fire having a total dollar value of $200.00 or more shall be reported to the fire prevention section of the department of fire and emergency services within 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-67) 
Sec. 22-62. - Modifications and deletions to NFPA 101 Life Safety Code. 
The following provisions of 1985 NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, as amended, are hereby modified to the extent provided in this section: 
(1)  5-2.1.1.4.1. Any door in the means of egress shall be of the side-hinged, swinging type. Doors shall swing in the direction of exit travel unless in conformance with the specific exceptions detailed in chapters 8 through 30. Exception number 2 to this section is deleted in its entirety unless specifically permitted in chapters 8 through 30. 
(2)  5-2.1.6. This section entitled, "Special Locking Arrangements," shall be modified as follows: 
a.  5-2.1.6.1(c) shall be deleted in its entirety. 
b.  5-2.1.6.2 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
(3)  5.2.2.2.4. This section titled, "Spiral Stairs," is amended as follows: 
Where permitted for individual occupancies by chapter 8 through 30, spiral stairs may be used as a communication between levels but may not be used as an approved means of egress. When used as a way of communicating between levels, items A through F of the original section shall apply. 
(4)  5-8.2.1. This section shall be amended to read as follows: 
Illumination of means of egress shall be from a source of reasonably assured reliability, complete with battery backup power sources and/or generating plants. 
(5)  5-8.1.1. This section shall be amended to read as follows: 
Illumination of means of egress shall be provided for every building and structure. 
(6)  5-9.1.1. This section shall be amended to read as follows: 
Emergency lighting facilities for means of egress shall be provided for every building and structure. 
(7)  5-10.1.1. This section shall be amended as follows: 
Every exit sign shall be suitably illuminated by an internal light source and equipped with battery backup emergency power supply. 
(8)  5-10.3.2. This section is deleted in its entirety, and the amended section 5-10.1.1 shall replace the deleted section. 
(9)  6-2.2.2. The exception provided in this section is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(10)  8-2.9. This section is amended by deleting the exception to this section in its entirety. 
(11)  8-2.11.1. This section entitled, "Panic Hardware," is amended by deleting exceptions #1 and #2 in their entirety. 
(12)  8-3.5.1. This section entitled "Fire Suppression Systems," is amended as follows: 
Every class A and B assembly occupancy shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic fire sprinkler system. 

 
(13)  12-2.11-3. Exception #2 of this section is deleted in its entirety and is replaced by 5-2.1.2.1.5, as amended. 
(14)  12-3.5.1. The exception to this section is hereby deleted in its entirety and shall be amended by section 22-34(b) and (c). 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-68; Res. of 7-20-1993, § 2) 
Secs. 22-63—22-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE MARSHAL 

Sec. 22-83. - Applicable codes. 
The following codes shall be used by the county fire marshal's office: 
(1)  National Fire Codes, as amended; 
(2)  Official Code of Georgia, Title 25, as amended (O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.); 
(3)  Title 36 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1191, as amended (36 CFR 1191); and 
(4)  Standard Fire Prevention Code, as amended. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-91) 
Sec. 22-84. - Enforcement authority. 
The county fire marshal's office shall have the responsibility and enforcement authority over the following fire protection requirements: 
(1)  Fire service standpipe systems. 
(2)  Requirements for tenant and occupancy separations, as well as attic fire and smoke barriers within multitenant commercial and industrial structures. 
(3)  Fire resistance rating requirements of assemblies, including wall and floor/ceilings. 
(4)  Regulations affecting fire protection requirements of openings and penetrations within or through assemblies. 
(5)  Fire service attic access panels. 
(6)  Requirements for tenant and occupancy separations, as well as attic fire and smoke barriers within all applicable occupancy classifications and structures. 
(7)  Requirements and specifications for fire resistance ratings of assemblies within all applicable occupancy classifications and structures. Fire protection requirements of openings and penetrations within these rated assemblies. 
(8)  Requirements and specifications regulating and affecting use and accessibility by the disabled. 
(9)  Automatic fire sprinkler systems. 
(10)  Fire resistance requirements of all roofing systems. 
(11)  Anchoring of portable buildings. 
(12)  Means of egress requirements. 
(13)  Exit hardware requirements. 
(14)  Illumination of the means of egress. 
(15)  Emergency lighting systems. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-92) 
Sec. 22-85. - Solution guidelines. 
(a)  Plans review. Plans and specifications as submitted by an architect, engineer, owner, developer, or contractor shall be reviewed by staff members of the fire marshal's office of the department of fire and emergency services and the development division of the department of planning and development. Each plan review unit will apply their respective codes and ordinances, as defined by Part A, Items No. 1, 2 and 3, of the ordinance from which this section is derived. During the review process, whenever differing code requirements or interpretations surface and cannot be resolved by the plan review staff, the following shall take place: 
(1)  The differing requirements and/or opinions shall be referred to the manager of the building construction plan review unit and the fire marshal for disposition. 
(2)  If the manager of the building construction plan review unit and the fire marshal are unable to resolve the problem, it shall be referred to the development division director of the department of planning and development and the assistant chief of technical services. 
(3)  If the development division director and the assistant chief of technical services are not able to come to agreement, it shall be referred to the chief of the department of fire and emergency services and the director of the department of planning and development. 
(4)  If the director of the department of planning and development and the chief of the department of fire and emergency services are unable to reach an accord, the quandary shall be referred to the attention of the board of construction adjustments and appeals for final disposition. 
(b)  Inspections. Once the facility is permitted and under construction, it will be inspected by members of the fire marshal's office of the department of fire and emergency services and the department of planning and development. Each unit applies their respective regulations pursuant to the approved plans and specifications relating to the construction project. During the inspection process, whenever differing code requirements or interpretations surface and cannot be resolved by the field inspections staff, the following shall take place: 
(1)  The differing requirements or opinions shall be referred to the appropriate chief inspector and the field inspections supervisor of the fire marshal's office of the department of fire and emergency services for solution. 
(2)  If the appropriate chief inspector and the field inspections supervisor of the fire marshal's office of the department of fire and emergency services are not successful in reaching a solution, the situation shall be forwarded to the manager of the building inspections unit and the fire marshal for disposition. 
(3)  If the manager of the building inspections unit and the fire marshal are unable to reach a compromise, the predicament will be directed to the attention of the development division director of the department of planning and development and the assistant chief of technical services. 
(4)  If the development division director of the department of planning and development and the assistant chief of technical services are not able to come to agreement, it shall be referred to the chief of the department of fire and emergency services and the director of the department of planning and development. 
(5)  If the director of the department of planning and development and the chief of the department of fire and emergency services are unable to reach an accord, the matter shall be referred to the board of construction adjustments and appeals for final disposition. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 46-93) 
Chapter 26 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 1—6, adopted May 16, 2017, amended Ch. 26 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 26, §§ 26-1, 26-21—26-34, 26-57—26-64, 26-87—26-93, 26-115—26-122, 26-143—26-147, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of July 1, 2012, § 50-31—50-44, 50-61—50-68, 50-81—87, 50-89, 50-102—50-108, 50-121—50-125; Ord. No. 2013-01-03, § 1.1—1.11, adopted Jan. 29, 2013. 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule power to exercise authority regarding stormwater systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III (a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT/FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 26-21. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 1.1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-22. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the City of Peachtree Corners. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 1.2, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-23. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The community development director or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 1.3, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-24. - Basis for area of special flood hazard—Flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of this article, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS) for Gwinnett County, dated March 4, 2013, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Peachtree Corners; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by City of Peachtree Corners. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Peachtree Corners; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by City of Peachtree Corners. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the Peachtree Corners City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 1.4, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-25. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 1.5, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-26. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 1.6, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-27. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Peachtree Corners or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 1.7, 5-16-2017) 
Secs. 26-28—26-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 26-50. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the (appointed official)'s interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1—30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other flood prone areas as referenced in section 26-24. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before (a specific date) [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before a specific date [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is; 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after April 24, 2017 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. (* specific date) [i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)]. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after (* specific date) [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Peachtree Corners to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and, 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 2, 5-16-2017) 
Secs. 26-51—26-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 26-57. - Permit application requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City of Peachtree Corners a permit application on a form provided by the City of Peachtree Corners for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 2.1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-58. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 26-116(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in subsection 26-115(5). 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre-and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 2.2, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-59. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the community development director a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The community development director shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 2.3, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-60. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the community development director shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the community development director shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of divisions 4 and 5; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
(6)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the community development director shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the community development director shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and, 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the community development director and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 2.4, 5-16-2017) 
Secs. 26-61—26-86. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 26-87. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the City of Peachtree Corners. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the City of Peachtree Corners, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Peachtree Corners. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 3.1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-88. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the City of Peachtree Corners. If floodway data is not available from the City of Peachtree Corners, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Peachtree Corners. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 3.2, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-89. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or, 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under (1) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 26-90; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City of Peachtree Corners using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 3.3, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-90. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 26-118 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the City of Peachtree Corners prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the City of Peachtree Corners. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 3.4, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-91. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the City of Peachtree Corners until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the City of Peachtree Corners. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 3.5, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-92. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The City of Peachtree Corners may direct the property owner (at no cost to the City of Peachtree Corners) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the City of Peachtree Corners. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 3.6, 5-16-2017) 
Secs. 26-93—26-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 26-115. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 26-117—26-119 have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  (All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; and, 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 4.1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-116. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
The following provisions, in addition to those in section 26-115, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings . 
a.  New construction . New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 26-117—26-119 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 26-117—26-119 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 26-115(5). 
b.  Substantial improvements . Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 26-115(5). 
(2)  Non-residential buildings . 
a.  New construction . New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 26-117—26-119 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 26-117—26-119 may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the community development director. 
b.  Substantial improvements . Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1—30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the community development director to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the community development director. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities . Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection 26-115(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles . All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (section 5.2(1)(b)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes . 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 26-117—26-119 have been met. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 5.1(7). 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 4.2, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-117. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings . For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Non-residential buildings . For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 4.3, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-118. - Building standards for residential single—Lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the community development director shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with section 26-143. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 4.4, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-119. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-143. 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and, 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 4.5, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-120. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 26-88. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(f)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City of Peachtree Corners to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 4.6, 5-16-2017) 
Secs. 26-121—26-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 26-143. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the City of Peachtree Corners, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the City of Peachtree Corners. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the City of Peachtree Corners. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the City of Peachtree Corners shall have the right to appeal such decision to the zoning board of appeals as established by the City of Peachtree Corners in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the zoning board of appeals. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the City of Peachtree Corners and zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(8)  Conditions for article: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The community development director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the City of Peachtree Corners and zoning board of appeals shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the City of Peachtree Corners and the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 5, 5-16-2017) 
Secs. 26-144—26-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 26-160. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 6, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-161. - Notice of violation. 
If the City of Peachtree Corners determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City of Peachtree Corners by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 6.1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-162. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Peachtree Corners shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Peachtree Corners may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order . The City of Peachtree Corners may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy . The City of Peachtree Corners may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit . The City of Peachtree Corners may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City of Peachtree Corners may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties . In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the City of Peachtree Corners shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the City of Peachtree Corners has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City of Peachtree Corners may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties . For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the City of Peachtree Corners may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04-90, § 6.2, 5-16-2017) 
Chapter 30 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Grants to municipal corporations for repairs on facilities of historical value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1; Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORICAL RESTORATION AND PRESERVATION BOARD 

Sec. 30-19. - Creation; membership; term; duties; city historian. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Peachtree Corners Historical Restoration and Preservation Board. 
(b)  The board shall consist of five members. 
(c)  One member shall be appointed by the mayor and city council for each commissioner district from among the residents of that district and the term of office for each such member shall be two years. 
(d)  A city historian shall be appointed by the mayor and city council to serve at the commissioners' pleasure, and such historian shall be an ex officio member of the historical restoration and preservation board. 
(e)  The board is hereby charged with the duty of advising the chairperson and mayor and city council on the restoration and preservation of city historical matters and such other duties as the mayor and city council may require. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 58-26) 
Chapter 34 - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Authority and title. 
(a)  These rules and regulations are adopted under the authority of the Constitution of the state and laws enacted pursuant thereto. 
(b)  These regulations shall be known as "The Development Regulations of Peachtree Corners, Georgia," and may be referred to generally as "the development regulations," or, as used herein, "these regulations." 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 1, § 1.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-2. - Purpose. 
These regulations are intended to serve the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  To provide a system for the subdividing of lands and the accurate recording of land titles. 
(3)  To provide assurance that lots shown on recorded subdivision plats are usable by the purchasers for their intended and permitted functions. 
(4)  To encourage economically sound and orderly land development in accordance with the policies and objectives of the county comprehensive plan. 
(5)  To ensure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments in conformance with public improvement policies of the city. 
(6)  To ensure adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments. 
(7)  To ensure the provision of needed open spaces and public facility sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation for purchase of land for public purposes. 
(8)  To ensure equitable review and approval of all subdivision and site plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 1, § 1.2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-3. - Intent and application. 
It is the intent of these regulations that they apply to and provide guidance for the development of any lands within the incorporated area of the city, whether the development involves the subdivision of the land for sale to individual users or pertains only to the construction of buildings or other improvements on a single parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 1, § 1.3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-4. - Agricultural exemption. 
Clearly agricultural uses, limited to the cultivation of the land, dairying or animal husbandry, are not intended to be governed by these regulations, provided that land proposed to be converted to a new agricultural use must be zoned RA-200 to be exempt from the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 1, § 1.4, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-5. - Use of words and interpretation. 
(a)  For the purposes of these regulations, the following shall apply to the use of all words: 
(1)  Use of the word "and" is inclusive and requires that all of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency. 
(2)  Use of the word "or" is not exclusive (as in "either ... or"), and requires that at least one of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency. The word "or" may allow more than one component phrase to be present or fulfilled, as is implied by the common term "and/or." 
(b)  The following shall control the interpretation of words and phrases as used in these regulations: 
(1)  Words and phrases defined in this chapter shall be interpreted as defined herein. 
(2)  Words or phrases not defined herein shall be interpreted as defined in the zoning resolution of the city, or as defined in the city's soil erosion and sediment control ordinance, buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance, or mobile home park regulations, as applicable to the use of the word within the context of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 2, § 2.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-6. - Definitions of words and phrases. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley or service drive means a minor, permanent, public service-way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side for properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Applicant means a person, either the owner or the bona fide representative of the owner of land or structures governed by these regulations, who seeks authority to use, develop, construct upon or otherwise enjoy the use of property through any of the procedures established under these regulations. 
Arterial means a principal arterial, major arterial, or minor arterial street as defined and designated in the comprehensive plan of the city. 
As-built survey. See Record drawing. 
Authorized registered professional. 
(1)  The term "authorized registered professional" means: 
a.  A landscape architect who is licensed in the state in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-23-1(2), (3); 
b.  A land surveyor who possesses a current certificate of registration issued by the state in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 43-15-2(6), (7) and 43-15-13; or 
c.  A professional engineer who possesses a current certificate of registration issued by the state in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 43-15-2(10), (11) and 43-15-9. 
(2)  An authorized registered professional shall know and understand the limits of their professional expertise, certification, license or registration and shall not perform work which is outside of the scope of said professional expertise, certification, license or registration. An authorized registered professional shall be liable for complying with all state laws and rules and licensing board requirements that apply to their particular profession, including ethical standards, and shall be liable for failure to meet the applicable standards of professional care. All documents and drawings submitted to the city by an authorized registered professional shall bear that person's certification, license, registration or seal, as appropriate. The certification, license, registration or seal of an authorized registered professional on documents and drawings submitted to the city shall certify that the documents and drawings comply with all applicable city ordinances, rules and regulations and shall certify that the documents and drawings are based on personal knowledge of the conditions depicted thereon and that the accuracy and completeness of the documents and drawings have been verified by field inspection of the facilities depicted therein. 
Base flood means the flood which has a one percent probability of occurring in any calendar year (i.e., the 100-year frequency flood). 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Big Haynes Creek Watershed Protection Area refers to that area of land lying within the drainage basin or watershed of Big Haynes Creek, as shown on the official set of maps of the protection area maintained by the department of planning and development. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets, other than alleys. 
Buildable lot of record means a lot or parcel of land which existed as a single parcel of ownership, recorded as such in its entirety and present boundaries with the clerk to superior court prior to June 2, 1970, or which is shown in its entirety and present boundaries on a final plat or exemption plat duly approved under these or any previously applicable regulations providing for the subdivision of land in the city and recorded with the clerk to the superior court of the city. 
Building setback line means a line across a lot parallel to a street right-of-way or other property line establishing the minimum open space to be provided between any principal building and the street or other property line. All building setback lines shall be at least as restrictive as the corresponding minimum yard setbacks required in the zoning resolution. On corner lots, the minimum required front yard setback shall be provided along all abutting streets. 
Certificate of development conformance means final approval issued by the department for completion of land development activities for a subdivision or project for which a development permit was issued. 
Certificate of occupancy means final approval by the department for the use or occupancy of a structure for which a building permit was issued. 
City means the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 
Clearing means the removal of trees or other vegetation, but not including grubbing activities. 
Comprehensive plan means a plan summarizing and illustrating the adopted goals and objectives of the mayor and council regarding the future location and character of anticipated land uses, transportation, and other public facilities in the city. The term "comprehensive plan" includes component or functional plans for the city, including, but not limited to, a plan for land use (i.e., land use plan) or a plan for transportation facilities, and includes the classification of streets and thoroughfares as shown on the adopted long range road classification map. 
Concept plan means a drawing which shows the overall concept (e.g., a concept plan) of a proposed development, and which may include lots and streets in a subdivision or the general location of buildings and improvements for a multifamily or nonresidential project, and which may be drawn to approximate dimensions in a free-hand style. A sketch plan, as required by the Gwinnett County 1970 Subdivision Regulations, is equivalent to a concept plan under these regulations. 
Condominium means a form of property ownership in which the buildings or portions of the buildings, whether residential or nonresidential in use, are owned by individuals separate from the lands which surround the buildings, said lands held in common ownership by the owners of the several buildings. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated within the development by a vehicular turnaround. For the purpose of designation, a cul-de-sac street shall be interpreted to begin at the intersection of two or more streets nearest to the vehicular turnaround. 
Department means the department of planning and development of the city. 
Department of transportation means the city department of transportation. 
Developer means any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit who directs the undertaking or purposes to undertake development activities as herein defined, whether the development involves the subdivision of the land for sale to individual users, the construction of buildings or other improvements on a single land ownership, or both. 
Development. 
(1)  Verb: All activities associated with the conversion of land or the expansion or replacement of an existing use to any new use intended for human operation, occupancy or habitation, other than for agricultural purposes devoted strictly to the cultivation of the land, dairying or animal husbandry. Such activities include land disturbance (clearing and grubbing the land of vegetation and stumps, and grading) and the construction of improvements, such as, but not limited to, streets, driveways or parking areas, water or sewer mains, stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks or other structures permanently placed on or in the property. 
(2)  Noun: Where appropriate to the context, the term "development" also may be used to denote a specific subdivision or project which is a single entity or intended to be constructed as in interrelated whole, whether simultaneously or in phases. 
Development agreement means a written contract between the city and a property owner or developer that specifies the system improvements to be provided by the developer for a specific project. 
Development permit means an official authorization issued by the department permitting clearing, grubbing, grading, or construction of storm drainage facilities, access drives, streets, parking or other improvements exclusive of buildings. 
Development plans means the detailed and professional plans showing the layout and design, site work and construction activities proposed for a project (other than architectural building plans) and including the preliminary plat or site plan (as applicable), grading plan, tree preservation/replacement plan, erosion and sediment control plan, buffer and landscape plan, and construction drawings for streets, stormwater drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, water supply facilities, and other site improvements. 
Diameter breast height (dbh) means the diameter of a tree measured at a point 4.5 feet above the ground. 
Director means the director of the department of planning and development or his designee. 
Drainage improvements means those facilities and structures intended to control and direct the passage of stormwaters and other surface water flows from and across a property; including, but not limited to, swales and ditches, cross drains and other piping systems, catchbasins, detention ponds, and velocity dissipation devices. 
Dripline means a line on the ground established by a vertical plane extending from a tree's outermost branch tips down to the ground (i.e., the line enclosing the area directly beneath the tree's crown from which rainfall would drip). 
Driveway means a vehicular accessway in private ownership, other than a private street, which provides access primarily to only one property or to no more than two single-family detached residences. 
Easement means recorded authorization for a specified purpose by a property owner for the use of any designated part of the real property by another entity. 
Erosion control regulations means the city soil erosion and sediment control ordinance. 
Exemption plat means a subdivision plat drawn to final plat standards, as contained herein, prepared in accordance with one of the exemptions provided under article II of this chapter. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency which administers the National Flood Insurance Program. This agency prepares, revises and distributes the maps and studies referenced in these regulations. 
Fee simple means a form of property ownership in which the buildings and surrounding lands are owned by the same person. 
Final plat means a finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and boundary information and certification required by these regulations. 
Fire marshal's office means a section of the county department of fire and emergency services charged with the responsibility of enforcing the city's fire prevention and protection code, the Standard Fire Prevention Code, the National Fire Prevention Code and state handicap laws. 
Fire services division means a division of the county department of public safety charged with the responsibility of enforcing the city's fire prevention and life safety codes, and the city handicap ordinance. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition or partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas. 
Flood boundary and floodway map means the official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the floodways are shown and the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the applicable risk premium zones. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary and floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Flood hazard area. See Floodplain. 
Flood-related definitions. See the floodplain management ordinance for specific definitions of terms used in relation to flooding, alteration of floodplains, construction of structures in or adjacent to floodplains, etc. 
Floodplain means those lands subject to flooding that have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plat (i.e., the regulatory flood). See the flood management ordinance for ancillary terms. 
Floodprone area. See the floodplain management ordinance of the city. 
Freeboard means the distance between the base flood elevation and the top of a stormwater detention structure. 
Georgia DOT means the department of transportation of the state. 
Grading means the movement, removal or addition of earth on a site by the use of mechanical equipment. 
Grading permit means an official authorization issued by the department permitting grading of a site, and may include installation of attendant stormwater drainage facilities. 
Grubbing means the removal of stumps or roots from a property. 
Health department means the environmental health services division of the state department of human resources for the county. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater or to violate water quality standards. 
House location plan (HLP) means a drawing showing lot information and all improvements, as outlined in article V of this chapter. 
Impervious surface means any paved, hardened or structural surface, including, but not limited to, buildings, dams, decks, driveways, parking areas, patios, streets, swimming pools, tennis courts, walkways, and other structures. 
Land disturbance permit means any permit other than a building permit issued by the city that authorizes clearing or grading activities on a site or portion of a site. Said permit may be a clearing, clearing and grubbing, a grading, or development permit, as defined and authorized herein. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development, or both. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a road or crosswalk may be included. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot other than a corner lot abutting upon two or more streets. 
Major intersection means the intersection of two or more public streets in which at least one of the streets is an arterial or major collector as designated by the comprehensive plan. 
Major thoroughfare means any public street, existing or proposed, which is shown in the Comprehensive plan as an arterial or major collector. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of these Regulations, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Minor collector means a through street having the primary function of connecting subdivisions or other areas to major collector streets or other major thoroughfares, or functioning as a central route within a subdivision channeling traffic from the local streets to an abutting major thoroughfare or another minor collector street. For the purposes of these regulations, a central but non-through route within a subdivision or other project will be considered as a minor collector if the average daily traffic generated by the development on the route will exceed 2,000 trips. 
Open space, Big Haynes Creek Watershed , means a parcel of land set aside, designated and reserved which shall remain in its natural state, undisturbed and unoccupied by any structures or impervious surfaces, and located within the Big Haynes Creek Watershed Protection Area. 
Owner means a person having a majority fee simple interest in real property, or a majority interest through any other form of ownership. 
Pedestrian way means a right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor propelled vehicles are excluded. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or other group or combination acting singly or collectively for a common purpose, and the duly authorized agents thereof. 
Planning commission means the City of Peachtree Corners Planning Commission. 
Plat means a map indicating the subdivision, resubdivision, or recombination of land. 
Preliminary plat means a drawing which shows the perimeter boundary, topography, lot arrangements, street layout, and other features of a proposed subdivision, as specified in these regulations. 
Project means a principal building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, planned and designed as an interdependent unit, together with all accessory uses or structures, utilities, drainage, access, and circulation facilities, whether built in whole or in phases. Examples include: a principal building on a lot, a residential subdivision, a multifamily development, a shopping center or an office park. 
Project access improvement means any improvement or facility that is planned and designed to provide service or access for a particular project and which is necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project and is not a system improvement. A project access improvement includes, but is not limited to, pedestrian access improvements; site driveways; new streets; median cuts; right turn lanes, left turn lanes, acceleration lanes, and deceleration lanes made necessary to serve site driveways or new streets leading to or from the project; traffic control measures made necessary to serve site driveways or new streets; intersection improvements whose primary purpose at the time of construction is to provide access to the project; and necessary right-of-way dedications required for any project access improvement. 
Record drawing means a survey or other drawing based on a field survey which shows existing features or components and horizontal or vertical information (grades or location of improvements). 
Redevelopment means development on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing building interiors, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior building changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Responsible party means, in the context of enforcement procedures, a person (as defined above) who is alleged to have committed, caused, continued or created a violation of the terms, requirements, regulations, or provisions of these regulations, whether as a direct act, through lack of action or neglect, or at the direction of or on behalf of others. A responsible party may be the owner of a premises where a violation has occurred; an occupant, whether through ownership, lease or other tenancy; a contractor, builder or developer; an agent of or person otherwise acting on behalf of the aforementioned parties; or other person acting in violation of these regulations. 
Road. See Street, public. 
Roadway means the paved portion of a street from back of curb to back of curb (or edge to edge of pavement for streets not having curbs), but excluding driveway aprons, bridges, and large single- and multi-cell culverts which in a hydrologic sense can be considered to function as a bridge. 
Sheet flow means diffused water running overland to a defined watercourse. 
Site work means development activity to prepare a property for construction of buildings or finished structures, including clearing, grubbing, grading, and installation of soil sedimentation and erosion control facilities. 
Sketch plan. See Concept plan. 
Street, private, means an access way similar to and having the same function as a public street, providing access to more than one property, but held in private ownership (as distinct from a "driveway"). 
Street, public, means a right-of-way dedicated to and accepted by the city for vehicular traffic or over which the city may hold a prescriptive easement for public access, and including designated and numbered U.S. and state highways. For the purposes of these regulations, the term "public street" shall be limited to those which afford or could afford a direct means of vehicular access to abutting property, and exclude limited access roadways which abut a property but from which direct access may not be allowed under any circumstances. 
Street, local nonresidential, means a surface street intended primarily to provide local access to adjacent existing or planned commercial or industrial development and not for through traffic. 
Street, local residential, means a surface street intended primarily to provide local access to adjacent residential development and not for through traffic. 
Street, marginal access, means a local street which is parallel to and adjacent to a major thoroughfare and which provides access to adjacent properties and protection from through traffic. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground. 
Subdivider means any person, individual, firm partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined, including an agent of the subdivider. 
Subdivision. 
(1)  Verb: Any division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel, regardless of its existing or future use, into two or more lots, tracts or parcels. The term "subdivision" shall mean the act or process of dividing property. Lots that do not abut or are not directly across a public street from other subdivided lots shall be considered a separate distinct subdivision with a separate name. 
(2)  Noun: Where appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" also may be used in reference to the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership at the time of division. 
Subdivision entrance means a public street, or publicly approved private street, that provides access to subdivided lots. 
System improvement means any improvement or facility, such as streets, bridges, or rights-of-way, identified on the long range road classification map (i.e., "the system"), and any traffic control measures, landscaping or other features to same, that is included in the comprehensive plan and which is further designed to provide service to the community at large. 
Tie point means the point of reference for a boundary survey. Said point of reference shall be an established, monumented position which can be identified or relocated from maps, plats, or other documents on public record. 
Traffic engineer means the designated head of the traffic and operations division of the county department of transportation, or his designee. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually having a main stem or trunk and many branches, and at maturity normally attaining a trunk diameter greater than three inches at any point and a height of over ten feet. 
Tree diameter means the widest cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at diameter breast height (dbh) or at any point below dbh for new trees or multi-trunked species, but in no case less than six inches from the ground. 
Tree preservation/replacement plan means a plan that identifies tree protection areas, existing trees to be preserved and proposed replacement trees to be planted on a property to meet minimum requirements of the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance, as well as methods of tree protection to be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information. 
Tree protection area means any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees which are proposed to be retained in order to comply with the buffer requirements of the zoning resolution or the requirements of the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance. 
Water pollution control division means a division of the public utilities department charged with the responsibility for the design, installation, inspection, approval, and maintenance of the public sanitary sewer system and wastewater treatment in Peachtree Corners. 
Water resources department means the county department of water resources, which includes operations and programs for water, wastewater, water pollution control and stormwater; known previously as the public utilities department. 
Water system division means a division of the public utilities department charged with the responsibility for the design, installation, and maintenance of the public water supply and distribution system in Peachtree Corners. 
Watercourse means a channel with a defined bed and banks, including lakes, ponds, and marshes, and which meets the definition of watercourse in section 391-3-7.01 of the state department of natural resources regulations. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
Zoning resolution means the adopted zoning resolution of the city, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 2, § 2.2, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 34-7—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATION OF THE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 34-31. - Application. 
Any land disturbance activity or any development activity must first comply with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 3, § 3.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-32. - Dedication of public lands and facilities. 
No land dedicated as a public street or other public purpose shall be opened or accepted as a public street or for any other public purpose, and no subdivision of land shall be made, nor subdivision plat, nor part thereof, shall be recorded before obtaining final approval from the city department of planning and development. Said approval shall be entered in writing on the final plat by the director of the department of planning and development. Said director is hereby authorized to accept such dedications of lands and public facilities on behalf of the city and to cause such dedications to be recorded, subject to ratification by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 3, § 3.2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-33. - Transfer of land ownership. 
(a)  Conditions applicable to title transfers. No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, developer, subdivider or any other owner or agent shall transfer title or attempt to record the title to any land in Peachtree Corners, and no building permit may be issued on said land, unless: 
(1)  Said land existed as a single parcel of ownership, recorded as such in its entirety and present boundaries prior to the 1970 Gwinnett County Subdivision Regulations; 
(2)  Said land is shown in its entirety and present boundaries on a final plat as approved (under these or any previous applicable regulations) and duly recorded; 
(3)  Said land is shown in its entirety and present boundaries on a plat authorized by the director and recorded pursuant to the regulations governing subdivision exemptions contained herein; or 
(4)  Said land is an aggregation of properties for land assembly purposes, and no building permit will be requested prior to the filing of an application for an issuance of a development permit, pursuant to these regulations. 
(b)  Sale of land by reference to unapproved final plat prohibited. No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, developer, subdivider or any other owner or agent shall transfer title to any property by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of any map of plat illustrating the subdivision of land without a final plat of said land showing said property first having been duly approved under the procedures of these regulations or any previously applicable regulations and recorded with the clerk to superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 3, § 3.3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-34. - Subdivision exemptions. 
(a)  General requirements. For the purpose of these regulations, the types of activities contained in this section shall be considered subdivisions but exempt from the "procedures" and "required public improvements" portions of these regulations, except as noted. Each such subdivision shall be drawn as an exemption plat in accordance with final plat standards (except subsections (d)(2) and (f) of this section) pursuant to the requirements of these regulations and shall be submitted in an appropriate number of copies, together with the appropriate fees to the department for review and approval. Upon approval, the director shall authorize the recording of the exemption plat with the clerk of superior court of the county and grant the issuance of building permits pursuant to this Code. 
(b)  Recombinations. An exemption plat shall be required for the combination or recombination of all of two or more buildable lots of record, where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots or parcels are in compliance with the zoning resolution. An exemption plat shall not be required for aggregations of properties for land assembly purposes where no building permit will be requested prior to issuance of a development permit. 
(c)  Minor subdivision. The division of a buildable lot of record into five or fewer lots, provided: 
(1)  Each proposed lot complies with all requirements of the zoning resolution and is limited to single-family detached residential use. 
(2)  Each proposed lot abuts upon an existing public street. 
(3)  All project related slope and utility easements as well as necessary street rights-of-way as determined by the department based on the comprehensive plan are provided at no cost to the city. 
(4)  Each lot thus created may not be resubdivided pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. Such resubdivision shall be accomplished only through the procedures contained in article X of this chapter. 
(5)  Each proposed lot shall comply with the requirements of the department of public utilities and the environmental health department, as appropriate, whose certification of approval shall be required prior to approval of the exemption plat by the department. 
The director is authorized to grant a modification from the five-lot maximum exemption; provided, however, modifications shall not be granted to exceed a total of seven exempt lots. The director may impose conditions of approval upon any modification thus granted as may be necessary to ensure the general public welfare. 
(d)  Estate subdivisions. 
(1)  The division of land in any single-family detached residential zoning district into lots having a minimum lot area of at least five acres, provided: 
a.  Each proposed lot abuts upon an existing public street which contains the necessary right-of-way width required by these regulations as determined by the comprehensive plan. 
b.  Each proposed lot shall provide at least 100 feet of frontage upon the street, shall provide at least 200 feet of lot width measured in accordance with the requirements of the zoning resolution, and shall meet or exceed all other minimum requirements of the applicable single-family detached residential zoning district. 
c.  All project related slope and utility easements as well as necessary street right-of way shall be provided at no cost to the city as determined by the department based upon the comprehensive plan. 
d.  No lot thus created may be re-subdivided to less than five acres as an exemption to these regulations. 
e.  Each proposed lot shall comply with the requirements of the department of public utilities and the environmental health department, as appropriate, whose certification of approval shall be required prior to approval of the exemption plat by the department. 
(2)  The division of land in any single-family detached residential zoning district into lots having a minimum lot area of at least ten acres, provided: 
a.  Each proposed lot abuts upon an existing public street. 
b.  Each proposed lot shall provide at least 100 feet of frontage upon the street, shall provide at least 200 feet of lot width measured in accordance with the requirements of the zoning resolution, and shall meet or exceed all other minimum requirements of the applicable single-family detached residential zoning district. 
c.  No lot thus created may be re-subdivided to less than five acres as an exemption to these regulations. 
d.  A record survey certified by a land surveyor currently registered in the state shall be submitted to and approved by the department showing all lots. 
(e)  Nonresidential project management. The creation of a lot for recording within an overall nonresidential development, provided: 
(1)  The overall nonresidential development is being undertaken as a single multi-phase or multi-use project under the unified control of a single developer is zoned for such use or development, and an overall concept plan for the entire project has been approved by the director. 
(2)  The proposed subdivision is clearly intended to transfer title for financing or building management purposes and not for the sale of the property for future development, to the satisfaction of the director. 
(3)  The proposed lot has been approved by the department to be provided permanent vehicular access by private drive. Said access shall be established by easement or acceptable covenant prior to or concurrently with recording of the exemption plat. 
(4)  The proposed lot must encompass a principal structure which has been granted a building permit and which is under construction or has been completed. 
(5)  The exemption plat shall be drawn to include the entirety of the overall development and shall clearly identify those lots to be recorded, those lots previously recorded and the remainder of the development which shall be labeled "not included." All easements, dedications, etc., shall be shown as appropriate or as required. Each lot shall be consistent with the zoning approved for the overall development and the applicable requirements of the zoning resolution. 
(f)  Amnesty lots. The designation of a lot as a buildable lot of record if the lot was recorded between June 2, 1970, and the effective date of these regulations but not reviewed and approved under the provisions of the subdivision regulations in effect at that time, provided: 
(1)  The exemption plat is limited to one individual lot and no property which adjoins the lot is or has been owned by the applicant in whole or in part. 
(2)  The lot meets all requirements of the zoning resolution, and the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that approval of the lot will not create nonconformity to the requirements of the zoning resolution on any other portion of the original property from which the lot was subdivided. 
(3)  The lot abuts upon an existing public street. 
(4)  All project-related slope and utility easements as well as necessary street rights-of-way as determined by the director based on the comprehensive plan are provided at no cost to the city. 
(5)  The lot shall comply with the requirements of the department of public utilities and the environmental health department, as appropriate, whose certification of approval shall be required prior to approval of the exemption plat by the director. 
(6)  A record survey certified by a land surveyor currently registered in the state shall be submitted to and approved by the department showing the lot. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 3, § 3.4, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 34-35—34-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT OR CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 34-57. - Authorization required for land disturbance or development activities. 
(a)  Permit required; exemptions. No disturbance of the land, including clearing, grubbing, or grading activities, shall commence or proceed except in accordance with the provisions of these development regulations, unless the activity is exempt as an agricultural activity in the RA-200 zoning district, or is for the construction of an individual single-family detached or duplex residence on a buildable lot of record. 
(b)  Plan review and approval. Any developer of land within incorporated Peachtree Corners shall first submit to the department such plans, plats, or construction drawings as may be required by these regulations and shall have been granted a permit consistent with these regulations and approved by the department prior to the initiation of development activities. Approval of plans by the city officials or employees shall not imply nor transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, or any other profession, from the professional corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared and sealed. Article IX of this chapter details the elements of the required plans. 
(c)  Chattahoochee River Corridor certificate. If any portion of a property included within a proposed project is located within 2,000 feet of the bank of the Chattahoochee River, the project shall first obtain a certificate authorizing the development under the provisions of the Metropolitan River Protection Act before any clearing, grading, or construction activity may be granted a permit by the department or any other agency. All permits issued by the city pursuant to such authorization shall be consistent with the requirements and provisions of the certificate. Any violation of the provisions of the Metropolitan River Protection Act Certificate shall be considered as though a violation of these development regulations, and shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions hereunder. 
(d)  Interdepartmental review and approval. The department shall not issue a permit for any development activities until the plans, plats, or construction drawings, as applicable, have been approved by such other departments or agencies as may have authority or jurisdiction over said activities in whole or in part. 
(e)  Activities limited to permit authorization. Development activities shall be limited to those as authorized by the applicable permit and as may be further restricted by conditions of approval pertaining thereto attached by the department or other department or agency as may have authority or jurisdiction over said activities in whole or in part. 
(f)  Developer's responsibility for compliance. No permit shall be interpreted to relieve any developer or subdivider of the responsibility of maintaining full compliance with all codes, ordinances, and other regulations of the city except as amended by an approved waiver, variance, or other relief granted through applicable formal appeal procedures for a specific property or application. Any permit issued in error or in contradiction to the provisions of an adopted code, ordinance, or regulation of the city shall be considered to have been null and void upon its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 4, § 4.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-58. - Land disturbance permits. 
(a)  Clearing permit, clearing and grubbing permit, and grading permit. The following permits covering portions of the land development process may be issued in accordance with the requirements of these regulations and the provisions of any Metropolitan River Protection Act Certificate, if applicable: 
(1)  Clearing permit. 
a.  A permit limited to clearing only with no grubbing or other land disturbance except for such activities necessary to install and maintain erosion and sediment control practices (as defined in the Georgia Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Act) may be issued upon identification of the property, the limits of the area to be cleared and the type of activities to be undertaken, an erosion and sediment control plan unless exempt under the soil erosion and sediment control ordinance, a hydrology study if an erosion and sediment control is required, and approval of a tree preservation/replacement plan as may be required under the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance. All clearing activities are to be consistent with the provisions of these regulations, the soil erosion and sediment control ordinance, the zoning resolution and any conditions of zoning approval. 
b.  A clearing permit shall expire unless activities are commenced within 60 consecutive calendar days of issuance of the permit or if activities lapse and are abandoned for a period exceeding 30 consecutive calendar days. 
c.  A clearing permit shall not be construed as approval of or authorization to construct any improvements, buildings, or other structures on the property. 
(2)  Clearing and grubbing permit. 
a.  A clearing and grubbing permit may be approved based on approval of a concept plan and tree preservation and/or replacement plan (if required) for the development, Erosion and sediment control plan, and hydrology study. Appropriate soil erosion and sedimentation controls and tree protection measures shall be placed and maintained as required. 
b.  A permit for clearing and grubbing shall expire unless activities are commenced within 60 consecutive calendar days of issuance of the permit or if activities lapse and the project is abandoned for a period exceeding 30 consecutive calendar days. 
c.  A clearing and grubbing permit shall be limited to the removal of vegetation and stumps and the placement of required tree protection measures and soil erosion and sedimentation facilities, and may authorize the removal of existing structures on the property at the option of the developer. No grading or construction activities may be started under a clearing and grubbing permit except for such activities necessary to install and maintain erosion and sediment control practices. The approval of a clearing and grubbing permit shall not imply the approval of or authorization to construct any improvements, buildings, or other structures on the property. 
(3)  Grading permit. 
a.  A grading permit, which may include clearing and grubbing, may be issued prior to approval of a development permit, as provided under article IX of this chapter. A grading permit may also be issued for earth borrow or storage, where no development or construction is proposed or imminent, based on approval of a grading plan, soil erosion and sediment control plan, and hydrology study, consistent with the requirements of the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance, the zoning category of the site, and the provisions of the comprehensive plan (as applicable). 
b.  A permit authorizing, but not limited to, grading (and clearing and grubbing) shall expire unless activities are commenced within 60 consecutive calendar days of issuance of the permit or if activities lapse and the project is abandoned for a period exceeding 30 consecutive calendar days. Any site for which the grading permit expires shall immediately be stabilized to prevent erosion. 
c.  A grading permit shall be limited in its authorization to land grading activities along with associated tree protection, clearing and grubbing, and demolition activities, and may authorize the construction of storm drainage improvements and soil erosion and sedimentation facilities as allowed by the permit itself. 
(b)  Development permit. 
(1)  Development activities authorized. A development permit shall be issued to authorize all activities associated with the land development process, including clearing and grubbing, grading, and the construction of such improvements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, sewer systems, stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks, or other structures permanently placed on or in the property except for buildings or other structures requiring the issuance of a building permit. Water system improvements shall be authorized solely by the public utilities department. 
(2)  Development permit approval. A development permit (which may include grading, clearing, and grubbing) shall be issued at the developer's request following approval of a Metropolitan River Protection Act Certificate, if applicable, and upon approval of a preliminary plat for a subdivision or a site plan for a non-subdivision project, along with approval of all other development plans and documents required to be submitted under article IV of this chapter. All plans approved for a development permit shall expire after six months if no permit is issued within said time period. 
(3)  Expiration of development permits. A development permit shall expire 12 consecutive calendar months after issuance unless development activity as authorized by the permit is initiated within the 12-month period or if such authorized activities lapse and the project is abandoned for a period exceeding 60 consecutive calendar days. The director may approve one extension not exceeding three consecutive calendar months within which time development activity must commence or the permit shall expire. Said extension shall be applied for within the first 12 consecutive calendar months after the permit's issuance. 
(4)  Lapse in construction activity. For the purposes of these regulations, a lapse in or suspension of development activity as authorized by a development permit, as a direct result of action or inaction on the part of the city completely beyond the control of the developer, shall not be considered as a lapse in activity causing the development permit to expire. The 12 months within which development activity must begin shall exclude any such time period during which the activity is prohibited or has been caused to lapse by said city action or inaction. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 4, § 4.2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-59. - Building permits. 
(a)  Applicable codes. Building permits for all structures or interior finishes are issued after meeting the applicable requirements of the fire prevention and life safety codes, and the various health, water, sewer, and building codes of the city, as well as the provisions of any certificate approved under the Metropolitan River Protection Act, if applicable. 
(b)  Health department; on-site sewage disposal. For any structure for which on-site sewage disposal will be provided, a permit issued by the health department shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit. Said permit may first require approval by the health department of a plan showing the location of the sewage disposal system and other site improvements, in accordance with their regulations. 
(c)  Single-family and duplex residences. 
(1)  A building permit for a single- or two-family residence may be issued after the recording of a final plat or after the lot upon which the building is to be located has otherwise become a buildable lot of record. 
(2)  The approval by the department of a house location plan (HLP), residential drainage plan (RDP), or residential drainage study (RDS), may be required prior to issuance of the building permit, as noted and conditioned on the final plat or as may be required for compliance with the Georgia Metropolitan River Protection Act. For such lots, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until conformance to the HLP, RDP, or RDS has been field verified by the department as shown on a certified foundation survey prepared by registered land surveyor. (See article V of this chapter for plan and study specifications.) 
(d)  Swimming pools. Issuance of a building permit for a swimming pool as an accessory use to a single- or two-family residence, whether to be issued at the same time as or subsequent to the permitting or construction of the house or duplex, shall first require approval of a swimming pool location plan. The plan shall show the proposed location of the swimming pool and enclosing fence relative to the residence, the property boundaries, setback lines, septic tank and septic tank drain field (if any), and any easements on the site, and shall comply with all requirements of the zoning resolution and swimming pool code. Based on site conditions, a residential drainage study (RDS) may also be required prior to issuance of the building permit. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until conformance to the swimming pool location plan (and to provisions of the RDS, if applicable) has been field verified by the department. 
(e)  Multifamily and nonresidential structures. 
(1)  Issuance of a building permit for any principal building other than a single-family detached or duplex residence (and associated accessory structure) shall first require issuance of a development permit for the building site, and the building permit shall be consistent with said development permit. 
(2)  Building plans must be reviewed and approved by the fire services division, development, and public utilities departments prior to permitting for all structures, except for one- and two-family residences or accessory structures. Building plan approval shall expire after one year, after which re-review and approval by the department shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit for the building or additional buildings. 
(f)  Issuance on buildable lots of record; exceptions. Building permits shall only be issued on buildable lots of record, as defined in these regulations, except under special circumstances limited to and as specifically described in this section, below. 
(1)  In single-family detached and duplex residential subdivision, building permits for no more than two model home buildings, except by approval of a modification application, on specific lots may be issued by the department on the basis of an approved preliminary plat after the approval of the environmental health department or department of public utilities, as appropriate, and subject to all limitations or requirements as may be established by the director. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for the completed model home until the final plat encompassing the model home building lots has been approved and recorded. 
(2)  In nonresidential subdivisions, building permits may be issued by the department on the basis of an approved preliminary plat and after a development permit has been approved reflecting the site plan and construction drawings for specific buildings and associated site improvements. Issuance of the building permits shall be conditioned on the following: 
a.  A performance bond or other approved surety shall have been received in a form acceptable to the city attorney, drawn in favor of the city, and in an amount not less than 110 percent of the cost of completing all public improvements as authorized and required by the preliminary plat. 
b.  The performance bond or other approved surety shall not exceed an aggregate total for all required public improvements of $12,000.00 per acre for the total acreage included within the subdivision or portion of the subdivision wherein the improvements are proposed, except by approval of the mayor and council. 
c.  Fire services division approval shall be required prior to issuance of any building permit, which may include approval of acceptable access and water under pressure for combustible construction. 
d.  Approval of the health department for on-site sewage disposal or by the water pollution control division for a building to be served by public sewer shall be required prior to issuance of any building permit. 
e.  Construction of the required public improvements shall proceed concurrently with construction of the buildings. 
f.  No certificate of occupancy shall be approved for any structure within the subdivision prior to recording of the final plat without the express approval of the director. 
g.  The director shall have found that the public interest is best served and that a public purpose is involved in the acceptance of the performance bond. 
(3)  In fee-simple townhouse subdivisions, a building permit may be issued on a buildable lot of record established for each building (containing any number of townhouse dwelling units) through recording of a final plat following completion of all required public improvements. Upon completion of the buildings, the final plat shall be rerecorded to establish individual lots for the townhouse units, based on their actual locations, prior to issuance of certificates of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 4, § 4.3, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 34-60—34-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 34-77. - Suitability of the land. 
(a)  Unsuitable land may not be developed. Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, and any land deemed to be unsuitable for development due to steep slope, unsuitable soils or subsurface conditions, etc., shall not be subjected to development for any uses as may continue such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life, or property, unless steps are taken to eliminate or abate these conditions. 
(b)  Unsuitable land must be included in buildable lots. 
(1)  Land within a proposed subdivision or development which is unsuitable for development shall be incorporated into the buildable lots as excess land. Lots which do not comply with the requirements of the zoning resolution are prohibited. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
a.  Signage and landscape features. The creation of an unbuildable lot in a proposed subdivision for the exclusive purpose of subdivision identification signage or subdivision entrance landscape features is authorized only under the following circumstances (modification applications from the circumstances of this exception shall not be accepted): 
1.  The lot shall be located at an entrance to the subdivision as an "island" in the right-of-way of a local or minor collector street; 
2.  A mandatory homeowner's association shall be required for the subdivision for ownership and maintenance of the lot as common area; 
3.  The lot shall meet the requirements of the zoning resolution or as may be approved by a zoning variance; 
4.  Right-of-way of a minimum width of six feet from back of curb shall be provided adjacent to the perimeter of the lot; and 
5.  Landscape plantings within the right-of-way shall not extend more than three feet above the street grade. 
b.  Stormwater management facilities. The creation of an unbuildable lot for the exclusive purpose of providing and maintaining a stormwater management facility is authorized. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 5, § 5.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-78. - Offers of land dedication. 
Whenever a developer proposes the dedication of land to public use, and the director or the appropriate agency finds that such land is neither required nor is it suitable for public use, the director shall require the rearrangement of lots to include such land in private ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 5, § 5.2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-79. - Zoning and other regulations. 
(a)  Discrepancy between minimum standards; what applies. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions required herein and those contained in zoning regulations, building codes, or other official regulations or resolutions, the most restrictive shall apply. In those instances where the required right-of-way width or roadway improvements for a specific project have been established as a condition of zoning approval, the requirements of the zoning condition shall control, whether more or less restrictive than the requirements of these regulations. 
(b)  Building setback conformity. Building setback lines shall at least conform to the minimum yard requirements of the zoning resolution. Building setback lines along all public streets shall be no less than the front yard setback required on the property by the applicable zoning district in the zoning resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 5, § 5.3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-80. - Required public improvements. 
Every developer of lands within the jurisdiction of these regulations shall provide the project access improvements included in these regulations as shall be appropriate to serve the project, in accordance with these development regulations and other pertinent codes, ordinances, and regulations of the city. Said improvements and associated lands shall be provided at no cost to the city, and shall be dedicated or otherwise transferred, as required, to the public in perpetuity and without covenant or reservation, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 5, § 5.4, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-81. - Lots. 
(a)  Lots to conform to the zoning resolution. Lots shall at least conform to requirements of the city zoning resolution. 
(b)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots required along major thoroughfares. 
(1)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be required for residential subdivisions along major thoroughfares where internal access can be provided. A no-access easement of at least ten feet in width, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery. When located along a major thoroughfare, the no-access easement shall be planted and/or screened as required by the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance. 
(2)  In no-access easements along minor collectors or local streets, planting or other screening treatments shall be at the sole option of the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 5, § 5.5, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-82. - Survey monuments. 
(a)  Lot corner monumentation. All corners shall be marked with an iron rebar or pin, at least one-half inch in diameter and 18 inches long and driven so as to extend no less than one inch above the finished grade. 
(b)  Floodplain elevations. On subdivisions containing floodplains, flood elevation references shall be set in accordance with the requirements of the floodplain management ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 5, § 5.6, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-83. - Standard drawings. 
(a)  Department to maintain standard drawings on file. The department shall maintain on file for consultation and distribution a set of standard drawings illustrating details of construction and design of streets, stormwater drainage facilities, site improvements and other elements related to the development of land in accordance with these regulations and under the jurisdiction of the department. 
(b)  Standard drawings to illustrate standards. The standard drawings shall illustrate minimum acceptable standards for land development activities authorized under these regulations, but shall not supersede more restrictive prudent design requirements or good engineering practices applied to specific situations on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  Standard drawings incorporated as part of development regulations. The standard drawings shall be treated as though they are a part of these regulations for application to the minimum standards for design and construction of improvements required herein and are subject to the modification and appeal provisions of article XII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 5, § 5.7, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-84. - Buffers, landscaping, tree preservation and tree replacement. 
(a)  General applicability. The standards and requirements contained in this section shall apply only to tree preservation and replacement, buffers, and landscape areas specifically required by this Code, ordinance or resolution, and shall not apply to general or voluntary landscaping or to open space otherwise voluntarily provided on a property. 
(b)  General requirements. Any property required by the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance, the zoning resolution or conditions of zoning special use or variance approval to provide a buffer or other specific landscaping shall do so in compliance with the standards included in the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance and this section. 
(1)  For any such property, a buffer and landscape plan shall be prepared by those individuals as required and authorized by the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance, and shall be approved by the department prior to issuance of a development permit on the subject site. 
(2)  At the discretion and option of the applicant, a required buffer and landscape plan and a required tree preservation/replacement plan may be combined into a single document, as long as the details and elements of the plans can be clearly and easily identified. 
(3)  Buffer areas or portions of buffer areas where natural vegetation provides an adequate visual screen as required by the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance, shall remain natural and undisturbed by any clearing, grading or other construction activity except as authorized by the development permit. 
(4)  In buffer areas where natural vegetation is non-existent or inadequate to provide a visual screen, replanting or supplemental planting shall be required in accordance with the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance. The department may also approve additional or alternative screening elements, such as planted earthen berms or solid fences where appropriate, to the intent of the requirements of the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance. 
(5)  New plantings in buffers shall be selected for natural survival expectancy for the city environment and for their ability to meet the screening standards established in the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance. 
(6)  Landscape areas or strips shall include trees and shrubs to the extent required by the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance, the zoning resolution or conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval. Plant materials may be grouped or arranged so as to achieve aesthetic results following professional landscaping standards, provided sight distances as required by these regulations are preserved. 
(7)  Tree plantings required by the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance for parking lots may be grouped or arranged so as to achieve aesthetic results, or may be located in landscape islands within the parking lot. 
(c)  Tree preservation and replacement requirements. 
(1)  Any property required to preserve and protect existing trees or to plant replacement trees under the provisions of the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance shall do so in compliance with said ordinance. 
(2)  Areas set aside for the preservation of existing trees or the planting of new replacement trees, in fulfillment of any portion of the tree density standard of a property other than the property upon which the areas are located, shall be established within an easement drawn in favor of the other property, and appropriately recorded. 
(d)  Landscape performance surety. In the event that the requirements of this section have not been met at the time that a certificate of development conformance otherwise can be approved by the department, and the certificate is requested, the director shall require a landscaping performance bond. The owner/developer or the contractor employed by the owner/developer shall post a landscaping performance bond or other city approved surety in an amount equal to 110 percent of the cost of materials, labor, and other attendant costs, incidental to the installation of the required landscaping as part of the owner's development performance and maintenance agreement with the city. The surety shall: 
(1)  Be drawn in favor of the city. 
(2)  Be in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(3)  Specify the time for the completion of the landscaping, which shall not be longer than three months following approval of the certificate of development conformance, or be in accordance with such other timetable for completion acceptable to the department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 5, § 5.8, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-85. - Recreation areas and open space. 
(a)  Recreation areas. Land for use as project open space or recreation shall be provided in single-family detached subdivisions having a gross area of 50 acres or more and a minimum lot size less than one acre; in duplex subdivisions having a gross area of 50 acres or more; and in single-family attached, townhouse, Senior Oriented Residence Developments (R-SR), and multifamily developments having a gross area of ten acres or more. 
(1)  For each development, six percent of the gross land areas shall be provided for the recreational use, but in no case shall the area required exceed six acres. Not over 60 percent of the area may be within the 100-year floodplain. 
a.  If recreation facilities are not proposed to be constructed, the land so provided shall be contiguous or separated only by parking areas and private drives, and of suitable shape and condition for construction of at least one swimming pool and one regulation-size tennis court. 
b.  If the developer constructs at least a swimming pool and tennis court, or other acceptable active recreation facilities, as part of the project, then the land so provided need not be a single contiguous parcel and the total set-aside area required by this subsection can be reduced to the amount actually required for the construction and maintenance of the facilities, but not less than 50 percent of the gross recreational set-aside requirements outlined herein. 
(2)  In subdivisions, land provided for recreational use in accordance with subsection (a)(1)a of this section, and not proposed for improvement by the developer, shall be deeded to the city or to a qualified property owner's association upon the approval of the final plat containing said land and shall be used exclusively for recreational purposes. The qualified property owners association shall provide for the voluntary membership of all the owner's of property within the subdivision, and shall be established under the laws of the state; it shall be responsible for the perpetuation, maintenance and function of the recreation areas and all uses or facilities therein. The association shall have the authority and duty to assess its members for such maintenance and improvements as set forth in the instrument creating the association. All covenants shall be recorded simultaneously with the final subdivision plat. 
(3)  If the developer constructs recreational facilities as approved under subsection (a)(1)b of this section, on the recreational land in a subdivision, the land area shall be deeded to a homeowner's association or other legal entity incorporated under the laws of the state. The land shall be deeded to said organization with a restriction that the land shall be used exclusively for recreational purposes and shall be made available to all residents of the subdivision project on an equal basis. The deed shall be filed with the department simultaneously with the final plat, and shall be held by the department until a certificate of occupancy is issued for the recreational improvements, whereupon the deed shall be recorded. Failure to construct or complete the approved facilities shall cause the land to be dedicated to the city. 
(4)  In multifamily rental or condominium projects, land provided for recreational use in accordance with these requirements shall be held in the ownership of the owner of the project. 
(5)  The city may lease or sell land reserved for public parks to a qualified property owner's association with a deed restriction that the land be used exclusively for open space or public recreational purposes in perpetuity. The organization of a qualified property owner's association and its adequate financing for the discharge of its responsibilities shall be assured through acceptable private deed covenants running with the land or other such documents as approved by the mayor and council of the city. 
(b)  Open space. Open space provided in projects located in the Big Haynes Creek Watershed Protection Area shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Open space shall be natural and undisturbed open space shall be permanent and shall remain in its natural state, undisturbed and unoccupied by any structures or impervious surfaces to include septic tanks and septic tank drain fields and except for approved access or utility crossings. Pedestrian access in open space shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. Buffers, floodplains and wetlands may be utilized as open space. 
(2)  Ownership requirements. Open space provided in a development shall be owned and maintained by the property owner, or, in the case of a subdivision, by a property owner's association. The association shall be established by the developer prior to or concurrent with the recording of the final plat of the subdivision. The association bylaws shall include the following provisions: 
a.  Automatic (mandatory) membership of all purchasers of lots therein and their successors; 
b.  Conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the developer to the lot owners shall be specified which shall not exceed four years from the date of recording of the final plat of the subdivision; 
c.  Responsibility for maintenance, insurance and taxes; 
d.  Sharing of the costs of maintenance among the lot owners with shares defined by the association bylaws; 
e.  Authority to place liens on the real property of members who fail to pay their dues or assessments; and 
f.  Prohibition on the dissolution of the association without the approval of the mayor and council. 
(3)  Maintenance. The property owner, or the property owner's association, shall be responsible for the maintenance of open space. Open space shall be kept in reasonable order and condition and shall be maintained free from refuse, junk and debris. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 5, § 5.9, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-86. - Wetlands. 
(a)  National Wetland Inventory maps. The National Wetland Inventory maps, prepared by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, shall be the official wetland maps of the city. These maps show the general locations of wetlands and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetland areas. 
(b)  Plans. Design professionals, after consulting the National Wetland Inventory maps, shall indicate wetlands on plans required for land disturbance permit applications. 
(c)  Design professional statement. Prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit, the design professional who prepared the required plans accompanying the permit application shall add a statement to the plan sheet indicating land disturbance and the statement shall read as follows: 
WETLAND CERTIFICATION 
The design professional, whose seal appears hereon, certifies the following: 1) the National Wetland Inventory maps have been consulted; and, 2) the appropriate plan sheet [ ] DOES/ [ ] DOES NOT (circle appropriate box) indicate wetlands as shown on the maps; and, 3) if wetlands are indicated, the land owner or developer has been advised that land disturbance of protected wetlands shall not occur unless the appropriate federal wetlands alteration ("Section 404") permit has been obtained. 
(d)  Permits. The issuance of land disturbance permits by the city shall be coordinated with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Section 404 permitting process. If the "wetland certification" above indicates the presence of wetlands as shown on the NWI generalized wetlands maps, no land disturbance permit will be issued by the city until a Section 404 permit or letter of permission is obtained from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 5, § 5.10, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 34-87—34-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ACCESS AND RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIREMENTS; AND STREET IMPROVEMENT AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 34-116. - Access. 
(a)  Large parcels to provide future street access. When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
(b)  Landlocking of adjacent property prohibited. No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. Every development shall be designed to facilitate access to adjoining properties which are developed or anticipated to be developed in a manner substantially similar to the subject property. Locations of inter-parcel access shall be as required by and subject to the approval of the department. 
(c)  Minimum lot frontage required. Any lot required to provide minimum frontage by the zoning district in which the lot is located shall provide vehicular access directly from a public street along the frontage or along any other property line which abuts a public street, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  Private streets to be constructed pursuant to roadway construction standards. Private streets as may be approved under the provisions of the zoning resolution shall be constructed to the roadway construction standards of the city, as contained herein. 
(e)  Vehicular access easements. Vehicular access easements may be provided from a public street indirectly via easement in any one or more of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The property is not required to provide a minimum frontage by the applicable zoning district, provided that the easement shall be in a location and the access driveway shall have a width and alignment acceptable to the fire services division and the department. 
(2)  The property is a buildable lot of record, as defined herein, but does not meet the minimum frontage requirement of the applicable zoning district. The property must be served by an exclusive access easement which shall be limited to the provision of access to only one principal use or structure. 
(3)  The access easement serves a single-family residence on a lot which is otherwise a buildable lot of record, and which is sharing a common driveway with no more than one other single-family residence. 
(4)  The access easement was lawfully established as such under the Code, ordinances, or regulations of the city prior to the adoption of these development regulations. 
(5)  The access easement coincides with a private roadway approved under the Code, ordinances, or regulations of the city. All new private roadways must be constructed to the roadway standards of these development regulations, and their ownership and maintenance responsibility by private parties must be clearly established on the final plat of the development. 
(6)  The access easement serves a buildable lot of record which meets the minimum frontage requirements of the zoning resolution, but at which point the access is not achieved. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-117. - Streets. 
(a)  Dedication of street right-of-way. Rights-of-way for all project public streets, existing and proposed, shall be dedicated in accordance with the street classifications as shown on the long-range road classification map of the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Street improvements. Streets, whether existing or new, shall be constructed or improved under those circumstances and to the standards as established in these regulations. Roadway improvements shall be in accordance with the street classifications as shown on the long-range road classification map of the comprehensive plan, or the zoning resolution, as applicable, or as otherwise required by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-118. - Minimum right-of-way and street improvements. 
(a)  Right-of-way and pavement widths. Minimum widths for new construction (new streets or project access improvements) shall be as shown on Table 6-A (unless a modification is granted by the director). 
(1)  Exception No. 1: Conservation subdivisions. New local streets in subdivisions developed in the conservation subdivision overlay district shall be as follows: 
a.  Right-of-way width of new interior local streets. 
1.  Entrance streets: At least 50 feet for a depth of 300 feet from the subdivision entrance (measured from exterior road right-of-way) after which street right-of-way width shall be at least 46 feet. 
2.  Other interior streets: at least 44 feet. 
3.  Right-of-way radii: at least 45 feet for cul-de-sac or "eyebrow" turnarounds. 
4.  Alleys: no minimum if not to be dedicated to the city; at least 15 feet if to be dedicated to the city. 
b.  Pavement width of new interior local streets. 
1.  Entrance streets: At least 27 feet (measured to back of curb) for a depth of 300 feet from the subdivision entrance (measured from exterior road right-of-way) after which pavement width shall be at least 24 feet (measured to back of curb). 
2.  Other interior streets: at least 22 feet (measured to back-of-curb). 
3.  Curb and gutter: at least 1.5 feet. 
4.  Pavement radii: at least 40 feet for cul-de-sac or "eyebrow" turnarounds (measured to back of curb). 
5.  Alleys: at least ten feet (concrete or asphalt), with or without curb, if not to be dedicated to the city; at least 12 feet if surfaced with asphalt (which includes one foot concrete curbs) and at least ten feet if surfaced with concrete (with or without curb). 
(2)  Exception No. 2: New local residential streets in the Mixed-Use Redevelopment (MUR) Overlay District. New local residential streets developed in a MUR Overlay District shall meet the following: 
a.  Right-of-way width. 
1.  Interior streets: at least 44 feet. 
2.  Right-of-way radii: at least 50 feet for cul-de-sac or "eyebrow" turnarounds. 
3.  Alleys: at least a 15-foot easement if not to be dedicated to the city; at least 15 feet of right-of-way if to be dedicated to the city. 
b.  Pavement width. 
1.  Interior streets: at least 22 feet (measured to back-of-curb). 
2.  Pavement radii: at least 40 feet for cul-de-sac or "eyebrow" turnarounds (measured to back of curb). 
3.  Alleys: at least ten feet (concrete or asphalt), with or without curb, if not to be dedicated to the city; at least 12 feet if surfaced with asphalt (which includes one foot concrete curbs) and at least ten feet if surfaced with concrete (with or without curb). 
c.  Additional pavement and right-of-way width. 
1.  Additional travel lanes: at least ten feet of pavement width. 
2.  On-street parallel parking: at least nine feet of pavement width. 
3.  Right-of-way: additional right-of-way shall be provided to accommodate additional travel lanes, on-street parallel parking, sidewalks and underground utilities. 
(3)  Exception No. 3: New local nonresidential streets in the Mixed-Use Redevelopment (MUR) Overlay District. New local nonresidential streets developed in a MUR Overlay District shall meet the following: 
a.  Right-of-way width. 
1.  Interior streets: at least 48 feet. 
2.  Right-of-way radii: at least 55 feet for cul-de-sac or "eyebrow" turnarounds. 
3.  Alleys: at least a 15-foot easement if not to be dedicated to the city; at least 15 feet of right-of-way if to be dedicated to the city. 
b.  Pavement width. 
1.  Interior streets: at least 26 feet (measured to back-of-curb). 
2.  Pavement radii: at least 45 feet for cul-de-sac or "eyebrow" turnarounds (measured to back of curb). 
3.  Alleys: at least ten feet (concrete or asphalt), with or without curb, if not to be dedicated to the city; at least 12 feet if surfaced with asphalt (which includes one foot concrete curbs) and at least ten feet if surfaced with concrete (with or without curb). 
c.  Additional pavement and right-of-way width. 
1.  Additional travel lanes: at least 11 feet of pavement width. 
2.  On-street parallel parking: at least nine feet of pavement width. 
3.  On-street angled parking: at least 18 feet of pavement width. 
4.  Right-of-way: additional right-of-way shall be provided to accommodate additional travel lanes, on-street parallel parking, on-street angled parking, sidewalks and underground utilities. 
TABLE 6-A  Minimum Right-of-Way and Roadway Widths for  New Streets and Project Access Improvements 

 
Footnotes: 
(1) The greater right-of-way width shall apply under circumstances as described in section 34-118(b)(3). 
(2) Roadway width dimensions are back-of-curb to back-of-curb except where noted. 
(3) Utility easement shall be provided in a location and size as required by the department of public utilities. 
(4) Subdivisions zoned R-140 and RA-200. 
(5) May be reduced to 50 feet if curb, gutter, and piped drainage system is provided. 
(6) Measured to edge of pavement. Curb and gutter is not required in subdivision zoned R-140 and RA-200. Roadway width may be reduced to 23 feet if curb and gutter is provided (27 feet total width). 
(b)  Street rights-of-way. 
(1)  The minimum width of street right-of-way shall be dedicated based upon the street categories as shown on the long-range road classification map in the comprehensive plan and as contained in these regulations. 
(2)  Additional street right-of-way width shall be required to be dedicated at intersections or other locations which the property abuts upon where deceleration lanes, turning lanes, storage lanes, medians, or realignments are required for traffic safety and minimum right-of-way standards would be inadequate to accommodate the improvements. 
(3)  If a new street or thoroughfare is proposed by the comprehensive plan or the state to adjoin or traverse the property, permits shall not be issued until the department has submitted the project to the mayor and council for review in order to seek a determination if the city should acquire the right-of-way or if a study of alternate routes should be undertaken. The review period by the city shall not exceed 90 days from the date of permit application. If, after the 90-day review, the mayor and council is unable to reach a decision, there shall not be any further delay of a requested permit for this situation. 
(c)  Project access improvements; single-family detached, single-family attached and duplex residential subdivisions. 
(1)  When property that abuts upon an existing or proposed city road is to be developed or redeveloped as a single-family detached or duplex subdivision and the city street will provide access to the property, project access improvements to the city road (deceleration lanes, turn lanes, etc.) shall be provided by the developer as required herein. 
(2)  A deceleration lane shall be required to be provided at each subdivision street entrance that is provided street access to a minor collector street or major thoroughfare. In the event a street has an existing or proposed median, and the developer desires to construct a median break to serve the subdivision, a left turn lane leading to the median break shall be required to be provided by the developer if approved by the department of transportation and shall meet the standards contained herein. 
(3)  Deceleration lanes shall have a length of 200 feet, with an additional 50-foot taper length, a pavement width of 12 feet (exclusive of curb and gutter) and shall be provided with curb and gutter. Additional right-of-way to accommodate the deceleration lane and an 11-foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to the city at no cost. Associated drainage improvements as deemed necessary by the construction of the deceleration lane shall also be required. 
(4)  A left turn lane shall be provided into each subdivision street that accesses a minor collector or major thoroughfare in accordance with the department of transportation's "Criteria and Guidelines for Left Turn Lanes." 
(5)  Other project access improvements may be required by the department upon the recommendation of the department of transportation in order to ensure adequate site access, pedestrian access, convenience and safety to the motoring public. 
(6)  The developer shall be responsible for the relocation of public or private utilities and drainage structures, as may be occasioned by the required project access improvements. 
(d)  Project access improvements; multifamily and nonresidential developments. 
(1)  When property that abuts upon an existing or proposed city road is to be developed or redeveloped for multifamily or nonresidential uses and the city road will provide access to the property, access improvements to the city road (deceleration lanes, turn lanes, etc.) shall be provided by the developer. 
(2)  A deceleration lane shall be required to be provided at each project driveway or subdivision street entrance, as applicable, that is provided street access to a minor collector street or major thoroughfare. In the event a street has an existing or proposed median, and the developer desires to construct a median break to serve the project, a left turn lane leading to the median break shall be required to be provided by the developer if approved by the department of transportation and shall meet the standards contained herein. 
(3)  Deceleration lanes shall have a length of 200 feet, with an additional 50-foot taper length, pavement width of 12 feet (exclusive of curb and gutter) and shall be provided with curb and gutter. Additional right-of-way to accommodate the deceleration lane and an 11-foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to the city at no cost. Associated drainage improvements as deemed necessary by the construction of the deceleration lane shall also be required. 
(4)  A left turn lane shall be provided into each project driveway or subdivision street, as applicable, that accesses a minor collector or major thoroughfare in accordance with the department of transportation's "Criteria and Guidelines for Left Turn Lanes." 
(5)  Other project access improvements may be required by the department upon the recommendation of the department of transportation in order to ensure adequate site access, pedestrian access, convenience and safety to the motoring public. 
(6)  The developer shall be responsible for the relocation of public or private utilities and drainage structures as may be occasioned by the required project access improvements. 
(e)  New streets. 
(1)  All new streets proposed to be constructed in a subdivision or other development, whether to be public or private, shall be designed and constructed at least to the standards contained in these regulations in accordance with the category of said streets. 
(2)  In residential subdivisions, a dead-end ("stub") street required under section 34-119(d) to provide access to an abutting property may be exempted from construction of roadway improvements and public utilities under the following circumstances: 
a.  No lot within the proposed subdivision will gain access from the "stub" street. 
b.  A concept plan has not been submitted or approved on the neighboring tract. 
c.  The "stub" street shall be fully designed as part of the development plans. However, the right-of-way shall only be cleared and rough graded in accordance with the approved plans, and all disturbed areas grassed. 
d.  Connections for future extension of all public utilities shall be constructed as part of the subdivision. Curb returns shall be constructed as part of the subdivision. Curb returns shall be provided to the future "stub" street roadway location, and curb and gutter shall be installed across the roadway stub at the right-of-way line (extended). 
e.  The right-of-way for the "stub" street shall be dedicated as part of the final plat. Slope easements or construction easements, if required by the street design, shall be shown on the final plat. 
(f)  Substandard streets. 
(1)  In the event that a development has access to a substandard street (i.e., a dirt or gravel road), the following project access improvements shall be required: If the abutting substandard street provides access to the development and is dirt or gravel, the street shall be upgraded by the developer to a paved roadway from the project entrance to the nearest standard paved road along the route of access. 
(2)  Off-site project access improvements required under subsection (f)(1) of this section shall, at a minimum, result in a full-section roadway meeting the requirements of a local residential rural roadway (24 feet edge-to-edge of pavement, with drainage swale ditches as needed). Responsibilities shall be as follows: 
a.  The developer shall design the road and provide the labor, equipment, and materials required for roadway improvements and necessary drainage improvements. 
b.  If the city desires the roadway to be improved to a standard greater than that for a local residential rural roadway, the city shall provide or pay the cost of the additional materials and labor. 
c.  All right-of-way required for these off-site improvements shall be acquired by the developer at no expense to the city. If the developer is unable to acquire the right-of-way, the department of transportation shall initiate acquisition proceedings, at the expense of the developer, after authorization by the mayor and council. 
(g)  Improvements along state highways. For any development which abuts a state highway or other right-of-way controlled by the state, improvements to the roadway and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access from the state highway shall comply with the standards and requirements of the state department of transportation. A permit for the proposed access or improvements shall be required to have been approved by the state DOT and incorporated into the construction drawings for the project prior to issuance of a development permit by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-119. - General layout requirements. 
(a)  Conformance to comprehensive plan. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform, at a minimum, to the comprehensive plan and these regulations. 
(b)  Local streets and minor collectors. Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. Minor collectors shall be provided to channel through traffic movements within a development, where appropriate to the design and a major thoroughfare is not proposed by the comprehensive plan. Minor collectors also may be provided as central routes within large residential subdivisions, where appropriate to the design, based on project traffic demands exceeding 2,000 trips per day (ADT). 
(c)  Cul-de-sac streets. 
(1)  Dead end streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall provide a cul-de-sac turnaround and may be no more than 2,000 feet in length. Additional length necessitated by topography or property configuration may be approved by the director. 
(2)  The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the center of the cul-de-sac to the center of the intersection with another street, whether a through street or another cul-de-sac or dead-end street. 
(3)  Eyebrow cul-de-sac (half cul-de-sacs) will be allowed only at right-angled intersections having an interior angle between 80 degrees and 100 degrees. 
(4)  Cul-de-sacs shall conform to the layout and dimensional requirements as shown in the standard drawings. 
(d)  Other dead-end streets. 
(1)  A dead-end street shall be provided to the boundary of a subdivision where necessary to provide access to a land-locked abutting property, for planned continuity of future circulation, for improved access for public safety vehicles, or for the extension of public water or other utilities to neighboring lands. Such dead-end streets shall be designed so as to allow their reasonable extension, and shall be located so as to be reasonably incorporated into a street design for the neighboring property. The stub street requirement may be waived by the director, provided the directors of the departments of public safety and public utilities concur. 
(2)  Dead-end streets on abutting property shall be extended into a proposed subdivision and incorporated into the street design of the development. This requirement may be modified by the director in cases of serious topographical hardship or dissimilar zoning which would create unacceptable land use conflicts between the two developments. This modification may conflict between the two developments. This modification may be conditioned on the provision of easements necessary for the extension of public utilities, the provision of cul-de-sac or other permanent turnaround on the dead end street, or the removal of the dead end street back to its nearest intersection. 
(3)  Where a dead-end street (other than a cul-de-sac) serves more than three lots, the developer shall be required to provide a temporary vehicular turnaround within the right-of-way. This requirement may be waived if extension of the dead end street is approved and under construction prior to its inclusion in a final plat. 
(4)  Where a street dead ends at the property boundary and the street exceeds 1,000 feet in length, a permanent cul-de-sac shall be required. In this situation, right-of-way to the property boundary shall be required, but the pavement shall not be extended to the property boundary beyond the edge of the paved cul-de-sac turnaround. In no case shall a dead end street exceed 2,000 feet in length unless approved by the department due to unusual topographic conditions or property configuration. 
(e)  Service roads. Where a development borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or limited access highway right-of-way or major thoroughfare, a public street may be required to be constructed and dedicated within the development approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way. 
(f)  Half-streets. Half-streets (new boundary streets having one-half of the minimum required right-of-way or pavement width) shall not be allowed nor access to same be permitted should it exist. 
(g)  Reserve strips. Land in private ownership adjacent to public rights-of-way which could control or are intended to control access to streets, alleys, or public lands shall not be permitted unless their control is given to the city under ownership, dedication, or easement conditions approved by the city attorney or acceptable to the director. No development shall be designed so as to deny access to abutting properties. 
(h)  Alleys. Alleys shall not be provided except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the director of the need for same. In the event the director approves a design which proposes alleys, the alley shall be constructed as though it were a local street pursuant to the standards contained in these regulations. 
(i)  Street jogs. 
(1)  Street jogs shall either directly align or have offsets of a minimum of 125 feet for residential subdivision streets and a minimum of 200 feet for nonresidential subdivision streets, as measured between centerlines of said streets. 
(2)  All major thoroughfares shall provide offsets as required by the department, where alignment is not desirable or feasible, but in no case be spaced less than 600 feet apart as measured between centerlines of said streets. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.4, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-120. - Traffic control devices. 
(a)  Traffic control signs. Street signs, traffic control signs, and devices, such as striping and signalization, shall be provided through payment of fees to the engineering department for the installation thereof. 
(b)  Street name signs. Street name signs shall have a green background with white legends mounted on channelized posts. Alternate post material shall be subject to the review and approval of the traffic engineer. The posts and signs will be furnished and installed by the city at all street intersections. The developer (or homeowner's association in the event an alternate signpost is chosen at a later date) shall pay the city's costs. 
(c)  Traffic signals and signs. All traffic signals and signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (no decorative traffic control devices will be allowed). 
(d)  Striping requirements. All newly constructed streets having four or more lanes (including auxiliary lanes) and existing streets being widened with one or more additional lanes shall be striped and the payment of said striping costs shall be required from the developer by the engineering department prior to the approval of development conformance for the project. Striping shall be accomplished with paint meeting state DOT standards conforming to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(e)  Payment of fees. Payment for materials and installation of street name and traffic control signs in new developments shall be required by the engineering department prior to the approval of development conformance. 
(f)  Street lights. Street lights shall be provided by the developer in new subdivisions which propose the construction of a new street to be dedicated to the city or which propose lot access to existing city streets. 
(1)  Prior to the approval of a final plat, the developer shall submit a copy of the approved preliminary plat to the traffic and operations division of the department of transportation. The traffic and operations division shall prepare a street light design drawn on the preliminary plat based upon the city's street lighting ordinance. The design shall be forwarded to the appropriate power provider and the developer shall pay the power provider the appropriate cost for materials and installation. Proof of payment to the power provider shall be required. 
(2)  All fixtures and poles shall meet the requirements of the city and all maintenance shall be the responsibility of the power provider. Fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of 16 feet above the ground and each fixture shall have appropriate arm length to illuminate the street. The city, in addition to other requirements, may require a light to be located at street intersections within the development. 
(3)  Upon acceptance of the street light installation by the city, the power provider shall submit monthly bills to the traffic and operations division of the department of transportation for payment. The city shall assign a special assessment to each property abutting a street with street lights for payment of the monthly utility costs in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 94 of the Code of Ordinances, Gwinnett County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.5, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-121. - Specifications. 
Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction shall conform to the latest specifications of the state department of transportation (Georgia DOT). 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.6, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-122. - Subgrade preparation for all streets. 
(a)  Subgrade preparation. Subgrade preparation shall be in accordance with state DOT specifications and these regulations. 
(b)  Removal of unsuitable material. If any sections of the subgrade are composed of topsoil, organic, or other unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material and then thoroughly compacted as specified for fill or stabilized with stone or a geo-textile or geo-grid. 
(c)  Compaction. Fill shall be placed in uniform, horizontal layers not more than eight inches thick (loose measurement). Moisture content shall be adjusted as necessary to compact material to 95 percent of maximum dry density, except for the top 12 inches which shall be compacted to 100 percent of maximum dry density. 
(d)  Brought to line and grade. After the earthwork has been completed, all storm drainage, water, and sanitary sewer utilities have been installed within the right-of-way, as appropriate, and the backfill in all such ditches thoroughly compacted, the subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grades, and typical roadway section shown on the plans. 
(e)  Utility trenches to be compacted. Utility trenches cut in the subgrade shall be backfilled as specified herein. Compaction tests at the rate of one per 150 feet of trench shall be provided to verify compaction. 
(f)  Roll testing required. The subgrade must pass roll testing prior to placement of the base material. With the approval of the department, a geo-textile or grid may be used to stabilize a subgrade that does not pass proofrolling. 
(g)  Temporary traffic surface. When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed, a layer of stone (except crusher run) shall be laid as a traffic surface. This material shall not be used as a part of the base material. It may be worked into the subgrade, or it shall be removed before the base course is set up for paving. 
(h)  Provisions to drain low points. Provisions shall be made to drain low points in the road construction when the final paving is delayed. A break in the berm section is required when the curbing has not been constructed. After installation, drainage under the curb to side slopes is required, using minimum four-inch diameter pipe sections. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.7, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-123. - Project access improvement standards. 
(a)  Sections wider than four feet in width. For sections four feet or greater in width, the section shall comply with the construction standards for new streets, in accordance with the street's category as shown on the comprehensive plan. The base course must pass roll testing prior to paving. If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the developer or the department, the base shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard and cured for 78 days before paving. 
(b)  Sections less than four feet in width. For sections less than four feet wide, seven inches of Class "A" concrete base (five inches on local and minor collector streets) and one inches of "E" or "F" topping shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.8, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-124. - New local and minor collector streets. 
(a)  Local and minor collector streets within a residential subdivision. 
(1)  Asphalt streets. The following types of base materials may be used: 
a.  Crushed stone base. 
1.  Two-pass street. The base course shall consist of at least five inches of graded aggregate base. After being thoroughly compacted and brought to proper section, two inches of "B" binder shall be applied. If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the developer or the department, the base shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard the same day it is compacted, and cured for seven days prior to paving. The final one inch of type "E" or "F" wearing course shall be applied after 90 percent of the houses on the street have been built, or prior to the end of the maintenance period (but after the 11th month), whichever occurs first. Prior to applying wearing course, a tack coat shall be applied to the binder course at a rate of no less than 0.05 gallons per square yard. Type of tack shall be approved by the department prior to placement. 
2.  One-pass street. The base course shall consist of at least six inches of graded aggregate base. After being thoroughly compacted and brought to proper section, the final two inches of type "E" or "F" wearing course shall be applied. If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the Developer or the department, the base shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard the same day it is compacted, and cured for seven days prior to paving. 
b.  Soil cement base. 
1.  If the base material (resident soil) is unsatisfactory to the department then a soil cement mix design with professional engineer test results acceptable to the department can be substituted. The design must come from a geo-technical firm with the results certified by a professional engineer registered in the state. The tests required for the design are ASTM D558 or AASHTO T134 or ASTM D559 and/or 560 or AASHTO T135 and 136. 
2.  The minimum base course shall consist of at least six inches of suitable soil (high mica content not suitable) stabilized with ten percent of Portland cement by volume (approximately 42.3 pounds per square yard). Depending on whether the street is to be constructed as a on-pass or two-pass street, please refer to section 34-124(a)(1)a or b for the applicable binder and/or paving standards. Where the grade of the street is five percent or greater, a single surface treatment course must be applied before the binder. 
(2)  Concrete streets. Five inches of 3500 psi concrete is to be applied on a stabilized subgrade, consisting of at least 150 pounds of stone per square yard mixed in four inches deep and compacted. The design and construction of the street shall comply with the Portland Cement Association standards. 
(b)  Local residential-rural streets. Where allowed (in subdivisions zoned R-140, subdivisions zoned RA-200, and upgrading off-site substandard streets), local residential-rural streets do not require curb and gutter. The road base shall be extended one foot beyond the edge of pavement, and the shoulders shall extend eight feet from the edge of pavement to a standard ditch section on each side (see section 34-83, standard drawings). Otherwise, the roadway shall comply with the standards for new residential subdivision streets, above. 
(c)  Nonresidential subdivision or development streets. The following standards shall apply to new local and minor collector streets in nonresidential subdivision and other nonresidential projects: 
(1)  Asphalt streets. The following types of base materials may be used: 
a.  Two-pass street (crushed stone base). The base course shall consist of at least seven inches of graded aggregate base. After being thoroughly compacted and brought to proper section, two inches of "B" binder shall be applied. If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the developer or the department, the base shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard the same day it is compacted, and cured for seven days prior to paving. The final one inch of type "E" or "F" wearing course shall be applied after 90 percent of the buildings on the street have been built, or prior to the end of the maintenance period (but after the 11th month), whichever occurs first. Prior to applying wearing course, a tack coat shall be applied to the binder course at a rate of no less than 0.05 gallons per square yard. Type of tack shall be approved by the department prior to placement. 
b.  One-pass street (crushed stone base). The base course shall consist of at least eight inches of graded aggregate base. After being thoroughly compacted and brought to proper section, the final two inches of type "E" or "F" wearing course shall be applied. If a delay in paving is reasonably expected by the developer or the department, the base shall be primed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard the same day it is compacted, and cured of seven days prior to paving. 
(2)  Concrete streets. Seven inches of Class "A" 3500 PSI concrete is to be applied on a stabilized subgrade, consisting of at least 150 pounds of stone per square yard mixed in four inches deep and compacted. The design and construction of the street shall comply with the Portland Cement Association standards. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.9, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-125. - New major thoroughfares. 
Minor collectors shall be constructed in accordance with designs prepared by the city or state DOT, or, if no design has been prepared, to the following standards as indicated by Table 6-B: 
Table 6-B  Construction Standards for Major thoroughfares 

 
* 2½" type "B" binder and 2½" asphaltic concrete base. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.10, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-126. - Curb and gutter. 
(a)  Curb and gutter required. All new streets and project access improvements shall be provided with curb and gutter except in subdivisions zoned R-140, and subdivisions zoned RA-200, where swale ditches may be provided in lieu of curb and gutter. All gutters shall drain smoothly with no areas of ponding. 
(b)  Residential curbing. Residential curbing shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by state DOT) and have a minimum strength of 3000 PSI at 28 days. 
(2)  Typical minimum section shall be six inches by 24 inches by 12 inches. 
(3)  Vertical curbing only. 
(c)  Industrial or commercial curbing. Industrial or commercial curbing shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by state DOT) and have a minimum strength of 3000 PSI at 28 days. 
(2)  Typical minimum section shall be eight inches by 24 inches by 14 inches. 
(3)  Vertical curbing only. 
(d)  Principal arterial and major arterial curbing. Principal arterial and major arterial curbing shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Concrete shall be Class "A" (as defined by state DOT) and have a minimum strength of 3000 PSI at 28 days. 
(2)  Typical minimum section shall be eight inches by 30 inches by 14 inches. 
(3)  Vertical curbing only. 
(e)  Construction methods. 
(1)  Curb and gutter shall be set true to line and grade, horizontal be field staked, and finished to the section shown on the plans. Along the project access improvements of a road which the department of transportation has identified for resurfacing within one year of the new construction, the grade of the new gutter shall be placed one inch above the project access improvement pavement grade in areas where drainage will not be adversely affected. 
(2)  Line and grade shall be field staked for grades less than two percent and grades over 12 percent, and within 100 feet in both directions from all low points. 
(3)  One-half inch expansion joints or pre-molded bituminous expansion joint material shall be provided at all structures and radius points and at intervals not to exceed 250 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 
(4)  Inferior workmanship or unprofessional construction methods resulting in unacceptable curb and gutter will be cause for rejection of the finished work. 
(5)  Disturbed areas along all curbing shall be backfilled, stabilized, and grassed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.11, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-127. - Underground utilities. 
(a)  Installation and compaction required before pavement or base. All water and sanitary sewer utilities and storm drain facilities within the curbs shall be installed and the ditches backfilled and thoroughly compacted before any pavement or base is installed. 
(b)  After base installed, utilities to be bored. Once the base has been placed, all further installation of utilities under the roadway shall be bored or otherwise comply with section 34-159, street cuts. 
(c)  Manholes flushed with finished grade. All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought flush to the finished grade within the roadway section. 
(d)  Standard drawings apply. All utility locations shall adhere to the details found in the standard drawings. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.12, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-128. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks and curb ramps shall be constructed in all new development or redevelopment along all abutting or internal streets, existing or new, private or public. Whenever a discrepancy occurs between the design and construction standards of this section and any state or federal regulation, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(1)  Sidewalk installation and timing. Sidewalks shall be installed as follows: 
a.  Residential subdivision projects. Sidewalks shall be installed on new internal streets (both sides, including "eyebrow" turnarounds) and on abutting external streets (abutting side). Sidewalks are not required adjacent to cul-de-sac turnarounds nor on streets ending in a cul-de-sac turnaround that provide access to six or fewer lots. Sidewalks may end at the radius transition of a cul-de-sac turnaround with an L-shaped "mid-block" curb ramp in alignment with the ramp on the opposite side of the street. 
1.  Residential subdivision developer responsibility. Developers shall install sidewalks on abutting external streets, "passive" recreation area lots, and open space lots, and shall install intersection radius curb ramps at new street intersections, and L-shaped mid-block ramps at cul-de-sac turnarounds, within 60 days of approval of the final plat. Sidewalks on "active" recreation area lots shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or shall be installed by the developer prior to release of the subdivision maintenance surety, whichever is earlier. Developers shall also install sidewalks on any vacant lots remaining between developed lots (i.e., dwellings under construction or completed) prior to release of the subdivision maintenance surety. 
2.  Homebuilder responsibility. Homebuilders shall install sidewalks, and curb ramps not required to be installed by developers, on building lots prior to release of the certificate of occupancy for a home. 
b.  Nonresidential subdivision projects. Sidewalks shall be installed on new internal streets (both sides, including cul-de-sac and "eyebrow" turnarounds) and on abutting external streets (abutting side) within 60 days of approval of the final plat. 
c.  Non-subdivision projects. Sidewalks shall be installed on abutting streets (abutting side) prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
d.  Maintenance surety. Maintenance surety provided to the city shall include the cost of sidewalk construction in an amount acceptable to the city. 
e.  Escrow alternative. The cost of sidewalk installation may be set aside in escrow with the department of transportation if proposed road improvements by the city may impact the location of a sidewalk. 
f.  Pursuant to a finding by the public works director that a sidewalk at a specific location would not provide a public benefit, funds may be contributed to the sidewalk bank in lieu of the sidewalk construction. 
(2)  Sidewalk design and construction standards. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of this section. The director is authorized to grant modifications upon specific application due to topographic or drainage difficulty as well as alternative design proposals after receiving a recommendation from the department of transportation. 
a.  Width. Sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide on new internal subdivision streets, except sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide on new internal streets or drives within the Senior Oriented Residence District (R-SR). Sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide on abutting external streets. 
b.  Setback. Sidewalks shall be located at least two feet from the back of curb except in conservation subdivisions or subdivisions in which street trees are provided (bridges excepted). Sidewalks in conservation subdivisions or in subdivisions in which street trees are provided shall be located at least six feet from the back of curb (bridges excepted). The area between the curb and the sidewalk shall consist of grass or landscaping. Where no curb exists, or if road improvements are proposed for installation by the city, sidewalks, including appropriate drainage facilities, shall be constructed in a location acceptable to the department of transportation. 
c.  Cross slope. Sidewalks shall be constructed with a cross slope of 0.25 inch per foot. Sidewalks shall maintain this cross slope at driveway crossings or transition the sidewalk to a driveway with ramps and detectable warnings. 
d.  Material. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete at least four inches thick. Concrete shall be Class "B" (as defined by state DOT) with a minimum strength of 2200 PSI at 28 days. 
e.  Final stabilization. Disturbed areas resulting from sidewalk construction shall be backfilled, stabilized, and grassed or landscaped. 
f.  State DOT controlled roads. Sidewalks located in the right-of-way of roads under the jurisdiction of the state DOT shall be constructed in accordance with state DOT design and construction standards. 
(3)  Sidewalk curb ramp design and construction standards. Intersection radius curb ramps shall be provided at street intersections. L-shaped mid-block curb ramps shall be provided to end sidewalks at the radius of cul-de-sac turnarounds in residential subdivisions. Straight ramps may be provided at intersections of curbed driveways and at streets without sidewalks. Curb ramps shall meet the requirements of the city's standard drawings. 
(4)  Damage repair. Damage to sidewalks and ramps caused by construction or development activity shall be repaired at no cost to the city within 30 days or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever is earlier. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 6, § 6.13, 1-29-2013; Ord. No. 2018-06-127, § 4, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 34-129. - Sidewalk bank program. 
(a)  In cases where the lack of need for new sidewalk construction has been established, developers shall have the option of contributing the equivalent monetary value of those sidewalk improvements into the City of Peachtree Corners Sidewalk Bank. 
(b)  The monetary value of the sidewalk improvements shall be determined by the public works director according to industry standards at the time of development and that valuation shall consist of the cost of the materials, the cost of installation, and the cost of one year of maintenance. 
(c)  A separate sidewalk bank account shall be established for the receipt of funds collected in cases where the developer makes a monetary contribution instead of providing sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2018-06-127, §§ 1—3, 6-27-2018) 
Secs. 34-130—34-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UTILITIES AND EASEMENTS 

Sec. 34-155. - Placement of utilities. 
(a)  Underground utilities to be in right-of-way or easement. All authorized public underground utilities shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street or within an easement designated for such use. Within public street rights-of-way, placement of the various authorized utilities (power, gas, cable TV, water and sewer) shall conform to the specific locations designated for such use by the city, as illustrated in the standard drawings. 
(b)  Private underground utilities require department approval if in the right-of-way. No other underground utilities, such as private lawn sprinkler systems, yard lighting, etc., shall be installed within a public right-of-way or easement except by authorization of the department. Such authorization, if issued, shall require the applicant to assume all repair costs of the applicant's facilities should they be damaged during the course of installation, maintenance or repair of any of the public utilities authorized to occupy said right-of-way or easement. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 7, § 7.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-156. - Water system and fire hydrants. 
(a)  Connection of public water main required. The developer shall install or have installed a system of water mains connected to a public water supply system in accordance with the requirements of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(b)  Water, fire hydrants, etc., to be designed according to applicable standards, and plans and specifications. All water mains, fire hydrants and appurtenances shall be designed in accordance with the policies, standards, plans and specifications of the city fire prevention ordinance and the water system having jurisdiction. Where jurisdiction resides with the city water system, the public water mains and appurtenances shall be designed by the city water system upon submittal of the development plans for the project. 
(c)  Water mains to be installed after curbs but before paving. Within the city water system jurisdiction, water mains and appurtenances shall be installed after installation of the curbs and gutters and before paving, or after staking of the curbline and submission to the water system of an as-graded survey of the street profile accompanied by a certification executed by the owner as required by the water system that the subgrade will not change. Water mains shall be relocated as necessary to meet water system regulations prior to approval of development conformance, if improperly located to final curb line or grade. 
(d)  [Operational recycled water systems.] All new commercial conveyor car washes, permitted and constructed after July 18, 2017 must install operational recycled water systems. A minimum of 50 percent of water utilized will be recycled. A conveyor car wash means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the car wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
(e)  Outdoor water waste is prohibited . Outdoor water waste means the excessive application of water that results in water flowing down any curb and gutter, street or storm drain or onto an adjacent property, and shall include the unnecessary loss of water through improper application or failure of an outdoor irrigation or plumbing system resulting in excessive runoff. Activities subject to a violation include without limitation: 
(1)  A broken irrigation system (missing heads, broken pipes, etc.) 
(2)  Excessive runoff such as water running down the driveway, street or sidewalk. 
(3)  A hose running unattended without a shutoff nozzle. 
(4)  A visible and unrepaired leak more than one gallon per minute. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 7, § 7.2, 1-29-2013; Ord. No. O2017-07-96, § I, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 34-157. - Sanitary sewer disposal. 
(a)  Connection to sewage disposal system required. Connection to an approved sewage disposal system shall be made, which may require the construction of an on-site system or the extension of public sanitary sewerage and associated appurtenances, as required under the water pollution control regulations of the city or as required by the city health department. 
(b)  If sewer is available, septic not allowed. No septic tanks shall be allowed if public sewer is available. All structures shall connect to public sewer when such sewer is available, in accordance with the sewer regulations of the city. Sewer availability shall be determined by the city water pollution control division. 
(c)  Septic field must be located out of the 100-year floodplain. Lots with septic tanks and tile drain-field sewerage disposal systems shall contain the contiguous area outside of the 100-year floodplain as required by the health department. 
(d)  Health department notations on plats. The health department may require notation that certain lots must meet additional requirements prior to issuance of a building permit, or otherwise limit development relative to health department regulations. 
(1)  Such lots may include lots upon which adequate depth to water table must be demonstrated during the appropriate season of the year, adequate percolation tests must be performed, limitations upon the number of bedrooms in a dwelling, etc. 
(2)  No lot shall be included on a final plat which the health department is not confident will meet all health department regulations at a reasonable cost or within a reasonable period of time, except lots proposed to be served by sanitary sewer in subdivisions where "dry" sewer has been installed. Such lots shall be noted: "Approval by Water Pollution Control for connection to sanitary sewer required prior to issuance of a building permit." 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 7, § 7.3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-158. - Easements. 
(a)  Dedication requirement. Temporary construction easements and permanent easements for public utilities, drainage or other public facilities shall be dedicated to the city in accordance with city requirements. All easements shall be stabilized in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(b)  Cleared, opened, and stabilized. Drainage easements are required for any part of the drainage system that is designed to carry stormwater runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed. Drainage easements for improved ditches, pipe construction, and detention facilities shall be cleared, opened, and stabilized at the time of development to control surface water runoff (See also article VII of this chapter). Runoff slope and sideslopes shall be specified by the developer's engineer, according to good engineering practice. Drainage easements for storm drain pipes that carry water shall be provided according to the minimum requirements found in Table 7-A below, and shall conform to city standards. The minimum easement width shall be based on the pipe diameter (span), plus two feet, plus two times the pipe invert depth. This value shall be rounded up to the nearest five feet. For pipes exceeding 16 feet in depth, a pre-submittal conference shall be held with the city to determine what additional requirements may be required. 
_____
Table 7-A  Easements for Storm Drain Pipes 

 
(c)  Width of permanent sanitary sewer easements. Permanent sanitary sewer easements shall be no less than 20 feet in width when no other parallel utilities are located therein. When warranted, temporary construction easement widths shall be determined by the water pollution control division. 
(d)  Provision for common sanitary/drainage easement. A common easement for sanitary sewer and drainage purposes may be allowed if the pipes are parallel and at least ten feet is provided between pipes (on center). The easement width shall be equal to the width shown in Table 7-A, plus the width distance separating the pipes (minimum of ten feet). 
(e)  Watercourse easements. Drainage easements shall be provided where a development is traversed by or contains a water course, impoundment, detention facility, improved channel, floodplain, natural stream or channel. It shall conform substantially to the flooding limits of the 100-year storm based on fully developed conditions per the land use plan, but shall be no less than 20 feet in width. 
(f)  Off-street right-of-way easements. Drainage easements off the street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the final plat. The property owner will be required to keep the easement free of obstruction in such a way as to ensure the maximum designed flow at all times. The property owner shall not alter any drainage improvements without the prior written approval from the city. Structures, except driveways, shall not be constructed or erected in an easement without the prior written approval from the city. Driveways shall cross an easement as close to perpendicular as practical. Property owners may plant landscaping in an easement that is piped; however, the city is not responsible for replacing the landscape material located in the easement when it is removed to maintain the drainage system. 
(g)  Cleared easements to be grassed. All drainage, sewer, access or other easements that were required to be cleared shall be fine graded and grassed within ten days of completing construction work. The use of sediment control measures may be required to protect the area until a comprehensive vegetative cover is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 7, § 7.4, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-159. - Street cuts. 
(a)  Review and approval by the department. All utility construction plans within city right-of-way shall be reviewed and approved by the department before construction begins. Street cuts shall not be allowed unless deemed absolutely necessary due to the presence of rock, the need to tap into an existing line beneath the road surface, or other circumstance which makes boring impossible or infeasible. 
(b)  Fees required. No street cut shall be authorized until such street cut fees have been paid. 
(c)  Trenches to be backfilled. If approved, all trenches shall be backfilled and compacted the same day the trench is opened. 
(1)  Trenches under the paving shall be returned to 95 percent compaction. 
(2)  Trenches elsewhere shall be returned to 90 percent compaction. 
(3)  See section 34-122 for trench compaction and test requirements. 
(d)  Trenches under paving. All trenches under paving shall be concreted with eight inches of Class "A" concrete base and two inches of type "E" or "F" wearing course asphalt is to be spread. 
(1)  The paving cut shall be widened to a minimum of nine inches beyond the edges of the trench. 
(2)  The edges of the paving cut shall be smooth. 
(e)  Utility extension contact information. Contact the department of public utilities for public utility extension information from the existing to the proposed development. Contact the traffic engineer at least 24 hours in advance of closure of traffic lanes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 7, § 7.5, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 34-160—34-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SITE GRADING, STORMWATER DETENTION, CULVERTS AND PIPED DRAINAGE SYSTEMS, AND EROSION CONTROL 

Sec. 34-187. - Site grading. 
(a)  Compliance with line and grade required. Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades shown on the approved grading plan. 
(b)  Contour interval of two feet required. Grading plans shall show existing and proposed contour lines at an interval of no more than two feet. Grading plans shall outline the areas that are required to remain undisturbed (i.e., tree protection areas, buffer, etc.) and shall indicate protective fencing or staking to be placed surrounding such areas. 
(c)  Consistent with Metropolitan River Protection Act. If the property is within the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan River Protection Act, the grading shall be consistent with the River Corridor Certificate approved for the project. 
(d)  Embankment layering. Embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed a compacted thickness of six inches per layer and shall be compacted to a density of 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99 in all areas where structure, parking lots and drives, streets, and utilities are to be placed. All other embankments are to be compacted to at least 85 percent. 
(e)  Maximum slopes. 
(1)  The maximum slopes for cut or fill shall be 2 to 1 (two feet of horizontal run for each foot of rise or fall), except: 
a.  For earthen dam embankments; 
b.  For rock cuts; 
c.  Where certified by a professional engineer; or 
d.  As discussed in subsection (f) of this section. 
(2)  Earthen dam embankments shall be 3 to 1 maximum unless a modification application is approved. The intent of the earthen dam embankment slope regulation is to provide for public safety, soil stability, and dam maintenance considerations. The depth of cut referred to herein shall be the maximum cut or fill that shall be allowed to occur in any one section of cut or fill. The slope of cut or fill shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or fill unless benching is approved by the city. When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, the slope may be steeper if pre-splitting is employed and upon submission of a geotechnical report which substantiates the integrity of the rock in the steeper condition, subject to the review and approval of the director. (Note: No blasting shall occur unless a permit has been obtained from the fire marshal's office.) Refer to the standard drawings for grading section and retaining wall details. 
(f)  Special conditions for soil with low shearing resistance and cohesion. While most soils in the area can be safely stabilized at a 2 to 1 slope, some soils exhibit a low shearing resistance and a low cohesiveness. These soils typically are micaceous silts and sandy soils with little or no clay. If the 2 to 1 slope shows evidence of shearing, non-cohesiveness, sliding, or inability to maintain compaction, the slope shall be stabilized at 3 to 1 or by using such mechanical methods as needed (such as retaining walls or "grow mats" stapled in place) to maintain slope, height, and integrity. 
(g)  Grading plan for building pad locations for residential subdivisions. A grading plan showing building pad locations shall be submitted for residential subdivisions, unless a modification application is approved, zoned for a lot size of less than 12,000 square feet or a density of four units per acre or more. The intent of this regulation is to ensure adequate lot-to-lot drainage. Granting a modification will not nullify the intent of these regulations when the layout has a minimum lot area of 14,520 square feet and a minimum lot width of 90 feet. The grading plan may be used as a construction document prior to approval of the final plat or as a guidance document for individual lot grading after approval of the final plat. 
(h)  Grading for roads and ditches. Grading for roads and improved ditches shall be shown. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 8, § 8.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-188. - Stormwater management (redevelopment refer to section 34-195). 
(a)  Stormwater management report required. 
(1)  The purpose of a stormwater management report is to support the development of the project site using best management practices and diligent engineering. The report must follow the guidelines set forth in the city stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications and is required for all developments. The report shall be certified by an authorized registered professional registered in the state. 
(2)  The stormwater management report shall identify the locations and quantities of stormwater runoff entering and exiting the site for both pre- and post-developed conditions. Analysis of the off-site properties shall anticipate future development in addition to addressing existing conditions. 
(3)  For the purposes of these regulations, the terms "downstream" and "analysis" shall have the following meanings: The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainageway immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. The analysis shall be in accordance with the city stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications. 
(4)  The following criteria shall be evaluated by the authorized registered professional (refer to subsection (a)(1) of this section) preparing the stormwater management report, and in determining whether or not detention should be required for any portion of any site: 
a.  Existing land uses downstream; 
b.  Anticipated future land uses downstream; 
c.  Magnitude of increase in peak flows due to development; 
d.  Presence of existing drainage problems; 
e.  Capacity of existing and anticipated drainage systems; 
f.  Creation of concentrated flows where none had occurred previously; 
g.  Availability of feasible locations for detention facilities; 
h.  Existing flows generated off-site which pass through the project site; and 
i.  The nature of the receiving watercourse. 
(5)  Where detention for a proposed project is provided in a regional detention facility that was permitted prior to January 1, 2001, the developer shall provide a copy of the original study that met the regulations at the time the facility was permitted. If the approved study cannot be found, then the authorized registered professional shall provide a recreated study. The project shall be exempt from restudy and any modifications required to meet regulations effective after January 1, 2001, provided the proposed project is in keeping with the intent of the original detention study and the detention facility is maintained. 
(6)  When a development uses an existing facility where the last approved certification and record drawing of the facility was over 18 months prior to the new development's submittal, the authorized registered professional shall provide one of the following: 
a.  A new survey, drawing and certification showing that the outlet structure is constructed as approved and the flood storage and water quality volume of the facility is equal to or greater than the volume required when the facility was approved. 
b.  Construction plans and calculations showing that the outlet structure will function as designed and the flood storage and water quality volume of the facility will be equal to or greater than the volume required when the facility was approved once the proposed maintenance has been performed. 
c.  A new record survey, drawing, study and certification showing that the facility meets the development requirements that were in effect when the facility was approved. 
(7)  Design criteria; general. All design related to stormwater shall be in accordance with the city stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications. 
(8)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management report. 
(b)  Stormwater detention required. 
(1)  Whenever a stormwater management report indicates that an adverse impact from stormwater runoff is expected to result from the development of a property, that project shall be provided with stormwater detention facilities. The meaning of "adverse impact" shall apply when pre-development flows do not cause difficulties and post-development flows do. Difficulties shall include, but not be limited to, situations where 25-year velocities exceed the non-erosive velocity of the stream, habitable structures are shown to be subject to increased depth of flooding for any frequency up to and including the regulatory flood, and stormwater facilities that can not carry the design storm in accordance with these regulations. 
(2)  Stormwater detention facilities required in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be provided, unless the authorized registered professional (refer to subsection (a)(1) of this section) certifies and provides certified documentation supporting the conclusion to the director that at least one of the following is true and correct as applicable: 
a.  The non-detained, post-development runoff will leave the project site as sheet flow, and will not have an adverse impact upon downstream properties. The increase for a 25-year storm should not exceed one cfs over a length perpendicular to the flow of 100 feet. 
b.  The effect of detention would be to concentrate flows where sheet flow had occurred under pre-developed conditions, and any impact of increase sheet flows upon downstream properties would be less adverse than that which would result from the concentrated flows from a detention facility even if energy dissipation devices were employed. 
c.  The undetained flow will pass through downstream properties, in drainage easements obtained by the developer, to an existing detention facility which has been designed to manage the upstream property's runoff or to the point in the downstream analysis (see subsection (a)(3) of this section) which shows that detention is not required. 
d.  Where the site runoff will flow directly into a stream or lake without crossing off-site properties: 
1.  24-hour detention of the one-year storm is required if water quality protection is required for the project. In this case, the post-development peak flows in the receiving channel may exceed pre-development flows by the smaller value of up to 0.1 percent of the pre-development flows or three cfs in the downstream analysis. 
2.  Only peak detention for the two-year through the 25-year storm is not required if the downstream analysis using timing of the hydrographs shows no adverse impact from the exit of the site to the point immediately downstream from the project in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total drainage basin area. 
(3)  Should the authorized registered professional conclude that stormwater detention may not be necessary because of anticipated compliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section, rigid compliance with all of the following criteria is mandatory: 
a.  A stormwater management report shall always be required, whether or not stormwater detention is required. 
b.  If the applicant proposes to show that the detention requirement may be eliminated for all or a portion of a project, then a pre-submittal conference with the department staff is required prior to preparation and submittal of construction plans for the project. 
c.  At the pre-submittal conference with the staff, the consultant shall be prepared to discuss the downstream analysis findings as follows: 
1.  The affected stream must be analyzed downstream from the project to a point where the project area is ten percent of the total drainage basin. The analysis must include all culverts, obstructions, existing and potential erosion problems, elevations of existing improvements, and any other existing modifications to natural conditions; 
2.  If the existing downstream conditions are overburdened by the pre-developed flows in the stream, then detention shall be required unless the developer elects to eliminate the downstream overburdened conditions at his expense when the development occurs; and 
3.  If there are any existing drainage complaints downstream, then detention shall be required unless the developer elects to minimize the conditions causing the complaint at his expense when the development occurs. 
(c)  Detention design criteria, general. 
(1)  All stormwater detention pond hydrologic and hydraulic analysis and design calculations shall be certified by the authorized registered professional (refer to subsection (a)(1) of this section). The design shall be in accordance with the city stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications. 
(2)  All stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to detain the one-year storm runoff, for the area draining to the pond, for 24 hours. For the project, this volume called the channel protection volume shall be equal to or greater than the one-year storm runoff volume from the project. In addition, these facilities shall control the peak flow rates associated with storms having two-year, five-year, ten-year, and 25-year return frequencies so that flows from the developed site do not exceed those associated with pre-development conditions at the project boundary nor increase the peak flows downstream from the project to the point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin. Where adverse impacts, as defined in section 34-188(b)(1), occur during the 100-year storm, the 100-year storm shall also be regulated. The hydrologic methodology used for any given project shall conform to the city stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications. Runoff coefficients and runoff curve numbers used for pre- and post-development conditions shall be consistent with those shown in the Gwinnett County Stormwater Systems and Facilities Installation Standards and Specifications. 
(3)  The USGS Method shall be used, where applicable, to check the magnitude of peak flows when other hydrologic methods recommended in the manual are used. 
(4)  Calculations shall be provided showing how all times of concentration or lag times were computed, both for pre- and post-developed conditions. Likewise, adequate support must be provided for all composite runoff coefficients or curve numbers used. 
(d)  Detention facility location criteria. 
(1)  For purposes of these regulations, a detention facility shall be deemed to consist of the area within the maximum design ponding limits unless a modification application is approved, the dam (if one), including all embankment slopes and wall footings (if applicable), primary and emergency outlet works, any drainage and access easements, and any energy dissipation devices. The intent of these regulations is to ensure that the extent of the facility is defined to allow flooding, access and maintenance. Granting of a modification will not nullify these regulations when the facility is a wet pond or lake, the area within the maximum design ponding limits is reduced to a few feet inside the normal pool elevation, and easements are provided on the perimeter properties to allow for flooding, access and maintenance around the lake. In addition, granting of the modification shall only be considered when the wet pond is an amenity and under no circumstances shall the dam and outlet structure lie on private property. 
(2)  Detention facilities, to the greatest extent feasible, shall be located so as to minimize the amount of flow generated on the project site that bypasses the facility. 
(3)  No portion of any detention facility shall disturb any required (as opposed to voluntary) buffer, landscape strip, or tree protection area, except that natural bottom detention ponds and its appurtenant structures, which require no grading and removal of trees, may encroach into a required construction buffer. 
(4)  The 100-year ponding limits of a detention facility shall not encroach upon a public right-of-way. 
(5)  Detention facilities may be located within utility easements or rights-of-way, or encroach upon utility easements or rights-of-way, upon receipt by the department of written permission from both the property and utility owners. 
(6)  Detention facilities may be constructed within recreation areas required under section 34-85, if the following criteria are met: 
a.  Ownership of the area will be held by a qualified property owner's association, homeowner's association, or other private parties. 
b.  Permanent structures, such as buildings and swimming pools, will not be constructed within the boundaries of the detention facility. 
c.  Detention facilities within recreation areas will be approved only if the design of the area includes recreation amenities, such as ball fields, tennis courts, grassed open areas or other similar improvements. The intent is to provide recreation facilities with detention as a secondary feature. 
d.  Permanent detention features shall not interfere with the intended uses of the recreation amenity, (i.e., a ditch or large swale shall not traverse a ball field, an inlet structure shall not be in a tennis court, etc.). 
(7)  If a residential subdivision is provided with an on-site detention facility not located within a recreation area as specified in subsection (d)(6) of this section, a mandatory property owner's association shall be established for its ownership and maintenance. The facility shall be located on a single lot within the development and owned by the property owner's association. The lot shall have a minimum of 30 feet of public road frontage and a minimum lot width of 30 feet. Access to the facility shall be located on this lot. If the project is provided with an off-site detention facility, a mandatory property owner's association shall be established for its maintenance. The association bylaws shall be recorded concurrently with the recording of a final subdivision plat. The association bylaws shall include the same provisions as specified in section 34-85(b)(2). 
(8)  A nonresidential subdivision is not required to locate an on-site detention facility on a separate lot. The property owners served by a detention facility that provides detention for more than one property owner or is located off site shall enter into a maintenance agreement acceptable to the city for the facility's maintenance. However, if desired by the developer, the facility may be located on a separate lot if it is owned and maintained by a mandatory property owner's association. 
(e)  Detention facility easement requirements. 
(1)  In a nonresidential subdivision or project, an easement at least 20 feet in width shall be required so as to provide access to all detention facilities from a public street. 
(2)  In a residential subdivision, an easement at least 30 feet in width shall be required so as to provide access to all detention facilities from a public street. 
(3)  Access easement. 
a.  The access easement shall be cleared, grubbed and graded so that it can be utilized by rubber-tired construction vehicles. 
b.  The minimum drive width shall be 15 feet. 
c.  The drive shall be grassed or paved. 
d.  The maximum slope shall be 20 percent (5H:1V). 
e.  Access easements may be combined with drainage easements containing an open channel; however, the combined easement shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width and shall be wide enough for the drainage channel and the drive. 
f.  A drive to the bottom of the pond shall be provided when the facility is over ten feet deep from the bench elevation or the facility is wider than 50 feet as measured from bench to bench. 
(4)  Every normally dry detention basin, lake, or parking lot detention facility shall be completely enclosed within a drainage easement. The drainage easement shall extend at least ten feet beyond the 100-year flooding limits of the detention facility. 
(f)  Detention facility maintenance. 
(1)  The detention storage capacity or function of any detention basin, pond or other impoundment, whether natural or manmade, shall not be removed or diminished without the express approval of the department. 
(2)  In a residential subdivision, it shall be the responsibility of the mandatory property owner's association to maintain the operational characteristics of any facility constructed on their property for stormwater detention pursuant to city requirements, to keep the access drive free of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of obstruction, silt or debris. 
(3)  In a nonresidential subdivision or project served by a detention facility that provides detention for more than one property or by an off-site facility, the property owners shall enter into a maintenance agreement with the city for maintenance of the operational characteristics of the facility pursuant to city requirements, to keep the access drive free of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of obstruction, silt or debris. 
(4)  In a nonresidential project with an on-site detention facility which serves only that project, the property owner shall be responsible to maintain the operational characteristics of the facility pursuant to city requirements, to keep the access drive free of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of obstruction, silt or debris. 
(5)  Where no maintenance agreement has been recorded, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the operational characteristics of any facility constructed on their property for stormwater management pursuant to city requirements, to keep the access drive free of obstructions, and to maintain the facility free of obstruction, silt or debris. 
(6)  Prior to the issuance of a development permit, the owner shall submit a detailed schedule of long-term maintenance and inspection activities. This schedule of activities shall be incorporated into a maintenance agreement to be entered into between the city and the owner. The schedule shall describe all maintenance and inspection activities and the parties responsible. The maintenance agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the city and shall be recorded in the deed records of the clerk of superior court of the city. 
(g)  Detention facility construction standards. Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed in accordance with plans reviewed and approved by the department, and shall be in place and inspected prior to the initiation of other improvements. If the detention facility is planned to be a lake, temporary detention facilities shall be provided and shall remain in place until such time as the lake has become effective in providing stormwater management. The construction shall be in accordance with the city stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications. 
(h)  Detention facility engineer's certification and record drawings. 
(1)  When a new facility is constructed in a development, a certified record survey of each detention facility shall be prepared by an authorized registered professional currently registered in the state. A certified record drawing of the facility shall be prepared based upon this survey. Based on the actual parameters established on the record drawing, an addendum to the stormwater management report shall be prepared which demonstrates that the facility, as constructed, complies with the requirements of these regulations. The amended stormwater management report shall be certified by the authorized registered professional (refer to subsection (a)(1) of this section). The survey shall be performed after substantial completion and stabilization of the project has occurred. The record drawing and addendum to the stormwater management report shall be submitted to the city at least one week prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval (as appropriate to the project). 
(2)  When a development uses an existing facility without an existing stormwater maintenance bond, the facility shall be cleaned out, if necessary, and a new record survey, drawing and certification showing that the outlet structure exists as approved and the flood storage and water quality volume of the facility is equal to or greater than the volume required when the facility was approved. As an alternative, a new record survey, drawing, study and certification showing that the facility meets the development requirements that were in effect when the facility was approved shall be submitted. The survey shall be performed after substantial completion and stabilization of the project has occurred. The certification and supporting data shall be submitted to the city at least one week prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy of final plat approval (as appropriate to the project). 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 8, § 8.2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-189. - Culverts and piped drainage systems. 
(a)  Drainage improvements required. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, storm drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, and ditches, shall be provided for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the requirements of these regulations. 
(b)  Design criteria; general. 
(1)  All stormwater conveyance facility design calculations shall be certified by the authorized registered professional (refer to section 34-187(a)(1)). 
(2)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the city stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications. 
(3)  The USGS Method shall be used, where applicable, to check the magnitude of peak flows when other hydrologic methods recommended in the manual are used. 
(4)  All portions of a stormwater conveyance system which drain areas falling within the same size category above shall be analyzed using the same methodology. 
(5)  Runoff coefficients used for the Rational Method and runoff curve numbers used for the SCS Method shall be consistent with those shown in the city stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications. 
(c)  Design criteria; culverts. 
(1)  Culvert design is to be in accordance with the methods contained in the city stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications and shall include a thorough analysis of both inlet and outlet control conditions. 
(2)  The 100-year ponding limits at and upstream of the culvert shall be shown on the development plans and on the final plat, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 8, § 8.3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-190. - Erosion control. 
(a)  Design standards. The procedures and requirements of the soil erosion and sediment control ordinance, as may be amended from time to time, shall be applicable whenever any land disturbance is proposed to occur which requires a permit to be obtained by these regulations and shall continue to apply until the project has been completed. 
(b)  Abandoned projects. Any project, whose permit has lapsed under the terms expressed in article III of this chapter, shall immediately have all disturbed areas stabilized. This responsibility shall fall upon the owner, developer, contractor, or any and all other responsible parties involved in the land disturbance activity. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 8, § 8.5, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-191. - Dams. 
Any land disturbing activity that involves a property which is proposed to contain a dam shall comply with the provisions of this article as well as the provisions contained in article II of this chapter. 
(1)  New dams which become subject to the requirements of the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety. Dams proposed to be 25 feet or more in height or proposed to have an impounding capacity of 100 acre-feet or more at maximum water storage elevation shall be subject to the following: 
a.  The developer of any new dam in which development exists within the proposed breach zone shall be subject to the requirements of the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety adopted by the state department of natural resources. The developer shall obtain necessary approvals and permits from the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources for the project and the dam prior to securing a development permit from the department. The developer of any new dam as to which development does not exist within the proposed breach zone shall submit construction plans to the city for review of the project and the dam prior to securing a development permit from the department. 
b.  If the developer elects to construct the new dam in accordance with the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then new development shall be permitted within the dam breach zone. However, the dam shall meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety if development currently exists or is proposed in the dam breach zone. 
c.  If the developer elects not to construct the new dam to the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then a dam breach analysis for the dam shall be submitted along with the construction plans for review prior to securing a development permit from the department. The professional engineer shall utilize the computer model titled "DAMBRK" for the dam breach analysis. 
d.  Should the new dam not meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then only the following uses and structures shall be permitted within the dam breach easement: 
1.  Agriculture which requires no structures for human habitation within the dam breach zone, including forestry, livestock raising, and agricultural and forestry access roads. 
2.  Fences. 
3.  Outdoor advertising signs, provided they are located no closer than 100 feet from any residence or place of business. 
4.  Roads, driveways and parking areas. 
5.  Utility poles, towers, pipelines, water treatment outfalls and facilities, or other similar facilities and structures. 
e.  For any new dam that is proposed not to meet the design for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, the developer shall obtain a dam breach easement, recorded with the clerk of superior court, from any off-site property owner where it is proposed for the dam breach zone to extend off the property where the dam is being constructed. The developer shall also cause a dam breach easement to be recorded upon the property being developed. 
f.  Prior to recording of a final plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as appropriate, an as-built certification from a professional engineer shall be submitted to the department. The certification shall state that the dam is constructed in accordance with the provisions of these regulations as well as the authorized construction plans. If the project is for the development of a subdivision, the developer shall also establish a legal entity, acceptable to the city, such as a mandatory property owner's association, prior to approval of the final plat, responsible for the maintenance of the dam and its impoundment. 
(2)  New dams subject to regulation by the city. Dams proposed to be nine feet or more in height, but less than 25 feet in height, in combination with an impounding capacity proposed to be 20 acre-feet or more at maximum water storage elevation, but less than 100 acre-feet, shall be subject to the following: 
a.  If the developer elects not to construct the new dam to the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then a dam breach analysis for the dam shall be submitted with the construction plans for review and authorization prior to securing a development permit from the department. The professional engineer shall utilize the computer model titled "DAMBRK" for the dam breach analysis. 
b.  Should the new dam not meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then only the following uses and structures shall be permitted within the dam breach zone: 
1.  Agriculture which requires no structures for human habitation within the dam breach zone, including forestry, livestock raising, and agricultural and forestry access roads. 
2.  Fences. 
3.  Outdoor advertising signs, provided they are located no closer than 100 feet from any residence or place of business. 
4.  Roads, driveways and parking areas. 
5.  Utility poles, towers, pipelines, water treatment outfalls and facilities, or similar facilities and structures. 
c.  If the developer elects to construct the new dam in accordance with the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, then new development shall be permitted within the dam breach zone. However, the dam shall meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the rules for dam safety if development currently exists or is proposed in the dam breach zone. 
d.  Construction plans for new dams defined herein shall be submitted to the city for review for the project and the dam prior to securing a development permit from the department. 
e.  For any dam that is proposed not to meet the design standards for new dams as contained in the Rules for Dam Safety, the developer shall obtain a dam breach easement, recorded with the clerk of superior court, from any off-site property owner where it is proposed for the dam breach zone to extend off the property where the dam is being constructed. The developer shall also cause a dam breach easement to be recorded upon the property being developed. 
f.  Prior to recording of a final plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as appropriate, an as-built certification from a professional engineer shall be submitted to the department. The certification shall state that the dam is constructed in accordance with the provisions of these regulations as well as the authorized construction plans. If the project is for the development of a subdivision, the developer shall also establish a legal entity, acceptable to the city, such as a mandatory property owner's association, at time of recording of the final plat, responsible for the maintenance of the dam and its impoundment. 
(3)  Existing dams. Existing dams that are located on a project site and will remain after construction is complete shall comply with the provisions of this article and all referenced articles as if they were new dams. 
(4)  Existing Category II dams. When an existing Category II dam may be reclassified to a Category I dam because of a proposed development downstream of the dam, the following shall be provided by the developer for review by the state safe dams program: 
a.  Location of the Category II dam and the proposed development; 
b.  A surveyed cross-section of the stream valley at the location of the proposed development, including finished floor elevations; and 
c.  A dam breach analysis using the Dambreak Computer Model to establish the height of the floodwave in the downstream floodplain. The Dambreak Modeling shall be completed in accordance with the Safe Dams Program quality assurance program by a professional engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 8, § 8.6, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-192. - Extended detention facilities. 
(a)  Easement requirements. Easement requirements shall be as specified in section 34-187(e) with the change that the easement enclosing the facility shall be named a best management practice (BMP) easement. 
(b)  Professional's certification and record drawings. A certified record survey of each facility shall be prepared by an authorized registered professional currently registered in the state. A certified record drawing of the facility shall be prepared based upon this survey. The authorized registered professional shall certify that the facility functions hydraulically as designed. The record drawing shall be submitted to the department at least one week prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval (as appropriate to the project). Record drawings of off-site facilities shall be recorded at least one week prior to the recording of the final plat. 
(c)  Wet and extended detention facility maintenance. Maintenance requirements shall be as specified in section 34-187(f). 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 8, § 8.7, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-193. - Stream buffers and impervious surface setbacks. 
Refer to the zoning resolution for buffer and impervious surface setback requirements from streams. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 8, § 8.8, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-194. - Water quality best management practices. 
(a)  Treatment of runoff. All projects, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this section, that meet one or more of the following criteria, shall provide water quality treatment based on the modeled total suspended solids (TSS) load of the project for post construction conditions. The determination of the TSS load shall be in accordance with the stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications. 
(1)  The modeled TSS load shall not exceed 850 pounds/acre/year. 
a.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more. 
b.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsection (a)(1)a of this section, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
c.  Utility projects, such as electrical, gas, water and sanitary sewer line installations that do not require detention. 
d.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Runoff from any new development, regardless of size, that is defined by the director of water resources to be a hotspot land use or activity shall be adequately treated and addressed through the use of structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(3)  The following activities are exempt from providing treatment: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; and 
c.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the director of water resources. 
(b)  Facility location criteria. 
(1)  Facility location criteria shall be as specified for detention facilities in section 34-188(d). 
(2)  In a residential subdivision, the following best management practices must be located on a separate lot in accordance with section 34-188(d)(7) if not located on a recreation area lot as specified in section 34-188(d)(6): 
a.  Extended detention ponds; 
b.  Retention ponds; 
c.  Sand filters; 
d.  Constructed wetlands; 
e.  Infiltration trenches; 
f.  Oil/grit separators. 
(c)  Easement requirements. 
(1)  Facility easement requirements shall be as specified in section 34-187(e) with the exception that the easement enclosing the facility shall be named a best management practice (BMP) easement. 
(2)  Stream buffer easements shall be shown on the final plat for areas that are claimed in the TSS Model as undisturbed stream buffers for the site. These areas shall be left in a natural, undisturbed condition except for walking trails. Trails shall not be allowed within 25 feet of a stream bank without a state waters buffer variance. 
(3)  Upland area easements in nonresidential subdivisions that are claimed as undisturbed upland areas for the site shall be recorded in an easement acceptable to the city. These areas shall be left in a natural, undisturbed condition except for walking trails. 
(d)  Facility maintenance. 
(1)  Maintenance requirements shall be as specified in section 34-187(f). 
(2)  Prior to or concurrent with the recording of a final plat for a subdivision, or issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a non-subdivision project, the developer shall provide acceptable surety, such as a bond or letter of credit, providing for the maintenance of the facility for a period of not less than 18 months. The amount of the surety shall be the greater of 50 percent of construction costs of the facility or 100 percent of the cost to clean out the facility. At the end of 18 months, the city may require the surety to be renewed due to anticipated maintenance caused by such concerns as future construction activity in the basin draining to the facility. A renewed surety may be required up to a total maximum of ten years. The surety for a facility shall be renewed during the ten years until: 
a.  The surface water drainage area within the project has undergone final stabilization and all planned construction activity has been completed; 
b.  All stormwater runoff in the surface water drainage area within the project is coming from undisturbed or stabilized areas; 
c.  At least 90 percent of the lots in that surface water drainage area within the project have been sold to an unrelated party, permanent structures completed and final stabilization achieved; 
d.  The accumulation of acreage of undeveloped lots, lots with no completed permanent structure and no final stabilization within the surface water drainage area within the project is less than five acres or ten percent of the total area of the common development draining to the facility, whichever is greater; and 
e.  Within two months of surety release, the facility shall be cleaned out, if necessary, and a new record survey, drawing and certification showing that the volume of the facility is equal to or greater than the volume shown in the record survey, drawing and certification when the facility was approved. As an alternative, a new record survey, drawing and certification showing that the facility complies with these regulations as specified in section 34-188(h) shall be submitted. 
(e)  Facility certification and record drawings. Requirements for a certified record survey and addendum to the stormwater management report shall be the same for water quality facilities as for detention facilities in section 34-188(h). 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 8, § 8.9, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-195. - Redevelopment. 
(a)  Stormwater management. Redeveloped sites must follow the guidelines set forth in the city stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications. The standards within this section apply to all redevelopment sites that meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition, or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(2)  Any redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the department of planning and development director or designee to be a hotspot land use; or 
(3)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  Stormwater management report required. The purpose of a stormwater management report is to support the redevelopment of the project site using best management practices and diligent engineering. The report must follow the guidelines set forth in the city stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications and is required for all redevelopment projects. The report shall be certified by a qualified registered professional in the state. The stormwater management report shall be in accordance with the criteria specified in section 34-187(a). 
(c)  Water quality treatment. 
(1)  Treatment of stormwater runoff for the purposes of water quality shall be in accordance with the criteria specified in the city stormwater systems facilities installation standards and specifications under the following conditions: 
a.  Water quality requirements of this section must be met for the entire site when 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface is created, replaced or added, or one acre or more of a developed project site is disturbed for redevelopment, and the disturbed area is more than 50 percent of the property. 
b.  Water quality requirements of this section must be met for the improvements on the site only when 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area is created, replaced or added, or one acre or more of a developed project site is disturbed for redevelopment, and the disturbed area is less than 50 percent of the property. 
c.  The project is exempt from having to provide the water quality requirements of this section for the project or for the rest of the site when less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface area is created or added, or less than one acre of land of a developed project site is disturbed for redevelopment. 
(2)  Facility location shall be in accordance with the criteria specified in section 34-194(b). 
(3)  Easement requirements shall be in accordance with the criteria specified in section 34-194(c). 
(4)  Facility maintenance shall be in accordance with the criteria specified in section 34-194(d). 
(5)  Facility certification and record drawings shall be in accordance with the criteria specified in section 34-194(e). 
(d)  Stormwater detention required. Stormwater management for a redeveloped project site shall be provided in accordance with the criteria specified in the city stormwater systems and facilities installation standards and specifications under the following conditions: 
(1)  Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  Erosion prevention measures, such as energy dissipation and velocity control; 
c.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event (channel protection volume). 
(2)  Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. 
(3)  Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(e)  Use of existing detention facilities. 
(1)  Where water quality treatment for a proposed redevelopment is to be provided in an existing detention facility, treatment must be provided for the original project area. A modification to the 25-year detention requirement may be granted for the purpose of retrofitting the detention facility to meet current water quality regulations. Granting a modification will meet the intent and purpose of these regulations when: 
a.  The detention requirements of the current regulations are provided in the facility for the one-year, two-year, five-year and ten-year storm. For a retrofitted facility, the volume of the one-year storm shall be based on the original project area being detained instead of the total area draining to the facility; 
b.  The water quality requirements of the current regulations as stated in section 34-194 are provided for the original project area in the facility; 
c.  The 25-year ponding limits create a hardship if no modification is granted; and 
d.  The outlet structure meets the requirements of the current regulations. 
(2)  Where stormwater is treated in a regional water quality facility approved between April 27, 1999, and January 1, 2001, lots in nonresidential subdivisions (or phases in residential subdivisions) shall either conform to the permit and water quality regulations at the time of approval or conform to the current water quality regulations as stated in section 34-194. 
(3)  Where stormwater is treated in a regional detention facility approved before April 27, 1999, lots in non-residential subdivisions (or phases in residential subdivisions) shall conform to the current water quality regulations as stated in subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Redevelopment improvement areas. Credits and corresponding water quality volume decreases may be given for demonstrable and equivalent TSS reductions resulting from stream restoration and habitat improvement projects along the same tributary or in the same basin downstream from the redevelopment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 8, § 8.10, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 34-196—34-213. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PERFORMANCE GUIDELINES 

Sec. 34-214. - General requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. The sections enumerated in this article are guidelines, and are intended to be benchmark indicators of what standards could be acceptable. They are further intended to allow alternate designs which could produce results similar to these performance standards and similar protection to the public. The objective of these performance standards is not to suggest a single methodological standard of acceptance exclusive of all others. Rather they establish what would otherwise be allowed in the absence of an acceptable alternative. 
(b)  Constraints. The alternative design solutions are constrained by the design requirements of article IV of this chapter, the access requirements and street and right-of-way requirements and the street construction standards of article V of this chapter, and the grading, detention, drainage requirements of article VII of this chapter, as well as the purpose and intent of these regulations. 
(c)  Documentation required. In the event that an alternative is suggested by the applicant, studies and reports conducted by professionals currently certified in the state will be required to be submitted to and approved by the department. These studies and reports must clearly relate to the desired results and purposes expressed or implied in the applicable performance standard. Once an alternative has been approved by the department, it shall become a required standard applicable to the specific approved permit only. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 9, § 9.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-215. - Lots. 
(a)  Lots design, HLP, RDP and RDS. Lots should be designed generally such that they are no more than four times as deep as they are wide at the building setback line, unless excepted by the director. 
(1)  The department may require notation that a house location plan (HLP) is required to be approved prior to issuance of a building permit on certain lots when particular care in locating the house or other improvements will be necessary. Such lots include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A lot which presents particular or unusual difficulties for a builder to meet minimum required building setbacks; 
b.  A lot upon which is located an easement of unusual configuration; 
c.  A lot containing floodplain, but upon which no fill or other encroachment into the floodplain is anticipated at the time the final plat is filed; 
d.  A lot upon which is located all or a part of a stormwater detention facility; 
e.  A lot upon which is located a buffer which was required by the zoning resolution as a condition of zoning approval; 
f.  All duplex lots; 
g.  All lots within, or partially within, the Chattahoochee River Corridor, or containing a River Corridor Tributary Buffer Zone. 
(2)  The department may require notation that a residential drainage plan (RDP) is required to be approved prior to issuance of a building permit on certain lots where additional (site specific) engineering will be necessary to properly grade the lot or locate the building or other improvements. Such lots include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A lot containing floodplain where fill or other encroachment into the floodplain is planned or reasonably expected; 
b.  A lot containing severe topographic features interdicting the building site; 
c.  A lot containing a drainage easement with a pipe discharge or other facilities, or flow characteristics which may adversely affect the location of a building or other site improvements. 
(3)  The department may require notation that a residential drainage study (RDS) is required to be approved prior to issuance of a building permit on certain lots where particular attention to site grading will be necessary, but formal engineering is not needed. Such an RDS is conducted in the field where the effect of the site grading must be accomplished with adequate care so as not to create a drainage problem on neighboring property. 
(b)  Side lot lines. Side lot lines generally should be at right angles (90 degrees) to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines as much as practical. Side lot lines should be radial to the radius points of all cul-de-sacs. Variations of more than ten degrees shall require approval of the department, but shall be approved when appropriate to the reasonable loading pattern of the subdivision, efficient use of the land relative to topographic conditions, or provisions of improved building sites over those which would result without variation of the side lot lines. 
(c)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently larger so that they have the same width between minimum side setback lines as an interior lot, but in no case shall more than 75 feet between side setback lines on a corner lot be required. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 9, § 9.2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-216. - Blocks. 
(a)  Length, width and shape. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(2)  Applicable zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions; 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic; 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  Pedestrian access. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, the director may, when existing or proposed pedestrian circulation patterns or public gathering places so justify, require pedestrian ways or pedestrian access easements, as appropriate, through the block. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 9, § 9.3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-217. - Access. 
Mixed-Use Redevelopment (MUR) Overlay District. Developments in a MUR Overlay District shall be designed with vehicle and pedestrian access between or among all uses within the development and between or among all contiguous external commercial, office, or multifamily property, developed or undeveloped. The director may grant a modification if it is demonstrated that a specific inter-parcel connection is not feasible due to traffic safety, topography or other development consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 9, § 9.4, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-218. - Roadway design. 
(a)  Street grades and design speeds. 
(1)  Minimum grade for all local and minor collector streets shall be 1.5 percent. Minimum grades for all major collector and arterial streets shall conform to state DOT practice. 
(2)  Minimum grade of less than 1.5 percent on a local street may be approved by the department, based on adequate engineering designs, where at least 1.5 percent cannot reasonably be achieved due to topographical limitations imposed by the land. In such cases, a record drawing and such computations as necessary shall be provided after construction to establish that the street will drain in accordance with these regulations. Street sections where unacceptable pooling, excessive spread at catch basins, or other hazardous conditions occur shall be reconstructed or otherwise improved to eliminate such conditions. 
(3)  Minimum vehicle design speeds and maximum grades allowable in the city by street classification shall be as shown in Table 9-A. 
(4)  Maximum grade on any cul-de-sac turnaround shall be six percent. 
Table 9-A  Minimum Design Speeds and Maximum Grades 

 
* Grades between 12 percent and 14 percent shall not exceed a length of 150 feet and shall require an "as-graded" survey prior to the installation of the curb or utilities. The distance shall be measured as the tangent length between points of curvature. 
(b)  Vertical street alignment. 
(1)  All changes in street profile grades having algebraic difference greater than one percent shall be connected by a parabolic curve having a minimum length (L) equal to the product of the algebraic difference between the grades in percent (A) and the design constant (K) assigned to the street according to its category (i.e., L=KA). 
(2)  Constant (K) values are shown in Table 9-B for both desirable and minimum acceptable ("hardship") conditions. In all cases, the "desirable" value shall be used, unless it cannot be achieved due to topographic conditions beyond the developer's control. In such hardship situations, the department may approve a lesser value to the extent required by the hardship situation, but in no event less than the value shown in the Table as "minimum." 
Table 9-B  Constant (K) Values for Vertical Curves 

 
(c)  Horizontal street alignment. 
(1)  All new streets shall adhere to the following standards governing horizontal curvature and superelevation: 
Table 9-C Horizontal Curves 

 
* No superelevation will be allowed on minor collectors internal to residential subdivisions. 
(2)  Superelevation for horizontal curves shall be calculated utilizing the following formula: 
R = minimum radius curve. 
v = vehicle design speed (MPH). 
e = rate of superelevation (decimal of a foot rise per foot roadway). 
f = side friction factor. 

 
  

 
(3)  Widening section along existing streets shall be designed reflecting existing curvature and superelevation, if any, unless the existing street has been included in a specific design by the city or state DOT which calls for different standards, in which case the project will be coordinated with the overall design. 
(4)  Superelevation runoff. Roadway edge curves shall be provided for tangent runout (bringing edge from a normal crown to centerline elevation) and superelevation runoff (from the end of tangent runout to the point of design superelevation) in accordance with design standards of the state department of transportation or other professional engineering standards. 
(5)  Tangents and compound curves. Between reverse horizontal curves there shall be not less than the minimum centerline tangents shown in Table 9-D, unless otherwise specified by the state department of transportation. Compound radii curves are prohibited. At least the "desirable" length shall be provided, unless hardship conditions of topography or property configuration will not allow lengths greater than those shown as "minimum." For compound circular curves, the ratio of the flatter radius to the sharper radius shall not exceed 1.5 to 1. 
Table 9-D Tangents 

 
Note: Minimum tangents are based on the distance traveled in 1.7 seconds at the design speed for each category of street. Desirable length is based on distance traveled in 2.0 seconds. 
(d)  Horizontal and vertical clearances. 
(1)  Horizontal clearances. 
a.  A shoulder of no less than 11 feet from the back of curb or edge of pavement, appropriately graded and having gentle slopes of not more than 0.5 inch per foot and rounded cross-sectional design shall be maintained along all streets. Beyond the shoulder but within the right-of-way, slopes shall not exceed one foot of rise for each two feet of horizontal distance on a cut slope, and one foot of fall for each three feet of horizontal distance on a fill slope. 
b.  Along all public streets, a clear zone shall be provided for a minimum distance of six feet from back of curb or edge of pavement wherein nothing may be located above ground level except traffic/street signs, public utility structures, and mailboxes. 
c.  At selected locations, such as the outside of a sharp curve, a wider clear zone with greater horizontal clearances provided to any roadside obstruction may be required. 
d.  The department of transportation, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51, is authorized to remove or direct the removal of any sign, signal, device, or other structure erected, placed, or maintained on the right-of-way of a public road which, because of its nature, construction, or operation, constitutes a danger to, or interferes with the vision of, drivers of motor vehicles. 
(2)  Vertical clearances. Vertical clearance at underpasses shall be at least 14.5 feet over the entire roadway width. 
(e)  Traffic calming for local residential streets. 
(1)  Subdivision streets shall be designed in accordance with the city traffic calming guide so as to encourage and maintain maximum operating speeds in the 25 to 30 miles per hour range. The maximum length of roadway section between speed control points, as defined by the traffic calming guide, shall be 500 feet. 
(2)  The traffic-calming plan is subject to review and approval by the department of transportation. The director of the department of transportation may grant modifications. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 9, § 9.5, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-219. - Street intersections. 
(a)  Angle of intersection. Intersections shall generally be at right angles and shall not be at an angle of less than 85 degrees unless approved by the department, or less than 80 degrees unless the intersection is signalized in which case the angle of the intersection may be reduced subject to the review and approval of the traffic engineer. 
(b)  Maximum grade. Street intersections should be designed with a flat grade wherever possible, but in no case should the grade exceed two percent in normal situations (or four percent in topographical hardship situations on local streets). 
(c)  Intersection approaches; horizontal alignment. 
(1)  New local streets which approach an intersection with a street in a category higher than itself on a horizontal curve having a centerline radius less than 240 feet shall provide a tangent section of roadway at least 30 feet long. Minor collectors approaching an intersection with a major thoroughfare on a horizontal curve having a centerline radius of less than 550 feet shall also provide the 30-foot tangent section. The tangent length shall be measured along the centerline of the street, from the right-of-way line of the intersecting street, extended, to the point of tangency with the centerline of the curve section. 
(2)  New major thoroughfares shall provide tangent sections at intersections with streets in equal or higher categories as needed to provide adequate stopping distances at their design speeds. 
(d)  Intersection approaches; vertical alignment. 
(1)  For intersections with local or minor collector streets, a leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding two percent shall be provided but no level approach distance is required for streets approaching at less than seven percent, and a minimum 25 foot level approach distance shall be provided for streets approaching at a grade of seven percent or more. (See section 34-83, standard drawings.) 
(2)  As a street approaches an intersection with a major thoroughfare, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding two percent and for a distance not less than the following minimums: 
Table 9-E  Approach Distances at Major  Intersections 

 
* Distance of the approach is measured from edge of pavement of the intersecting street to the point of curvature in the approaching street. 
(e)  Intersection radii. Intersection radii for roadways measured at back of curb and for the right-of-way lines shall be as follows. For intersecting streets of difference classification, the larger radii shall be provided. In all cases, adequate right-of-way shall be provided to maintain a minimum of 11 feet from back-of-curb. Larger radii may be required for streets intersecting at angles less than 90 degrees. 
Table 9-F  Intersection Radii 

 
* Intersecting right-of-way lines may be joined by an arc having the minimum radius shown, or by a miter which cuts across the right-of-way lines connecting the points where the required radius would have otherwise been tangent. 
(f)  Islands. Islands in street intersections shall conform to the design requirements of the standard drawings. In no case shall anything in an island extend more than three feet above the street grade within the right-of-way, except traffic regulatory devices and other infrastructure erected or approved by the city. No island shall be approved which contains less than 100 square feet. 
(g)  Intersection corner sight distance. 
(1)  Intersections shall be designed with adequate corner sight distance for each street which approaches a street in an equal or higher street category (except an intersection of two local streets). Where necessary, backslopes shall be flattened and horizontal or vertical curves lengthened to provide the minimum required sight distance. 
(2)  The minimum corner sight distance from the approaching street shall be equal to or exceed ten times the regulated speed of the intersecting street, as measured from the center of the approaching street in both directions along the right-of-way line of the intersecting street. As an alternative, the minimum corner sight distance requirement may be calculated using AASHTO "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," Chapter 9 (at-grade intersections), latest edition. The sight distance shall provide clear visibility of an object four feet above the intersecting street viewed from the centerline of the approaching street at the right-of-way line of the intersecting street, at a height of 3.5 feet above the ground. 
(h)  Obstructing visibility at intersections. On any corner lot, within an area formed by the lot lines on the street sides of such lot and a line (miter) joining points on such lot lines located at a distance of 20 feet from the point of their intersection, the following shall apply: 
(1)  There shall be no fence or wall or hedge higher than three feet. 
(2)  There shall be no obstruction to vision, other than a post or column or tree (except standards erected by the city) not exceeding one foot in greatest cross-sectional dimension, between a height of three feet and a height of 15 feet above the established grade of either of the intersecting streets. 
(i)  Turning lanes at intersections. Left turning lanes shall be provided on all new internal project streets, classified as a minor collector or major thoroughfare, intersecting a major thoroughfare, and may be required in other locations to meet traffic demand and safe operations. Right turning lanes may be required to meet traffic demands or safety concerns. When provided, turning lanes shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Storage length: A minimum of 150 feet of storage length for turning lanes on any arterial roadway shall be used. A minimum of 100 feet of storage length for turning lanes on all collectors shall be used. 
(2)  Taper length: The minimum taper length shall be 50 feet. 
(3)  Left turning lanes from arterial roads shall be subject to longer storage lengths and tapers an as determined on a case by case basis. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 9, § 9.6, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-220. - Driveway intersections. 
(a)  Angle and improvements. Driveways shall generally intersect streets at right angles. The portion of a driveway located within a public right-of-way shall be paved, if any. Driveways providing access to parking lots which contain six more spaces shall be paved in accordance with the parking lot requirements of the zoning resolution. 
(b)  Driveway design standards. 
(1)  Driveways serving single-family detached or duplex residences may be no less than ten feet wide at the right-of-way line and shall provide a radius to the back of curb or edge of pavement of the roadway of no less than five feet. All other driveway curb cuts on public streets shall conform to the standards shown on the driveway details contained in the standard drawings, by land use type, as follows: 
a.  Driveway Detail 1 (32-foot width, 25-foot radius) for: 
1.  Service stations; 
2.  Commercial sites (over 80,000 square feet); 
3.  Office/institutional complexes (over 100,000 square feet); 
4.  Apartment/condo complexes (over 200 units); and 
5.  Mobile home complexes (over 200 lots). 
b.  Driveway Detail 2 (28-foot width, 25-foot radius) for: 
1.  Commercial sites (80,000 square feet or less); 
2.  Office/institutional complexes (100,000 square feet or less); 
3.  Apartment/condo complexes (200 units or fewer); and 
4.  Mobile home complexes (200 lots or fewer). 
c.  Driveway Detail 3 (32-foot width, 40-foot radius) for: Industrial sites. 
d.  Driveway Detail 4 (optional design with island) for: 
1.  Private commercial/office street entrances; 
2.  Private entrances to apartment/condo complexes (over 200 units); and 
3.  Private entrances to mobile home complexes (over 200 lots). 
(2)  All driveways and driveway curb cuts on state highways shall conform to state DOT standards unless city requirements are more restrictive. 
(c)  Auxiliary lanes. Along any major thoroughfare, a deceleration lane, acceleration lane, larger turning radius, traffic islands, or other devices or designs may be required to avoid specific traffic hazards which would otherwise be created by the proposed driveway location. 
(d)  Corner sight distance. All driveways approaching a minor collector or major thoroughfare shall provide adequate corner sight distance. The minimum corner sight distance from the driveway shall be equal to or exceed ten times the regulated speed of the intersecting street, as measured from the center of the driveway in both directions along the right-of-way line of the intersecting street. As an alternative, the minimum corner sight distance requirement may be calculated using AASHTO "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," Chapter 9 (at-grade intersections), latest edition. The sight distance shall provide clear visibility of an object four feet above the intersecting street viewed from the centerline of the driveway at the right-of-way line of the intersecting street, at a height of 3.5 feet above the ground. 
(e)  Separation and spacing. All driveways except those serving residential units on individual lots shall be recommended to meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Minimum separation from a street intersection: 100 feet from centerline of driveway to nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street, extended. For any driveway on a major thoroughfare having a centerline between 100 feet and 200 feet from the intersecting street right-of-way line, access restriction may be imposed to avoid traffic hazards. Greater separation may be required for safe operation of a free right lane, acceleration or deceleration lane, etc. 
(2)  Minimum separation between driveways along the same side of a major thoroughfare: 100 feet between centerline as measured along the roadway edge or back of curb. 
(3)  Whenever possible, proposed driveways along one side of a street shall coincide with existing or proposed driveways on the opposite side of such street. 
(4)  Maximum number of driveways serving a single project: one for each 400 feet of property frontage, or fraction thereof, per street, along a major thoroughfare. This is not meant to be a spacing standard but only an expression of the total number of driveways that are permitted serving a single project. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 9, § 9.7, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-221. - Stormwater detention guidelines. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Stormwater detention facilities shall be designed so that their peak release rates, when combined with those of all detention bypass areas in the same basin, produce peak flow rates and flow velocities at the site's boundary line no greater than those which occurred at the same location for pre-developed conditions. 
(2)  The positive effects of stormwater management via on-site detention facilities diminish rapidly as the distance downstream from the point of discharge increases, and the smaller the facility's contribution is, as a percentage of the total runoff contributing to downstream flow, the shorter the distance downstream that the benefits are realized. Because of these limitations, on-site detention is effective at controlling flooding only when flow from the facility is a significant percentage of the total flow at the point of interest, and only if the point of interest is immediately downstream. The concepts of immediately downstream and significant percentage of total flow are inseparable. The portion of a receiving watercourse (one which receives and conveys runoff from a site) which lies downstream from the site to the point where the area of the site is ten percent of the total drainage area, shall generally be considered to constitute that portion of the watercourse which is immediately downstream. However, the total flow in the receiving watercourse may become very large, relative to the flow contributed by the site, within a much shorter distance. For this reason, the significant percentage test must also always be applied. For purposes of these regulations, the flow from a site represents a significant percentage of the total flow in a watercourse only when the ratio of the peak flow rate from the site to the peak flow rate in the watercourse (including the contribution from the site) is greater than five percent. 
(3)  Peak flow rate control shall normally be provided only for the two-year, five-year, ten-year, and 25-year frequency storm events. However, under certain conditions, the 100-year event must also be detained to the pre-developed rate. Such control of the 100-year event shall be provided when failure to do so would result in flooding of other habitable dwellings, property damage, or public access and/or utility interruption. 
(4)  For any stormwater analysis, the composite "C" (Rational Method) or CN (SCS Method) used for analysis of pre-development conditions shall not exceed 0.15 or 55, respectively, unless prior approval has been obtained from the department. A pre-design conference between the authorized registered professional and appropriate department personnel, which may in certain straightforward cases be conducted via the telephone, is required. 
(5)  Rational Method runoff coefficients used for analysis of pre- and post-development conditions shall be consistent with those shown in the stormwater design manual. 
(b)  Dam design and construction criteria. 
(1)  Detention facilities which take the form of normally dry basins, ponds, or lakes usually are created by damming a drainage way or watercourse. Such dams can take a variety of different forms, the most common being earthen embankments and reinforced concrete walls. Each type of dam has different characteristics, and the selection of the most appropriate type for a particular site should be made by an authorized registered professional and based on the physical features of the dam site, the purpose of the dam, the type of impoundment, safety, and maintenance requirements. 
(2)  For purposes of these regulations, dams will be addressed separately for each of the three most frequently encountered types of detention facilities: normally dry basins, ponds, and lakes. A normally dry basin is one designed to impound stormwater runoff for only a brief period of time following a storm event. The vast majority of the time the basin will be completely dry except for any normal stream flows which pass through unimpeded. Lakes and ponds, on the other hand, are designed to impound a body of water at least several feet in depth on a more-or-less permanent basis. Lakes and ponds vary from one another only in terms of magnitude. The magnitude of a lake is determined primarily from the height of its dam, the size of its contributing drainage area, and the volume of water it is capable of impounding. For purposes of these regulations, a pond is any lake having a dam height of less than nine feet and which is incapable of impounding more than 20 acre-feet of water. 
(3)  All dam design shall be certified by a professional engineer currently registered in the state. 
(4)  Dams for normally dry detention basins shall conform to the following: 
a.  Dams for normally dry detention basins may be constructed of earth, reinforced concrete, mortared rubble, or other suitable materials. 
b.  The design of any concrete or rubble wall over five feet in height shall be certified by a structural engineer currently registered as a professional engineer in the state, and the structural design shall be based on soil tests certified by a professional engineer. 
c.  Any non-earthen structure shall be designed to prevent piping failure through its subgrade and abutments. 
d.  The construction of walls over five feet in height shall be monitored and approved by a qualified materials testing company. 
e.  Earthen dams for normally dry detention basins shall have a top width of no less than eight feet. 
f.  For earthen dams for normally dry detention basins, there shall be at least 1.5 feet of vertical separation between the 100-year ponding elevation in the basin and the low point on the top of the dam. One foot of this distance is to provide a margin of safety against overtopping of the dam and the other six inches is to allow for settlement. Separation is not required for a non-earthen dam if it has been designed to overtop safely. 
g.  More stringent design and construction criteria shall be used for dams for normally dry detention basins whenever the probable consequences of dam failure are severe. 
(5)  Dams for normally dry ponds shall conform to the following: Any professional engineer responsible for the design of a dam for a pond is expected to be knowledgeable of the criteria contained within the Georgia Safe Dams Act, state department of natural resources "Rules for Dam Safety" publication, and the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service's Technical Release No. 60 "Earth Dams and Reservoirs." The provisions of each are to be applied wherever applicable. Applicability shall be determined based upon site-specific constraints and downstream conditions. Consultation with appropriate department personnel, both prior to and throughout the design process, is encouraged. 
(6)  Dams for lakes shall conform to the following: Any professional engineer responsible for the design of a dam for a lake is expected to be thoroughly familiar with the criteria contained within the Georgia Safe Dams Act, state department of natural resources "Rules for Dam Safety" publication, and the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service's Technical Release No. 60 "Earth Dams and Reservoirs." All design is to be in accordance with the applicable requirements contained in each of the above referenced publications. 
(c)  Detention facility outlet devices. 
(1)  Because of the variables that may be associated with the choice of an outlet device for any given condition, the design consultant is responsible for the selection of the device, subject to the review and approval of the department. 
(2)  The department will include in its consideration the ease of maintenance, longevity of the system, and freedom from congestion, practicality, and aesthetics in its review of the outlet device. The consultant should be guided by the departmental preference of vertical weir designs since they have proven to generally meet most of the considerations expressed herein. 
(3)  Orifices shall not be smaller than three inches in diameter. An orifice smaller than 15 inches in diameter shall be protected by a trash rack. A trash rack protecting an orifice shall have surface area of at least ten square feet. Design shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. No opening in the trash rack shall have an area more than one-half the size of the area of the orifice being protected. Two-stage trash racks, or screens having progressively smaller openings placed in series, are suggested. To facilitate outlet operation, curved or inclined trash racks designed to allow debris to rise with the water level are preferred. In all cases, trash racks shall be either hinged or removable to facilitate maintenance operations. 
(4)  If the primary detention facility outlet is a conduit through a dam, and there is not an orifice, weir-box, or other flow-control device affixed to the upstream end, then the conduit shall be analyzed for both inlet and outlet control conditions. If an orifice or weir-box is affixed, then the conduit shall be analyzed to determine if any flows will occur for which outlet control conditions in the conduit, rather than the hydraulic characteristics of the flow-control structure, will determine the total flows occurring. In any case where the conduit through the dam is less than 15 inches in diameter, the trash rack provisions of subsection (c)(3) of this section shall be followed. 
(5)  Unless the 100-year maximum flow velocity in a conduit through a dam forming a pond or a lake is less than ten feet per second, and the hydraulic grade line for the 100-year condition is at or below the crown of the conduit for at least 90 percent of its length, the conduit must be equal or superior to Class V reinforced concrete pipe in its structural characteristics. 
(d)  Emergency overflow requirements. 
(1)  For every type of detention facility, a planned safe flow path must be provided for conveyance of flows of water in excess of those for which the detention facility was designed. In many instances, this function can be provided through installation of an emergency spillway. Emergency spillways are usually excavated open channels, either vegetated or paved with reinforced concrete. 
(2)  Every earthen dam shall be provided with an open-channel emergency spillway, unless all of the following apply: 
a.  The principal spillway is a closed conduit having a cross-sectional area that can pass 125 percent of the 100-year storm routed peak discharge. 
b.  The principal spillway is a closed conduit having a cross-sectional are of at least one square foot per each three acres of drainage area, or a maximum of 20 square feet of surface area, whichever is less. 
c.  The principal spillway capacity is at least equal to the capacity required for an open channel emergency spillway. 
d.  The low point of the dam crest is not in a fill section except for roadway embankments. 
e.  A trash rack or other debris protection is provided on the outlet control. 
(3)  Any portion of any emergency spillway excavated into a dam embankment or other fill section must be paved. Pavement material shall be either reinforced concrete or asphalt, as dictated by the design life of the dam and the potential consequences of its failure. Any portion of any emergency spillway excavated into natural ground shall be vegetated in accordance with the practices described in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(4)  In determining the necessary dimensions of an open-channel spillway for a normally dry basin, a pond, or a lake, the methodology contained in the Earth Emergency Spillway Design Data section of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia should be used. 
(5)  Emergency spillway capacity for dams shall be as follows: 
a.  For normally dry detention basins, ponds, and lakes, having a dam height of less than nine feet and which are incapable of impounding more than 20 acre-feet of water, and for which the probable sequences of dam failure are not severe, an emergency spillway should be provided. Its capacity should be at least equal to the routed 100-year peak flow out of the detention facility assuming the principal spillway is blocked. 
b.  For normally dry detention basins, ponds, and lakes, having a dam height of nine feet or more and which are capable of impounding 20 acre-feet or more of water, an emergency spillway should be provided. Its capacity should be at least equal to the greater of either the routed 100-year peak flow rate out of the facility assuming the principal spillway is blocked, or the routed one-fourth PMF hydrograph out of the facility. In cases when state or federal regulations may require greater spillway capacity, those more stringent regulations shall govern. 
(6)  Emergency overflow for non-earthen dams may take the form of planned structure overtopping. In such cases, however, care must be taken to prevent flows from eroding supporting soils along the toe of or immediately downstream from the dam so as the cause it to be undermined. The profile of the top of the dam shall be so designed as to prevent flows along the ends of the structure that might result in abutment erosion. 
(e)  Parking lot detention facilities. 
(1)  Parking lot detention facilities shall generally be of one of the two following types: 
a.  Depressed areas of pavement at drop inlet locations; and 
b.  Ponding areas along sections of raised curbing. The curbing in these areas is usually higher than a standard curbed section. 
(2)  The detention methodology utilized for all parking lot detention facility design shall conform to the stormwater design manual. 
(3)  Parking lot detention areas shall be located so as to restrict ponding to areas other than parking spaces near buildings, and to not encroach upon entrance drives. 
(4)  The maximum depth of detention ponding in a parking lot, except at a flow control structure, shall be six inches for a ten-year storm, and nine inches for a 100-year storm. The maximum depth of ponding at a flow control structure shall be 12 inches for a 100-year storm. 
(5)  In truck parking areas, the maximum depth of ponding shall be 12 inches for the ten-year storm. 
(6)  Detention ponding areas are to be drained within 30 minutes after the peak inflow occurs. 
(7)  Parking lot detention areas shall have a minimum surface slope of one percent, and a maximum slope of five percent. 
(f)  Underground and rooftop detention facilities. The design of underground or rooftop detention facilities shall be in accordance with current engineering standard practice, and shall conform to the general spirit and intent of this article. In the case of rooftop detention, permissible structural loads and weatherproofing shall be governed by the state building code as may be amended by the city. 
(g)  Sediment basins. 
(1)  Stormwater management and sediment trapping functions should be separated whenever possible. Every erosion control design should seek to: first, prevent erosion from occurring; second, trap sediments as close to their sources as possible, and third, provide a second-tier or backup line of defense against sediments leaving the project site. This backup defense will usually consist of check dams/and or sediment basins. 
(2)  Whenever a sediment basin and a detention facility are both required on the same watercourse, the sediment basin should be located immediately upstream of the detention facility. 
(3)  In unusual cases where a normally dry detention basin is planned to be used to trap sediment as well as provide stormwater control, the basin may be undercut to accommodate the sediment so that the required detention characteristics, particularly volume, will be maintained. 
(4)  The design of sediment basins shall be in accordance with Appendix C of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(h)  Ponds and lakes not used for detention. In such cases where a pond or lake is provided as part of a development, but is not planned to function as a stormwater detention facility, the same general and specific criteria contained in these regulations shall apply, but may be modified in instance where a specific requirement is clearly detention-oriented rather than safety-based. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 9, § 9.8, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-222. - Culverts and pipe collection system guidelines. 
(a)  Culverts. 
(1)  Single barrel or single cell culvert structures are less prone to clogging and require less maintenance than multi-barrel or multi-cell installations and should therefore be used whenever feasible. 
(2)  The maximum velocity in a corrugated metal culvert for the 100-year flow shall be 15 fps (feet per second). Velocities over ten fps in a pipe of any material shall be considered a special design with particular attention required to pipe or structure invert protection and to fill slope, stream bed, and stream bank stability. 
(3)  The minimum allowable slope shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(b)  Pipe collection systems. 
(1)  The maximum velocity in a corrugated metal pipe system for the design flow shall be 15 fps. Velocities over ten fps in a pipe of any material shall be considered a special design with particular attention required to pipe invert protection and the ability of the receiving waterway or detention facility to accept the flow without damage. 
(2)  The minimum allowable slope shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(3)  The maximum allowable slope for a concrete storm drainage pipe shall be ten percent, for a corrugated metal pipe shall be 14 percent, and for a HDPE pipe shall be 14 percent. Greater slopes may be approved if installation is in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. In cases where the slope is in excess of ten percent, anchor collars may be required. 
(4)  A minimum pipe cover of one foot shall be required. 
(c)  Outlet location; culverts and pipe systems. 
(1)  Outlet structures, such as headwalls, shall not be located closer to the project site's property line with an adjoining property than the greater of the distance necessary to construct any velocity protection or a flow distance equal to six pipe diameters. For non-circular conduits, this distance shall be six times the rise dimension of the conduit. 
(2)  The invert elevation of a culvert or pipe outlet shall be no more than two feet above the elevation of the bottom of the receiving watercourse at the outlet. 
(d)  Energy dissipation. The maximum developed condition flow velocity at the project site's downstream property line with an adjoining tract shall not exceed the maximum pre-developed condition velocity. Calculations may be required to support this velocity standard on a case-by-case basis. 
(e)  Discharge of concentrated flows. 
(1)  The discharge of concentrated flows of stormwater into public roadways shall be avoided. In no case shall such concentrated flows, including flows from swales, ditches, draws, driveways, or piped systems, exceed the allowable peak flow rates in Table 9-G, below. 
Table 9-G Maximum Flows into Streets 

 
(2)  In residential subdivisions, the drainage area contributing to the peak flow along any property line between lots within 50 feet of the building setback line for either lot shall not exceed two acres, unless contained within a piped drainage system or maintained in a natural watercourse. The stormwater conveyance shall be in a drainage easement. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 9, § 9.9, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 34-223—34-252. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PLAN AND PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 34-253. - Concept plan specifications. 
The following subsections outline the required elements of both the required and optional plans and plats mentioned throughout these regulations, and especially in articles III and X of this chapter. 
(1)  Size. The concept plan for a subdivision or site development shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. Sheet size shall not exceed 48 inches by 36 inches; provided, however, a scale of 200 feet to one inch may be used to avoid sheets in excess of 48 inches by 36 inches. The director may approve other scales and sheet sizes as deemed appropriate. 
(2)  Freehand drawing (approximate scale). The concept plan may be prepared as a free hand drawing to approximate scale of the proposed improvements, rights-of-way, lot lines, etc., shown on a boundary survey or other property outline map of the property. 
(3)  List of what is required to be shown. The concept plan shall contain the following: 
a.  Approximate total acreage. 
b.  Proposed total number of lots and minimum lot size. 
c.  Size and location of adjoining existing streets or access drives and proposed rights-of-way, roadways, and access drives. 
d.  For multifamily and nonresidential site developments (not subdivisions), the approximate location and arrangement of buildings, parking areas, and other improvements, including stormwater detention areas, and all required buffers. 
e.  Topography with contour intervals no greater than ten feet. 
f.  Proposed method of sewage disposal (expressed as a note). 
g.  Boundary lines of the overall property showing bearings and distances along all lines and the bearings and distance to an existing street intersection or other recognized permanent landmark. The source of said boundary information shall be indicated. 
h.  All contiguous property under the ownership or control of the developer, except those lands of a dissimilar zoning category specifically approved to be excluded by the department. Areas not planned at the time of the submittal shall be shown as "future development." 
i.  Authorization statement on concept plan to read as follows: 
I hereby submit this concept plan as authorized agent/owner of all property shown thereon, and certify that all contiguous property under my ownership or control is included within the boundaries of this concept plan, as required by the Development Regulations. 

 
j.  Location sketch (vicinity map). 
k.  Location and size (in acres) of lakes, ponds, wetlands and floodplains and the source of the information. 
l.  Required recreation areas, and other public areas to be dedicated to the public or held in common ownership by a homeowner's association or other similar entity. 
m.  Existing zoning of the property and adjoining properties. 
n.  Land lot and district. 
o.  Subdivider's name, local, and permanent (if different) address and phone number. 
p.  Name of company or person who prepared plan, local and permanent River Tributary Protection Areas, if applicable to the property. 
q.  Boundaries of the Chattahoochee River Corridor and Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Areas, if applicable to the property. 
r.  General development data (in tabular form) for individual multifamily or nonresidential site developments, such as number of residential units, number of gross square feet of nonresidential floor area by building, number of parking spaces, number of stories, etc. 
s.  General development data (in tabular form) for single-family developments, such as minimum lot size, floor area, and all relevant conditions of zoning. 
t.  Signature block to read as follows: 
This Concept Plan has been reviewed and approved for general compliance with the Zoning Resolution and Development Regulations of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 

 
(4)  Concept plans for developments in a Mixed-Use Redevelopment (MUR) Overlay District. Concept plans for developments in a MUR Overlay District must be prepared by authorized registered professionals, planners, and/or architects. A concept plan without all required plan elements shall not be accepted for plan review processing. In addition to the items required for concept plans contained in this section, concept plans in a MUR Overlay District shall contain additional information and plan elements as follows: 
a.  Location, footprint, number of residential units, nonresidential floor space, and stories for non-single-family residential structures. 
b.  Proposed street networks, including street cross sections indicating conformance with MUR Overlay District design standards. 
c.  Location and size (in acres and square feet) of uses and pods, including number of units and/or amount of square feet of each use and pod. 
d.  Location and size (in acres and square feet) of plaza, common areas, parks, recreation areas and similar amenity areas. 
e.  Location of greenways, paths, bike routes, etc., both on-site and within 1,000 feet of the project boundary that will be used to promote connectivity. 
f.  Location of stormwater management facilities and BMPs. If these facilities are proposed for inclusion in required common area calculations, detailed design plans of these facilities shall be required. 
g.  Location of proposed landscaped areas and features. 
h.  Proposed phases or stages of development. 
i.  Location of off-street and on-street parking areas and detail drawings of any required decorative fencing or screening. 
j.  Location of transit stops and/or features to be used for public transit. The plan designer shall incorporate transit stops and options into the plan design subject to coordination with the department of transportation. 
k.  A pedestrian access plan (subject to the review and approval by the director) that shall indicate the location of, and connectivity between and among, sidewalks, paths, trails and bike routes. The plan shall also include provisions and details for bike racks, street furniture and directional signage. 
l.  A street and pedestrian lighting plan (subject to the review and approval by the director) that shall include the location and details of lighting fixtures. 
m.  An architectural design plan, subject to the review and approval by the director, that shall include building elevations for each use type and including decorative elements for such items as fountains, street furniture, outdoor restaurant seating, etc. 
n.  A unified signage plan (subject to the review and approval by the director) that shall include typical sign locations, elevations, and construction materials for all signage. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 10, § 10.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-254. - Subdivision development plans. 
(a)  What consists of a development permit for a subdivision. An application for a development permit for a subdivision shall consist of the preliminary plat, a certified boundary survey, associated slope or construction easements (if any), and such other development plans as may be required by these regulations. 
(b)  Conformation to concept plan. The development plans shall generally conform to the concept plan, if any, and may constitute only that portion of the approved concept plan which the subdivider proposes to construct at one time as a single unit, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of these rules and regulations. If no concept plan was approved on the property, the development plans shall include the entire property being developed within the same zoning category. 
(c)  Scale. The development plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. Sheet size shall not exceed 48 inches by 36 inches. Plan and profile sheets shall have a horizontal scale of no less than 100 feet to one inch and a vertical scale of no less than ten feet to one inch. 
(d)  Certified boundary survey. 
(1)  The preliminary plat shall be based on a certified boundary survey delineating the entirety of the property contained within the preliminary plat, and tied to a point of reference (tie point) with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary survey itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than one in 10,000, and shall meet all requirements of state law regarding the recording of maps and plats. 
(2)  Each preliminary plat shall be drawn on, accompanied by, or referenced to a boundary survey which shall at least meet the requirements of subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(e)  List of what is required to be shown. The preliminary plat shall contain the following: 
(1)  Proposed name of subdivision. 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of record, and of the subdivider (if not the owner). 
(3)  Name, address, and telephone number of each professional firm associated with the development plans (engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, etc.). 
(4)  Date of survey, north point, and graphic scale, source of vertical datum, date of plat drawing, and space for revision dates. 
(5)  Proposed use of the site, such as single-family detached residences, duplexes, townhouses, office park, industrial subdivision, etc. For residential, indicate total number of dwelling units within plat. 
(6)  Location (land district and land lot), acreage, and density (if applicable). 
(7)  Location sketch locating the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks, such as major thoroughfares or railroads. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
(8)  Name of former subdivision if any or all of the land in the preliminary plat has been previously subdivided, showing boundaries of same. 
(9)  Boundary lines of the perimeter of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths in feet and hundredths of a foot, and bearings in degrees, minutes, and seconds. Bearing and distance to designated tie point. 
(10)  Directional flow arrows for street drainage and individual lot drainage when finished grading of lots is not shown. 
(11)  Contour lines based on sea level datum, or other datum acceptable to the department. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet. Contour lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs. The basis for the topographic contour shown shall be specified and dated. 
(12)  Natural features within the proposed subdivision, including drainage channels, bodies of water, and other known significant features, such as extensive exposed rock. On all water courses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year floodplain shall be outlined and the source of the depicted floodplain information shall be indicated. For those lots containing floodplain, a floodplain lot chart shall be provided showing the area (in square feet) of each lot lying inside and outside of the floodplain as though the land disturbance activity were completed. 
(13)  Manmade and cultural features existing within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision, including existing right-of-way measured from centerline, pavements widths, and names of existing and platted streets; all easements, city, and city jurisdiction lines; existing structures on the site and their disposition, Chattahoochee River Corridor information and limits of Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Area (if applicable), and other significant information. Location and dimensions of existing bridges; water, sewer, and other existing utility lines and structures; culverts and other existing features should be indicated. 
(14)  Proposed layout, including lot lines, lot numbers, and block letters; proposed street names, roadway and right-of-way lines; and sites reserved through covenants, easement, dedication, or otherwise for public uses. Lots shall be numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
(15)  The minimum building setback line from all streets. Streets shall be dimensioned to show right-of-way and roadway widths, central angles, intersection radii, and cul-de-sac roadway and right-of-way radii. Centerline curve data shall be provided for all roadway curves (radius, length, amount of superelevation (if any), point of curvature (P.C.), point of tangency (P.T.), etc.), if not shown separately on construction drawings. 
(16)  Identify unit number, division, or stage of development, if any, as proposed by the subdivider. 
(17)  Existing zoning of the property. Rezoning and variance case numbers, dates of approval and conditions (as applicable). Note minimum lot size and minimum yard setback requirements, and other applicable zoning requirements. Show and dimension any required buffers, landscape strips, no-access easements, etc. Note any approved waivers from these regulations. 
(18)  All adjoining property owners, subdivision names, lot numbers and lot lines, block letters, and zoning. 
(19)  Location of all known existing or previously existing landfills. 
(20)  Proposed recreation area, if any; area of the site; area and percent of site within the 100-year floodplain; proposed disposition of the site (public ownership, homeowners association, etc.). 
(21)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate evaluation of the subdivision. 
(f)  Certificate of development plans approval. Each preliminary plat shall carry the following certificate printed or stamped thereon: 
All requirements of the Peachtree Corners Development Regulations relative to the preparation and submission of a subdivision development permit application having been fulfilled, and said application and all supporting plans and data having been reviewed and approved by all affected City Departments as required under their respective and applicable regulations, approval is hereby granted, on this Preliminary Plat and all other development plans associated with this subdivision, subject to all further provisions of said Development and other City existing Regulations. 

 
THIS CERTIFICATE EXPIRES TWELVE MONTHS FROM THE DATE OF APPROVAL UNLESS A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT IS ISSUED. 
Note: The boundaries of the lots shown on this Plat have not been surveyed. This Plat is not for recording. 
(g)  Other development plans to accompany preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by other development plans showing the following information when same is not shown on, or evident from, the preliminary plat. The various plans may be combined where appropriate and clarity can be maintained. 
(1)  Erosion control plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of the soil erosion and sediment control ordinance. Erosion control measures may be shown on the grading plan, if desired. 
(2)  Grading plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of article VII of this chapter if grading is proposed beyond the street right-of-way. 
(3)  Stormwater drainage construction data. 
a.  Location and size of all proposed drainage structures, including detention ponds, catchbasins, grates, headwalls, pipes and any extensions thereof, energy dissipators, improved channels, and all proposed drainage easements to be located outside street right-of-way lines. 
b.  Profiles of all storm drainage pipes and slope of receiving channels. On storm drainage profiles, a pipe chart will be shown which will include pipe numbers, pipe size, pipe material, pipe slope, pipe length, contributing drainage area, design flow, design storm frequency, runoff coefficient and velocity. The hydraulic grade line will be shown on all pipes for the required design flow. 
c.  Profiles of all open channels and ditches, including Manning's 25-year storm normal depth and velocity. On storm drainage profiles, an open channel chart will be shown which will include open channel numbers, conveyance size, lining material, length, channel slope, contributing drainage area, design storm frequency, runoff coefficient and velocity. 
d.  Hydrological study used in determining size of structures, including map of all contributing drainage basins and acreage. 
(4)  If sanitary sewers are required by water pollution control, sanitary sewer plans, including the location and size of all proposed sewer lines, manholes, and any easements required therefore, together with sufficient dimensions to locate same on the ground. 
(5)  Construction data for new streets and street widenings. 
a.  Centerline profiles and typical roadway sections of all proposed streets, as well as plans and profiles for all proposed major thoroughfares. Typical roadway sections shall be provided for street widenings. 
b.  Where sanitary or storm sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade; size, location, and bedding class of pipe; location and invert elevation of manholes shall be indicated on the road profile. 
c.  Profiles covering roadways that are extensions of existing roadways shall include elevations at 50 foot intervals for such distance as may be adequate to provide continuity consistent with the standards required by the regulations for street improvements, but no less than 200 feet. 
d.  All elevations shall be coordinated and tied into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey or Department of Transportation bench marks, where feasible, or into reference monuments established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
e.  Stub streets shall be profiled at least 200 feet onto adjoining property (no tree cutting). 
(6)  Buffer and landscape plan, if any such areas exist within the subdivision, prepared in accordance with the specifications under this article, the requirements of article IV of this chapter, and the requirements of the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance. 
(7)  Tree preservation/replacement plan (if required by the tree protection ordinance). 
(8)  Floodplain management plans. If any floodplain areas are located on the property, such data as is required by the floodplain management ordinance of these regulations shall be submitted. 
(h)  Encroachments. Where construction is proposed on adjacent property, an encroachment agreement or easement shall be submitted to the department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 10, § 10.2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-255. - Final plat specifications. 
(a)  Size. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black ink on tracing cloth or other permanent reproducible material. The scale of the final plat shall be 100 feet to one inch (one inch equals 100 feet) or larger. Sheet size shall not exceed 48 inches by 36 inches. (Any sheet that is larger than 17 inches by 22 inches must be photographically reduced to no more than 17 inches by 22 inches in order to be recorded with the clerk of the superior court.) 
(b)  Certified boundary survey. The final plat shall be based on a certified boundary survey delineating the entirety of the property contained within the final plat, and tied to a point of reference (tie point) with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary survey itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than one in 10,000, and shall meet all requirements of state law regarding the recording of maps and plats. 
(c)  Conformity to preliminary plat. The final plat shall substantially conform to the preliminary plat and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of these regulations, and said portion is not inconsistent with the public health, safety, or welfare. Any substantial deviation from the preliminary plat shall require revision and re-approval of the preliminary plat. 
(d)  List of what is required to be shown. The final plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of the subdivision, unit number, land district, and land lot number. 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of owner of record and the subdivider (if not the owner). 
(3)  Name, address, and telephone number of each professional firm associated with the portion of the subdivision within the final plat (engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, etc.). 
(4)  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point; notation as to the reference of bearings to magnetic, true north or grid north, and indication whether bearings shown are calculated from angles turned. 
(5)  Location sketch of tract showing major surrounding features. 
(6)  Name of former subdivision, if any or all of the final plat has been previously recorded. 
(7)  Case number and date of approval for any applicable rezoning, special use permit, variance or waiver affecting the property. 
(8)  Location and dimension of any buffer, landscape strip, special setback, no-access easement, etc., required by the zoning resolution or these regulations. 
(9)  Boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line, giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth foot and bearings to the nearest second. Bearing and distance to designated tie point shall be shown. The plat shall have a closure precision of one foot in no less than 10,000 feet. 
(10)  Municipal or city jurisdictional lines approximately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or adjoin the subdivision; land lot lines traversing or adjoining the subdivision shall also be indicated. 
(11)  Locations, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat, the location and widths of all internal public crosswalks, and all other public rights-of-way. 
(12)  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data, including radii, length of arcs and tangents between curves, point of curvature (PC) and point of tangency (PT). 
(13)  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and bearings to the nearest second, and radii of rounded corners, as necessary to delimit each lot. 
(14)  Building setback lines along streets with dimensions. 
(15)  When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than 90 degrees, the lot width measured in accordance with the provisions of the zoning resolution may be required to be shown, if deemed necessary by the department for clarity. 
(16)  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
(17)  Location and size of all drainage pipe, location and extent of detention ponds, the location and size of all public water mains and fire hydrants, and the location, dimensions, and purpose of any easements, including construction or slope easements, if required. 
(18)  Location of any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use with notes stating their purpose and limitations. Location of any areas to be reserved by private deed covenant for common use of all property owners, or dedicated to a homeowner's association. 
(19)  A statement of private covenants, if any, and they are brief enough to be put directly on the plat; otherwise, if covenants are separately recorded, a statement as follows: 
This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto dated ________, which hereby become a part of this plat, and which were recorded ___________ and signed by the owner. 
(20)  Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers (all monuments shall be in place prior to approval of the final plat.) 
(21)  Certificates and statements specified in these regulations, below. 
(22)  All information required under the Georgia Metropolitan River Protection Act for recording of plats, if applicable. 
(23)  Extent of the 100-year floodplain and a floodplain chart showing the area within and outside the floodplain for each lot containing any portion of the 100-year floodplain. Origin of the floodplain data shall be indicated. 
(24)  Street address numbers and block number designations for street name signs on abutting streets, where appropriate. 
(25)  Individual lots shall be designated HLP (house location plan), RDP (residential drainage plan) and/or RDS (residential drainage study) if such are required by the department to be approved prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(26)  All other notes or notations as may be required by the department. 
(e)  Warranty deed. If any lands are shown as the final plat for dedication to the city other than street rights-of-way or easements, a warranty deed transferring title to said land in fee simple, in a form acceptable to the director, shall be submitted with the final plat application. 
(f)  Property owner's association. If any lands are shown on the final plat for dedication to a property owner's association in order to meet minimum park or open space requirements of these regulations, a copy of the deed of transfer for such dedication and a copy of the instrument of incorporation of the property owner's association shall be submitted with the final plat application. 
(g)  Certificates. Each final plat shall bear the following certificates or statements printed or stamped thereon as follows: 
(1)  Final registered land surveyor's certificate. 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct as to the property lines and all improvements shown thereon, and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist, and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown. The field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in _____ feet and an angular error of _______ per angle point, and was adjusted using _______ rule. This plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in _____ feet, and contains a total of _____ acres. The equipment used to obtain the linear and angular measurements herein was ________. 

 
REG NO _____ 
DATE OF EXPIRATION _______ 
(2)  Owners acknowledgment and declaration. 
STATE OF GEORGIA, CITY OF GWINNETT 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and dedicates by this Acknowledgement and Declaration to the use of the public forever all streets, sewer collectors, lift stations, drains, easements, and other public facilities and appurtenances thereon shown. 

 
(3)  Final plat approval. 
The Director of the Department of Planning & Development certifies that this plat complies with the Zoning Resolution and the Development Regulations, and that it has been approved by all other operational City departments, as appropriate. This plat is approved subject to the provisions and requirements of the Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement executed for this project between the Owner and Peachtree Corners. 
DATED THIS _____ DAY OF _______, 20___. 

 
(4)  Environmental health department certification (for subdivisions served by septic tanks). 
The lots shown hereon have been reviewed by the Environmental Health Department and with the exception of lots ________ are approved for development. Each lot is to be reviewed by the Environmental Health Department and approved for septic tank installation prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
DATED THIS _____ DAY OF _______, 20___. 

 
(5)  Public notice - drainage. 
a.  Every residential final plat shall contain the following statements: 
1.  NOTE: Peachtree Corners assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way, or for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded subdivision plat. 
2.  NOTE: Stream buffer easements are to remain in a natural and undisturbed condition. 
3.  NOTE: Structures are not allowed in drainage easements. 
b.  Every nonresidential final plat shall contain the following statement: 
1.  NOTE: Peachtree Corners assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way, or for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded subdivision plat. Peachtree Corners does not assume the responsibility for the maintenance of pipes in drainage easements beyond the city right-of-way. 
2.  NOTE: Stream buffer easements are to remain in a natural and undisturbed condition. 
3.  NOTE: Structures are not allowed in drainage easements. 
(6)  R-ZT and R-TH fee-simple layout plan. Every final plat for a subdivision zoned R-ZT or R-TH and proposing single-family detached houses on fee-simple ownership lots shall contain the following statement: 
NOTE: Lot layout plan is required on each lot to be approved by the Department prior to a building permit being issued. This lot layout plan must be drawn to scale on a copy of a certified boundary survey of the lot. It must show all proposed improvements and easements on the lot and must indicate compliance with the requirements of the Zoning Resolution or conditions of zoning approval. It shall be the builder's responsibility to ensure that the house is staked out on the site to match the approved lot layout plan. 
(7)  House location plans (HLP). On any final plat containing a lot for which a house location plan approval will first be required prior to issuance of a building permit, the following statement shall be included: 
HLP - HOUSE LOCATION PLAN 
A House Location Plan shall be required to be approved by the Department prior to issuance of a Building Permit on those lots labeled "HLP". A House Location Plan is a scale drawing submitted by the builder at the time of permit. It is not required that this plan be prepared by an authorized registered professional. The purpose of this plan is to ensure that the house is properly located on the lot. Please refer to the Peachtree Corners Development Regulations or contact the Peachtree Corners Department of Planning and Development for further information. 
(8)  Residential drainage plan (RDP) or study (RDS). On any final plat containing a lot for which a residential drainage plan (RDP) or residential drainage study (RDS) will first be required prior to issuance of a building permit, the following statement shall be included, as applicable: 
RDP - RESIDENTIAL DRAINAGE PLAN 
RDS - RESIDENTIAL DRAINAGE STUDY 
A Residential Drainage Plan or Residential Drainage Study must be approved by the Storm Water Management Division of the Department of Public Utilities prior to issuance of a Building Permit on those lots labeled "RDP" or "RDS", respectively. Please refer to the Development Regulations and contact the Department of Public Utilities for further information. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 10, § 10.3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-256. - House location plan (HLP). 
(a)  Size and description. House location plans shall be drawn to scale and may be shown on a certified boundary survey of the lot or any other drawing showing the information required below. The department may accept a house location plan drawn to the same scale as shown on the final plat where sufficient detail can be shown to support an adequate review and approval. The house location plan may be combined with a residential drainage plan (RDP) if an RDP is required for the lot. 
(b)  May be drawn by an individual. It is not the intent of the department that the house location plan be prepared by an authorized registered professional but may be done by the individual proposing the improvements on the lot. It is the intent, however, to receive a drawing with sufficient readability and accuracy to ensure that the proposed improvements will be constructed on the lot in conformance with the requirements of these regulations, the zoning resolution, or other regulations, as applicable. 
(c)  List of what is to be shown. House location plans shall show the following as applicable: 
(1)  Boundary lines of the lot, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and bearings to the nearest minute. 
(2)  Location and names of all abutting streets or other rights-of-way. 
(3)  Minimum required front, side and rear building setback lines with dimensions, and notation of the existing zoning on the property. 
(4)  The approximate outline of all buildings, driveways, parking areas, swimming pools, recreational courts, patios, accessory structures and other improvements existing or proposed on the property, and dimensions of buildings and distances between all structures and the nearest property lines. 
(5)  All easements, public water, sewer or storm drainage facilities traversing or located on the property, septic tank, and septic tank drain field. 
(6)  Subdivision name, lot designation, land lot, and district. 
(7)  North arrow and scale. 
(8)  Limit of the 100-year floodplain and any applicable buffers or special building setback lines. 
(9)  If the lot is located within the Chattahoochee River Corridor, the location of each area by vulnerability category and calculations of impervious surface and clearance by category, or other such data in accordance with the certification for the subdivision approved under the Metropolitan River Protection Act. Show also any buffer or setback required by the Metropolitan River Protection Act. 
(10)  All other applicable requirements of the zoning resolution or conditions of zoning approval. 
(11)  Name, address, and telephone number of the owner and the person who prepared the HLP. 
(d)  Certificate of occupancy. If a lot is located in the Chattahoochee River Corridor, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for the structure or other improvements until conformance to the provisions or other requirements of the house location plan have been field verified by a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor and submitted to the department of planning and development. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 10, § 10.4, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-257. - Residential drainage plan (RDP) or study (RDS). 
(a)  Certified boundary survey required. Residential drainage plans shall be drawn to scale on a certified boundary survey of the lot prepared by a registered land surveyor. The residential drainage plan may be combined with a house location plan (HLP) if an HLP is required for the lot. The requirements contained herein shall also apply to lots which formerly required SPED (Site Plan - Engineering Division) approval prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  List of what is required to be shown. Residential drainage plans shall show the following as applicable: 
(1)  Boundary lines of the lot, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and bearings to the nearest minute. 
(2)  Location and names of all abutting streets or other rights-of-way. 
(3)  The outline of all buildings, driveways, parking areas, swimming pools, recreational courts, patios, accessory structures and other improvements existing or proposed on the property, and dimensions of buildings and distances between all structures and the nearest property lines as required to locate the major improvements on the lot. 
(4)  All easements, public water or sewer facilities traversing or located on the property, and septic tank drain field. 
(5)  Subdivision name, lot designation, land lot, and district. 
(6)  North arrow and scale. 
(7)  Contour lines based on sea level datum. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet, and shall be based on a field survey. Proposed grading of the lot shall be shown along with the finished floor elevation of the lowest habitable floor of the house. 
(8)  Stormwater features, including swales, pipes, stormwater detention and other structures, all drainage (DE) easements, and directions of flow. 
(9)  Floodplain features, including the limits of the flood hazard area, 100-year flood high water elevation, origin of the floodplain data, and any proposed modifications to the floodplain limits. 
(10)  Sedimentation and erosion control measures to be taken or placed on the lot during construction. 
(11)  Names, address, and telephone number of the owner and person who prepared the RDP. 
(12)  Seal, registration number, and date of expiration of the authorized registered professional who prepared the drainage improvements or modifications shown on the RDP. 
(c)  Residential drainage study (RDS). A residential drainage study (RDS) shall be conducted by the developer's or builder's authorized registered professional prior to issuance of a Certificate of occupancy on those lots so noted on the final plat. The requirements for a RDS contained herein shall also apply to lots that formerly required SSED (Site Study - Engineering Division) approval prior to issuance of a building permit. The grading and construction of the lot shall be field verified by the developer's or builder's authorized registered professional as being in conformance with grading plans and stormwater management studies approved for the subdivision prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  Certificate of occupancy; conditions. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for the structure until a written certification has been received from the developer's or the builder's authorized registered professional stating that the provisions or improvements required by the residential drainage plan or as a result of the residential drainage study have been field verified. 
(e)  Certificate; department approval. If a RDP or RDS is required because a stream or floodplain is on or adjacent to the lot, the notation on the development plans and plat should be "RDP-E" or "RDS-E," as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 10, § 10.5, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-258. - Site development plans. 
(a)  What a development permit for a site plan consists of. An application for a development permit for a multifamily or nonresidential site shall consist of the site plan, a certified boundary survey or final plat reference, associated slope or construction easements, if any, and such other development plans as may be required by these regulations. 
(b)  Conformation to concept plan. The development plans shall generally conform to the concept plan, if any, and may constitute only that portion of the approved concept plan which the developer proposed to construct at one time as a single unit, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of these rules and regulations and all setbacks, maximum density, and other zoning restrictions. If no concept plan was approved on the property, the development plans shall include the entire property being developed having the same zoning category. 
(c)  Scale. The development plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn at an engineering scale convenient to illustrate the details of the project. Sheet size shall not exceed 48 inches by 36 inches. Plan and profile sheets, if any, shall have a horizontal scale of no less than 100 feet to one inch and a vertical scale of no less than ten feet to one inch. 
(d)  Project boundary data. 
(1)  The site plan shall be based on the boundaries of a lot as recorded on a final subdivision plat or on a certified boundary survey delineating the entirety of the property contained within the project, and tied to a point of reference (tie point) with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary survey itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than one in 10,000, and shall meet all requirements of state law regarding the recording of maps and plats. 
(2)  Each site plan shall be drawn on, accompanied by, or referenced to a boundary survey which shall at least meet the requirements of subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(e)  List of what is required to be shown. The site plan shall contain the following (on one or more sheets): 
(1)  Proposed name of development. If the project is located within a subdivision, the name of the subdivision, lot, and block number must also be shown. 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of record, and of the developer (if not the owner). 
(3)  Name, address, and telephone number of each professional firm associated with the development plans (engineer, landscape architect, etc.). 
(4)  Date of survey, north point, and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and space for revision dates. 
(5)  Proposed use of the site, including gross square footage for each different use type or building. 
(6)  Location (land district and land lot), acreage or area in square feet, and density (if applicable). 
(7)  Location sketch locating the development in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks, such as major thoroughfares or railroads. Sketches may be drawn in free-hand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
(8)  Size and location of all buildings, building setback lines, minimum yard lines, and distances between buildings and from buildings to property lines; location of outdoor storage areas; parking and loading areas, driveways, curb cuts and designated fire lanes. Each building shall be identified with a number or letter. 
(9)  Boundary lines of the perimeter of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and bearings to the nearest second. Bearing and distance to designated tie point. 
(10)  Directional flow arrows for street drainage. 
(11)  Contour lines based on sea level datum. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet and shall include the entire site and all abutting public streets. Contour lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs. The basis for the topographic contour shown shall be specified and dated. 
(12)  Natural features within the proposed development, including drainage channels, bodies of water, and other known significant features, such as extensive exposed rock. On all water courses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year floodplain shall be outlined and the source of the depicted floodplain information shall be indicated. The acreage or area in square feet within the floodplain shall be indicated. 
(13)  Manmade and cultural features existing within and adjacent to the proposed development, including existing right-of-way measured from centerline, pavement widths, and names of jurisdiction lines; existing structures on the site and their disposition, Chattahoochee River Corridor information and Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection Areas (if applicable), and other significant information. Location and dimensions of existing bridges; water, sewer, and other existing utility lines and structures; culverts and other existing features should be indicated. 
(14)  Proposed street names, roadway and right-of-way lines and widths and sites reserved through covenants, easement, dedication or otherwise for public uses. 
(15)  Identify unit number, division or stage of development, if any, as proposed by the developer. 
(16)  Show all adjoining property owners, subdivision names, lot numbers, lot lines and block letters, and zoning. 
(17)  Show the location and number of parking spaces according to the size of the building on the plans. Show factors used in determining number of spaces as required in the zoning resolution. Handicapped parking spaces must be shown as required by the state handicap law. 
(18)  Zoning district rezoning case number, date of approval and conditions (as applicable). Variances obtained on the property should be shown with the case number, date of approval and conditions, if applicable. Note any approved waivers from these regulations. 
(19)  If buffers or other landscaping or screening treatments are required, show the location, size, and type (natural or planted) on the plans conforming to the tree preservation/replacement plan or buffer and landscape plan, as applicable. 
(20)  Location, height, and size of all freestanding signs to be erected on the site, and indication whether lighted or unlighted. 
(21)  Location of all known existing landfills and proposed on-site bury pits (state EPD permit and a city special use permit or other approval may be required). 
(22)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate evaluation of the project. 
(f)  Certificate of development plans approval. Each site plan shall carry the following certificate printed or stamped thereon: 
All requirements of the city development regulations relative to the preparation and submission of a development permit application having been fulfilled, and said application and all supporting plans and data having been reviewed and approved by all affected city departments as required under their respective and applicable regulations, approval is hereby granted of this site plan and all other development plans associated with this project subject to all further provisions of said development and other city regulations. 

 
THIS CERTIFICATE EXPIRES TWELVE MONTHS FROM THE DATE OF APPROVAL UNLESS A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT IS ISSUED 
(g)  Other development plans to accompany site plan. The site plan shall be accompanied by other development plans showing the following information when same is not shown on, or evident from the site plan. The various plans may be combined, where appropriate, and clarity can be maintained. 
(1)  Erosion control plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of the soil erosion and sediment control ordinance. Erosion control measures may be shown on the grading plan, if desired. 
(2)  Grading plan, prepared in accordance with the requirements of article VII of this chapter. 
(3)  Stormwater drainage construction data. 
a.  Location and size of all proposed drainage improvements, and all proposed drainage easements to be located outside street right-of-way lines. 
b.  Profiles of all storm drainage pipes and slope of receiving channels. Hydraulic grade line is to be shown on all pipes (except roof drains) for the required design flow. On storm drainage profiles, a pipe chart will be shown which will include pipe numbers, pipe size, pipe material, pipe slope, pipe length, contributing drainage area, design flow, design storm frequency, runoff coefficient and velocity. On all pipes, the hydraulic grade line shall be shown. 
c.  Profiles of all open channels and ditches, including the design flow normal depth and velocity. On storm drainage profiles an open channel chart will be shown which will include open channel numbers, conveyance size, lining material, length, channel slope, contributing drainage area, design flow, design storm frequency, runoff coefficient and velocity for the required design flow. 
d.  Acreage of drainage areas and Hydrological study used in determining size of structures, including map of all contributing drainage basins and acreages. 
(4)  Sewage disposal plans, as follows. 
a.  Sanitary sewer plans, including the profiles and other information as may be required by water pollution control. 
b.  For projects proposed to be served by on-site sewage disposal systems, location and extent of septic tank, drain field and attendant structures, and other information required by the health department. 
(5)  Street widening and construction data. 
a.  Centerline profiles and typical roadway sections of all proposed streets, as well as plans and profiles for all proposed major thoroughfares. Profiles (and plans, where required) shall be drawn on standard plan and profile sheet with plan section showing street layout, pavement and right-of-way width, curvature, and required drainage facilities. Typical roadway sections shall be provided for street widenings. 
b.  Where sanitary or storm sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade, size, location and bedding class of pipe; location and invert elevation of manholes shall be indicated on the road profile. 
c.  Profiles covering roadways that are extensions of existing roadways shall include elevations at 50 foot intervals for such distance as may be adequate to provide continuity consistent with the standards required by these regulations for street improvements, but no less than 200 feet. 
d.  All elevations shall be coordinated and sited into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey or department of transportation bench marks where feasible or into reference monuments established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(6)  Buffer and landscape plan, if any such areas exist within the site, prepared in accordance with the specifications contained in this article, and the requirements of article IV of this chapter, and the requirements of the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance. 
(7)  Tree preservation/replacement plan (if required by the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance). 
(8)  Floodplain management plans, if any floodplain areas are located on the property. Such data as is required by the floodplain management ordinance shall be submitted. 
(9)  Private water system plans, if any, indicating proposed water main size and location, with fire hydrants, on the site. The distance and direction to all other fire hydrants within 500 feet of the site or buildings along existing streets or other access drives shall also be indicated. 
(10)  Street striping plan, showing striping in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, for any street newly constructed to four or more lanes, and all newly constructed or widened major thoroughfares. 
(h)  Encroachments. Where construction is proposed on adjacent property, an encroachment agreement or easement shall be submitted to the department. 
(i)  Public notice; drainage. Every site plan shall contain the following statement: 
(1)  NOTE: The city assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way, or for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded plan. The city does not assume the responsibility for the maintenance of pipes in drainage easements beyond the city right-of-way. 
(2)  NOTE: Stream buffer easements are to remain in a natural and undisturbed condition. 
(3)  NOTE: Structures are not allowed in drainage easements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 10, § 10.6, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-259. - Tree preservation/replacement plan specifications. 
(a)  When required. A tree preservation/replacement plan shall be required only under the circumstances described in the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance. 
(b)  In accordance with buffer, landscape and tree ordinance. Tree preservation/replacement plans shall be prepared in accordance with the specifications contained in the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance. At the developer's option, the plan may be combined with other plans, such as a general landscaping plan for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 10, § 10.7, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-260. - Buffer and landscape plan specifications. 
(a)  When required. A buffer and landscape plan shall be required as described in the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance. 
(b)  In accordance with buffer, landscape and tree ordinance. The buffer and landscape plans shall be prepared in accordance with the specifications contained in the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance. At the developer's option, the plan may be combined with other plans such as a general landscaping plan for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 10, § 10.8, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 34-261—34-283. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PROCEDURES 

Sec. 34-284. - Subdivision review procedures. 
(a)  Pre-application conference. Whenever any subdivision of a tract of land is proposed to be made, whether for residential or nonresidential development, the subdivider is encouraged to present to the department preliminary documents and graphic exhibits to permit early evaluation of the subdivider's intentions and coordination with the comprehensive plan, zoning resolution, Metropolitan River Protection Act, etc., and to inform and provide the subdivider with the necessary regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed project. 
(b)  Concept plan approval. 
(1)  Application for concept plan approval shall be submitted to the department using an application form and in a number of copies to be determined by the director. The concept plan shall include the entire property proposed for development, but need not include the applicant's entire contiguous ownership. 
(2)  In such case that the subdivider elects not to submit a concept plan, then the subdivider may proceed directly with the submittal of development plans if they show the entire property proposed for development. In so doing, however, the subdivider assumes the risk of premature design and engineering expenses in the event that the city requires subsequent design and engineering changes. 
(3)  Following concept plan approval, a clearing and grubbing permit may be issued based on a tree protection plan (if required, see tree protection ordinance) and soil erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by the department, and consistent with an approved certificate issued under the Metropolitan River Protection Act, if applicable. 
(4)  Copies of the approved concept plan shall be provided to the department for permanent record, in a number as determined by the director. 
(c)  Development plans approval for subdivisions. 
(1)  An application for development plan approval and issuance of a development permit shall be submitted to the department using an application form and in a number of copies as determined by the director. The development plans may encompass a portion of a property included within an approved concept plan. However, if no concept plan has been approved, the development plans must include the entire property being developed and having the same zoning. The application shall include the preliminary plat, and construction drawings. All construction drawings and other engineering data shall be prepared and sealed by an authorized registered professional currently registered in the state, in accordance with provisions of state law. 
(2)  Following submission to the department of a preliminary plat and all drawings required for development permit review, a grading permit shall be issued at the developer's request based on a tree protection plan (if required), soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, hydrology study, and related construction drawings, and consistent with an approved certificate issued under the Metropolitan River Protection Act, if applicable. The grading permit shall be limited to the area included within the development plans and may be further conditioned as deemed appropriate or necessary pending development permit approval. 
(3)  The director shall indicate on a review copy of the drawings or in a written memorandum all comments related to compliance of the development plans with these regulations, principles of good design, the zoning resolution, conditions of zoning approval, and the regulations of other city departments and state agencies, as appropriate. The director shall have final staff authority to determine the applicability of any and all comments under these development regulations, the zoning resolution or conditions of zoning approval. 
(4)  The director may not approve any preliminary plat whereon is shown a lot which would present particularly unusual difficulties for construction of a building, which would clearly require a variance to be reasonably usable, or which is otherwise "unbuildable" because of its unusability, whether due to the presence of floodplain, unusual configuration, lack of public utilities or for any other reason. A house location plan (HLP) may be required to be filed as a part of the preliminary plat approval to substantiate the buildability of any such difficult or unusual lot. 
(5)  The subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the noted and written comments of the director. 
(6)  Should an applicant disagree with the findings or final review comments of the director or of any other city department, concluding that factual or interpretive errors have been made, the following appeal procedure shall be followed to resolve the issues: 
a.  Submit to the department of planning and development a written statement clearly defining the nature of the disagreement, the specific reference to the sections of the regulations (i.e., sewer regulations, development regulations, etc.) at issue, and the applicant's own opinion. 
b.  Should the department under appeal fail to respond within ten working days from the date of transmittal of the appeal by the department of planning and development, the department shall automatically forward a copy of the appeal to the mayor and council for final action in their normal course of business. 
(7)  When the director has determined that the plat and other development plans are in compliance with all applicable city regulations and zoning requirements and approval has been received from all affected city departments, he shall sign and date a certificate of development plans approval stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the plat. Approved copies of the approved plat and development plans shall be printed on a reproducible copy of the plat. Approved copies of the approved plat and development plans shall be transmitted to the applicant and retained by the department for its records. 
(8)  Following the above approval by all affected city departments, a development permit shall be issued at the developer's request to begin construction activities based on the approved development plans. 
(d)  Final plat approval. 
(1)  When the provisions of these regulations have been complied with, the subdivider may submit to the department an application for final plat approval, using an application form and in a number of copies as determined by the director. 
(2)  The director shall indicate on a review copy of the plat or in a written memorandum all comments related to compliance of the final plat with these regulations, the zoning resolution, conditions of zoning approval, and the regulations of other city departments and state agencies, as appropriate. The director shall have final staff authority to determine the applicability of any and all comments under these development regulations, the zoning resolution or conditions of zoning approval. 
(3)  The director may not approve any final plat whereon is shown or by which is otherwise created a lot which would present particularly severe and unusual difficulties for construction of a building, which would clearly require a variance to be reasonably usable, or which is otherwise "unbuildable" due to the presence of floodplain, unusual configuration, lack of health department approval, or for any other justified reason. 
(4)  Lots which would appear to be buildable under certain circumstances and would require further study or additional information before a building permit could be issued, but which present problems or unusual difficulties which can reasonably be addressed or overcome by the lot owner, may be included in the plat with the appropriate notation of the steps necessary to allow issuance of a building permit (see section 34-81). 
(5)  The subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the comments of the director. 
(6)  Final approval by the director shall not be shown on the final plat until all requirements of these and other applicable regulations have been met, and the director has received a completed request for approval of development conformance and an executed development performance and maintenance agreement. The agreement shall be accompanied by a bond, letter of credit or other acceptable surety providing for the maintenance of all installations and improvements required by these regulations in the subdivision for a period not to exceed 12 months following the date of approval of development conformance for subdivisions for which the final topping of a "two-pass" street has not been applied or for a period not to exceed 18 months. The maintenance bond period of application may be extended by the director at the request of the developer, provided it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(7)  The director shall further determine that either: 
a.  All improvements and installation to the subdivision required for approval of the final plat under the rules and regulations of the city have been completed in accordance with the appropriate specifications; or 
b.  All of the stormwater drainage and detention facilities, water and sewer utilities, street base and curbing construction required for approval of the final plat have been properly installed and completed and, for those required improvements not yet completed (grassing, pavement topping, required landscaping, sidewalks, etc.), a performance bond shall have been filed by the subdivider with the development performance and maintenance agreement, which performance bond shall: 
1.  Be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the subdivider or developer of all work required to complete all improvements and installations for the subdivision, or approved portion thereof, in compliance with these rules and regulations within a specified time, not to exceed three months; 
2.  Be payable to, and for the indemnification of, the city; 
3.  Be in an amount equal to the cost of construction of the required improvements not yet completed, plus an additional ten percent of said costs, as calculated by the director on the basis of yearly contract prices or city contracts, where available; 
4.  Be with surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the state; and 
5.  Be in a form acceptable to the director or the city attorney. 
(8)  Payment for materials and installation of traffic control and street name signs shall be made to the department of engineering in accordance with the traffic engineering regulations prior to approval of the final plat. Payment of the cost of striping major thoroughfares or required signalization, if required, and not completed by the developer shall also be received by the engineering department prior to approval of the final plat. 
(9)  Payment of the required plat recording fee shall be made to the department prior to approval of the final plat. 
(10)  Once the department has approved the final plat and all other affected departments and agencies of government as required have certified compliance and signed the route sheet, the director shall certify by his signature on the original of the plat that all of the requirements of these regulations, the zoning resolution, and the conditions of zoning approval have been met, and that all other affected departments have approved the plat. The final plat shall not be deemed approved until it has been signed by the director and, where use of septic tanks is proposed, by a duly authorized representative of the health department. 
(11)  Once the final plat has been so certified, the director shall authorize it to be recorded with the clerk of the superior court of the city. The subdivider shall provide the department with an appropriate number of copies of the recorded plat, as determined by the director. Deeds to lands dedicated to the city in fee simple, or to property owner's associations for park or recreational use, shall be recorded simultaneously with the final plat. 
(12)  Periodically, but no less often than once each month, the director shall submit a listing of all approved final plats to the mayor and council for ratification of acceptance of all dedications. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 11, § 11.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-285. - Non-subdivision review procedures. 
(a)  Pre-application conference. Whenever any development of a single parcel of land (other than a subdivision or a one- or two-family dwelling) is proposed to be made, the developer is encouraged to present to the department preliminary documents and graphic exhibits to permit early evaluation of the developer's intentions and coordination with the comprehensive plan, zoning resolution, Metropolitan River Protection Act, etc., and to inform and provide the developer with the necessary regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed project. 
(b)  Concept plan approval. 
(1)  Application for concept plan approval shall be submitted to the department using an application form and in a number of copies to be determined by the director. 
(2)  The concept plan shall include the entire property being developed. Properties which adjoin the subject property and which are under the same ownership or control as the subject property shall be so indicated. In such case that the developer elects not to submit a concept plan, then the developer may proceed directly with the submittal of development plans, if they show the entire parcel being developed. In so doing, however, the developer assumes the risk of premature design and engineering expenses in the event that the city requires subsequent design and engineering changes. 
(3)  Following concept plan approval, a clearing and grubbing permit shall be issued at the developer's request based on a tree protection plan (if required, see tree protection ordinance) and soil erosion and sediment control plan approved by the department, and consistent with an approved certificate issued under the Metropolitan River Protection Act, if applicable. 
(4)  Following concept plan approval, a grading permit may be issued at the developer's request based on the requirements above for a clearing and grubbing permit and in addition a stormwater management report (hydrology study) shall be submitted and approved. 
(5)  Copies of the approved concept plan shall be provided to the department for permanent record, in a number as determined by the director. 
(c)  Site development plans approval. 
(1)  An application for development plan approval and issuance of a development permit shall be submitted to the department using an application form and in a number of copies as determined by the director. The development plans may encompass a portion of a property included within an approved concept plan. However, if no concept plan has been approved, the development plans must include the entire property being developed and having similar zoning. As required under section 34-258, the application shall include the site plan and construction drawings, as appropriate to the project. All construction drawings and other engineering data shall be prepared and sealed by an authorized registered professional currently registered in the state, in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(2)  The director shall indicate on a review copy of the drawings or in a written memorandum all comments related to compliance of the development plans with these regulations, principles of good design, the zoning ordinance, conditions of zoning approval, and the regulations of other city departments and state agencies as appropriate. The director shall have final staff authority to determine the applicability of any and all comments under these development regulations, the zoning resolution or conditions of zoning approval. 
(3)  The developer shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the noted and written comments of the director. 
(4)  Deeds to lands dedicated to the city in fee simple shall be submitted to the director for recording. 
(5)  Should an applicant disagree with the findings or final review comments of the director or of any other city department, concluding that factual or interpretive errors have been made, the following appeal procedure shall be followed to resolve the issues: 
a.  Submit to the department of planning and development a written statement clearly defining the nature of the disagreement, the specific reference to the sections of the regulations (i.e., sewer regulations, development regulations, etc.) at issue, and the applicant's own opinion. 
b.  Should the department under appeal fail to respond within ten working days from the date of transmittal of the appeal by the department of planning and development, the department shall automatically forward a copy of the appeal to the mayor and council for final action in their normal course of business. 
(6)  When the director has determined that the site plan and other development plans are in compliance with all applicable city regulations and zoning requirements, and approval has been received from all affected city departments, he shall sign and date a certificate of development plans approval on a reproducible copy of the plan. Approved copies of the approved development plans shall be transmitted to the applicant and retained by the department for its record. 
(7)  Following the above approval by all affected city departments, and approval of a Metropolitan River Protection Act Certificate, if applicable, a development permit shall be issued at the developer's request to begin construction activities based on the approved development plans. Said permit may include clearing, grubbing, and grading, as appropriate, and approved as part of the project. A building permit may also be issued on the basis of the approved development permit under the provisions contained in article III of this chapter. A certificate of occupancy may not be issued, however, until a certificate of development conformance for the project has been executed by the owner and an executed development performance and maintenance agreement has been received in accordance with these regulations. 
(d)  Certificate of development conformance approval process. 
(1)  Final approval by the director shall not be shown on the certificate of development conformance until all requirements of these and other applicable regulations have been met, and the director has received a completed request for approval of development conformance and an executed development performance and maintenance agreement. The agreement shall be accompanied by a bond, letter of credit or other acceptable surety providing for the maintenance of all installation and public improvements required by these regulations in the development for a period not to exceed 12 months following the date of approval of development conformance for developments for which the final topping of a "two-pass" street has not been applied or for a period not to exceed 18 months. The maintenance bond period of application may be extended by the director at the request of the developer, provided it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(2)  The director shall further determine that either: 
a.  All public improvements and installations to the development required to be dedicated and for approval of the certificate of development conformance under the rules and regulations of the city have been completed in accordance with the appropriate specifications; or 
b.  All of the stormwater drainage and detention facilities, water and sewer utilities, street base and curbing construction required for approval of the certificate of development conformance have been properly installed and completed and, for those required public improvements not yet completed, within areas to be dedicated, (grassing, pavement topping, required landscaping, sidewalks, etc.) a performance bond shall have been filed by the developer with the development performance and maintenance agreement, which performance bond shall: 
1.  Be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the developer of all work required to complete all public improvements and installation required to be dedicated for the development, or approved portion thereof, in compliance with these rules and regulations within a specified time, not to exceed three months; 
2.  Be payable to, and for the indemnification of, the city; 
3.  Be in an amount equal to the cost of construction of the required public improvements required to be dedicated not yet completed, plus an additional ten percent of said costs, as calculated by the director on the basis of yearly contract prices or city contracts, where available; 
4.  Be with surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the state; and 
5.  Be in a form acceptable to the director or the city attorney. 
(3)  Payment for materials and installation of traffic control shall be made to the department of engineering in accordance with the traffic engineering regulations prior to approval of the certificate of development conformance. Payment of the cost of striping major thoroughfares or required signalization, if required, and not completed by the developer shall also be received by the engineering department prior to approval of the certificate of development conformance. 
(4)  Payment of the required plat recording fee shall be made to the department prior to approval of the final plat. 
(5)  Once the department has approved the certificate of development conformance and all other affected departments and agencies of government, as required, have certified compliance and signed the route sheet, the director shall certify by his signature on the original of the certificate of development conformance that all of the requirements of these regulations, the zoning resolution, and the conditions of zoning approval have been met, and that all other affected departments have approved the plat. The certificate of development conformance shall not be deemed approved until it has been signed by the director and, where use of septic tanks is proposed, by a duly authorized representative of the health department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 11, § 11.2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-286. - Assignment of names and address. 
(a)  Subdivision or development names. 
(1)  Proposed subdivision or development names must be reviewed and approved prior to the issuance of a development permit. Names will be reviewed by the department upon submittal of the preliminary plat or site plan 
(2)  Proposed names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision or development in the city or its municipalities, except for extensions of existing subdivisions or developments. 
(3)  Subdivision and development names may be reserved if submitted and approved along with the concept plan for the project. 
(b)  Street names. 
(1)  Proposed street names must be reviewed and approved prior to approval of a final plat for recording. Street names may be reserved through approval as shown on an approved concept plan or preliminary plat for the subdivision. Proposed names for private streets shall follow the same rules as for public streets. 
(2)  Street names shall consist of a root name of the developer's choosing and a suffix designation, such as "street," "avenue," "drive," etc., and shall be followed by a quadrant suffix. Directional prefixes (i.e., "North," "South") and the prefixes "old" or "new" shall not be used. 
(3)  All streets shall bear the proper quadrant suffix appropriate to its location within the city (i.e., NE, NW, SE and SW), as determined by the department. 
(4)  A proposed street that is obviously in alignment with another already existing and named street shall bear the name of such existing street, unless this requirement is waived by the departments of public safety and engineering. 
(5)  Except within the same development, no proposed street name shall duplicate (be spelled the same or be phonetically the same) as an existing street name within the city, regardless of the use of such suffix designations as "street," avenue," "boulevard," "drive," "place," "way," "court," or however otherwise designated. In the same subdivision, a root name may not occur more than twice. 
(6)  All street root names and suffix designations are subject to the approval of the department. Obscene or otherwise unacceptable language, abbreviations, contractions, or initials may not be used. 
(7)  Root names shall consist of no more than 13 characters, including space, hyphens, etc. Letters not occurring in the English alphabet, and numerals, shall not be used. 
(c)  Street address assignments. 
(1)  Time of number designation. A street address number must be assigned prior to issuance of a building permit. For any new structure proposed on a property which has not been assigned an address, a street number will be assigned upon confirmation or establishment of the property as a buildable lot of record under the requirements of these regulations. 
(2)  Subdivisions. House numbers will be assigned after an exemption plat or preliminary plat is approved for the property. Submit two copies of the approved plat to the department. Block number assignments shall also be designated for abutting major street name signs at this time. 
(3)  Commercial/industrial projects or buildings. Projects will be numbered after the developer submits the site plan for development review. 
(4)  Apartment projects. Projects will be numbered after the developer submits copies of the site plan for development review. The overall development will be issued a single street address. The developer will be responsible for numbering/lettering individual buildings and units. 
(5)  Condominium projects. Projects will be numbered after the developer submits the site plan for development review. Individual units shall be numbered consecutively if located along public or private streets. Units in the "stacked-flat" configuration shall use the same numbering approach as applies to an apartment project. 
(6)  Numbering system. The following numbering systems shall be followed per postal regulations: 
a.  Individual mailbox for each dwelling units: Each street in the project must be named. 
b.  Cluster box system, centralized mailbox for entire project: One street name will serve to assign all house numbers for main delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 11, § 11.3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-287. - Initiation of development activities. 
(a)  Initial activities required. Following the issuance of any permit authorizing clearing and grading of a site: 
(1)  Required erosion control measures must be installed, where practical, by the developer and inspected and approved by the department prior to actual grading or removal of vegetation. All control measures shall be in place as soon after the commencement of activities as possible and in coordination with the progress of the project. 
(2)  Soil sedimentation facilities must be installed and operational prior to major grading operations. 
(3)  Areas required to be undisturbed by the zoning resolution, conditions of zoning approval, Metropolitan River Protection Act or other ordinance or regulation shall be designated by survey stakes, flags, or other appropriate markings and shall be inspected and approved by the department of development prior to the commencement of any clearing or grading activities. 
(b)  Tree protection areas. Prior to the initiation of land disturbance activities and throughout the clearing and grading process the following must be accomplished for an designated tree protection area in accordance with any approved buffer and landscape plan or tree preservation/replacement plan for the property: 
(1)  For those trees which are not to be removed, all protective fencing, staking, and any tree protection area signs shall be in place. These barriers must be maintained throughout the land disturbance process and should not be removed until landscaping is begun. 
(2)  The tree protection areas shall not be utilized for storage of earth and other materials resulting from or used during the development process. 
(3)  Construction site activities, such as parking, materials storage, concrete washout, burning, etc., shall be arranged to prevent disturbances within the tree protection areas. 
(c)  Development inspections. Oral notification shall be made by the developer or contractor to the development inspections section of the department at least 24 hours prior to commencement of activity for each of the following phases as authorized by any permit for site work or development. Inspections shall be made by the department and passed prior to continuation of further activity or proceeding into new phases. 
(1)  Clearing. Clearing or clearing and grubbing of the site or any portion included under the permit. 
(2)  Grading. Installation of slope stakes shall be required. Upon completion of roadway grading, the water certificate shall be submitted to the department certifying that the centerline of the road and the offset centerline of the water line are within six inches of that shown on the approved plans or re-lined plan submittal. Inspection and approval shall be required prior to trenching or continuation with subbase preparation. 
(3)  Stormwater facilities. Installation of storm drainage pipe, detention, or other stormwater facilities. 
(4)  Installation of sanitary sewer and appurtenances. This notification shall be made simultaneously with official notification by the developer or contractor to the water pollution control division and if for informational purposes only to the department. 
(5)  Curbing of roadways. Inspection should be requested before the forms have been set (if used). Roadway width will be spot checked by string line between curb stakes. 
(6)  Sub-base or subgrade of streets. After compaction, the subgrade will be string-lined for depth and crown. The subgrade shall be roll tested and shall pass with no movement, to the satisfaction of the department. 
(7)  Street base. The base will be string-lined for depth and crown, and shall pass a roll test with no movement to the satisfaction of the department. 
(8)  Paving. A department inspector shall be on site during the paving process to check consistency, depth, and workmanship, as applicable. For asphalt paving, the temperature of the material will be spot-checked, and the roadways will be cored after completion to check thickness. 
(d)  Responsibility for quality and design. The completion of inspections by city officials or employees and authorization for work continuation shall not transfer responsibility for the quality of the work performed or materials used from the contractor or developer, nor imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for project design or engineering from the professional corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
(e)  Stop work orders. Work which is not authorized by an approved permit, or which is not in conformance to the approved plans for the project, or which is not in compliance with the provisions of these regulations or any other adopted code, regulation or ordinance of the city, shall be subject to immediate stop work order by the department. Work which proceeds without having received the necessary inspections of the department shall be halted until all inspections of intervening work is completed. 
(f)  Stabilization for erosion control. If for any reason a clearing and grubbing, grading, or development permit expires after land disturbance activities have commenced, the developer shall be responsible for stabilizing the site for erosion control, under the direction of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 11, § 11.4, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-288. - Approval of development conformance. 
(a)  Prerequisite to final plat or certificate of occupancy. This approval shall be a prerequisite to the approval of a final plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any part of a project included in a development permit, except for single-family and two-family residential structures. The approval shall reflect the owner's certification that all site work and construction has been accomplished according to the terms of approved plans and permits, and that all facilities intended for maintenance, supervision and/or dedication to the public are in compliance with appropriate standards, regulations, codes and ordinances. Such approval shall be revoked in cases of fraud or whenever unauthorized changes are made to the site without the benefit of required permits. 
(b)  Submission requirements. Upon completion of the project as authorized for construction by the development permit, the owner shall file a certificate of development conformance with the director along with record drawings of all stormwater detention facilities and modifications to the limits of the 100-year floodplain (if any). An as-built hydrology study shall be submitted for the project with the actual parameters from the record drawing of the detention facilities. A record drawing of the sanitary sewer facilities shall also be prepared, separately or included with the above, and submitted to the public utilities department in accordance with their regulations. The certificate of development conformance shall be in a form as required by the director and shall be accompanied by a development performance and maintenance agreement completed in draft form. If the owner is a corporation, the documents shall be signed by the president or vice-president, be affixed by the corporate seal, and either the corporate secretary shall attest to the signature and affix the corporate seal, or a certificate of corporate resolution shall also be submitted. 
(c)  Approval. Following final inspection and approval of all record drawings, the director shall approve the certificate of development conformance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 11, § 11.5, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-289. - Project closeout and continuing maintenance. 
(a)  Development performance and maintenance agreement. Based on the approved certificate of development conformance, the owner shall file a final development performance and maintenance agreement with the director, along with any required certificate of corporate resolution and performance or maintenance surety, as a prerequisite to the approval of a final plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any part of a project included in the development permit, except for single-family and two-family residential structures. The development performance and maintenance agreement shall be in a form as required by the director, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Final required improvements yet to be completed (e.g., grassing, topping, sidewalks, required landscaping) and performance bonding. Final landscaping shall be provided in accordance with a schedule acceptable to the department. The developer may be allowed up to three months in which to finish the other designated improvements, after the date of approval of the certificate of development conformance. 
(2)  Maintenance of the public streets and drainage facilities within public streets or easements for the bonding period after the date of approval of the certificate of development conformance. Repairs shall be made for any deficiencies identified within the bonding period or the bonds shall be called to complete same. 
(3)  Indemnification of the city against all liability for damages arising as a result of errors or omissions in the design or construction of the development for a period of ten years. If liability is subsequently assigned or transferred to a successor in title or other person, a copy of such legal instrument shall be filed with the clerk to superior court. 
(b)  Maintenance and performance surety. 
(1)  The maintenance surety and the performance surety, required from the owner/developer or the contractor employed by the owner/developer, may be in the form of cash deposited with the city, or a bond, letter of escrow or letter of credit from a bank or other financial institution in a form acceptable to the director or city attorney. 
(2)  Performance surety and maintenance surety shall, in all cases, be provided in an amount as provided in section 34-284(d) or 34-285(d), as applicable. The maintenance bond period of application shall not be less than 18 months from installation of the wearing course or final topping for a one-pass street and not less than 12 months from the installation of the binder for a two-pass street and which time shall be extended equal to any extension of time for the performance bond granted by the director but not to exceed 24 months. The performance bond period of application shall not exceed three months unless an extension of an additional three calendar months has been granted by the director. All cost estimates shall be as prepared by or acceptable to the department. 
(3)  A maintenance bond for the sanitary sewer facilities is required separately by the water pollution control division in accordance with their regulations. For the water system improvements, the contractor employed by the developer shall be responsible for maintenance of all water mains and appurtenances for one year from the date of approval of the certificate of development conformance by correcting all defects or deficiencies in materials or workmanship. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 11, § 11.6, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 34-290—34-311. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FEES 

Sec. 34-312. - Fees set by mayor and council. 
Application filing and permit fees shall be as may be established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 12, § 12.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-313. - Prerequisite to issuance of permits. 
Permit fees, if any, shall be submitted as a prerequisite to issuance of the permit. Nonpayment as a result of submission of a check having insufficient funds on account, or for any other reason, shall cause the permit to be voided and re-issuance subject to penalty as may be established by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 12, § 12.2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-314. - Fees nonrefundable. 
Application fees, if any, shall be submitted with the application and upon acceptance of said submission for review and consideration shall not be refundable. Failure to pay a required application fee shall cause the application to be returned to the applicant without acceptance for review or consideration by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 12, § 12.3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-315. - Sanitary sewer, curb cut, etc., fees. 
Following the approval of development plans, and prior to authorization to begin construction, the developer shall pay into the treasury of the city such required inspection, sanitary sewer permit charges, curb cut, or other fees as may be established from time to time by the mayor and council. Such fees shall not be refundable following issuance of a development permit, except upon approval of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 12, § 12.4, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-316. - Traffic control fees. 
Prior to approval of development conformance for a project, the developer shall provide to the department of engineering such fees for traffic control signs, street name signs, and street striping as shall be required by traffic engineering regulations and established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 12, § 12.5, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-317. - Recording fees. 
Prior to approval of a final plat or certificate of occupancy, the developer shall provide to the department of development such recording fees and performance and/or maintenance bonds as shall be required by these regulations or established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 12, § 12.6, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 34-318—34-337. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ADMINISTRATION, APPEAL, AND VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 34-338. - Administration. 
(a)  Administered by director of planning and development. These development regulations shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced by the director of the department of planning and development of the city. All other ordinances or regulations referenced herein, such as the fire prevention and life safety codes, building and other technical codes, health, water, and sewer regulations, shall be administered by the directors of the departments responsible for such regulations, as established by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Director authorized to suspend or stop work and direct corrections. In any case in which activities are undertaken in violation of these regulations, not in compliance with the provisions of a permit issued under the authorization of these regulations, or without authorization of a permit which would otherwise be required, the director is hereby authorized to suspend or invalidate such permits, order that all unauthorized or improper work be stopped, direct correction of deficiencies, issue summonses to any court of competent jurisdiction, or take any other legal or administrative action appropriate to the severity of the violation and degree of threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 13, § 13.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-339. - Regulations to be published. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the director of the department of planning and development to maintain an accurate and up-to-date compilation of these development regulations and all amendments and pertinent attachments thereto, and to publish said compilation and make it available to the public at a cost as established by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 13, § 13.2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-340. - Modifications. 
Modification of the design standards set forth in these development regulations may be authorized by the director in specific cases when, in his opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance; provided any such determination shall be based fundamentally on the fact that unusual topographical or other exceptional conditions require such modification, or that the granting of the modification will not adversely affect the general public welfare or nullify the intent of these regulations. Any such modification granted by the director shall be made in writing to the developer and also made a part of the department's records. Application for any modifications shall be filed in writing on a form provided by the department with necessary supporting documents with the director by the developer and shall explain in detail the reasons and facts supporting the application. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 13, § 13.3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-341. - Appeal and waiver of the regulations. 
(a)  Appeals. Appeals of the interpretation by the director of the requirements of these regulations shall first be submitted in writing (on a form provided by the department) to the director who shall review the request in a timely manner and receive comments from other affected departments. The appeal thereupon shall be forwarded to the mayor and council for final action in their normal course of business. Exception: appeal requests from the stormwater requirements of article VI, VII or VIII of this chapter shall be submitted to the board of construction adjustments and appeals for action in their normal course of business. 
(b)  Waivers. Waiver requests of the requirements of these regulations shall be submitted on an application form as prescribed by the director, along with such fees as shall be established by the mayor and council. The director shall coordinate the review of each waiver request with all other affected city departments and shall summarize such comments or recommendations as may be received to the mayor and council for action in their normal course of business. Exception: waiver requests from the stormwater requirements of article VI, VII or VIII of this chapter shall be submitted to the board of construction adjustments and appeals for action in their normal course of business. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 13, § 13.4, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-342. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction that violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved plan or permit shall be subject to the enforcement actions or penalties outlined herein. Any such action or inaction that is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and also may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the enforcement actions or penalties described herein shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Enforcement procedures. The following are the enforcement procedures authorized by this chapter: 
a.  Notices of violation. 
1.  Enforcement shall begin with the issuance of a written notice of violation to the owner or responsible person by the director. The notice may be delivered personally or sent by first class mail. The notice of violation shall contain at least the following information: 
(i)  The name and address of the owner or responsible person; 
(ii)  The location or address of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(iii)  A description of the nature of the violation; 
(iv)  A description of the remedial actions or measures necessary to bring an action or inaction into compliance with a permit, approved plan or this chapter; 
(v)  The deadline or completion date of any such remedial actions or measures; 
(vi)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the owner or responsible person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
2.  In the event the owner or responsible person fails to correct the violations after the deadline contained in the notice of violation, the director is authorized to take or impose any one or more of the additional actions contained herein. 
b.  Stop work orders. The director is authorized to issue stop work orders to an owner or responsible person. Stop work orders are effective immediately and shall remain in effect until the necessary corrective actions or remedial measures as set forth in the notice of violation have occurred. Stop work orders may be withdrawn or modified by the director in order to enable an owner or responsible person to take necessary remedial actions or measures to correct the violations. 
c.  Refusal to issue certificates of occupancy or completion. The director is authorized to refuse to issue certificates of occupancy or completion for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on a site until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures as set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. 
d.  Suspension, revocation, or modification of permit. The director is authorized to suspend, revoke or modify a permit that was issued authorizing land disturbing activities or development. The director is authorized to reinstate a suspended, revoked or modified permit, after the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures stated in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. The director is also authorized to reinstate such permit, which may include conditions as the director may deem necessary, to enable the owner or responsible person to take the necessary remedial actions or measures to correct the violations. 
e.  Refusal to approve final subdivision plats. The director is authorized to refuse to approve final plats until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial actions or measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. 
f.  Issuance of citations or summons to court. The director is authorized to issue a citation or summons to the owner or responsible person requiring such person to appear in a court of competent jurisdiction to answer charges for violations of this chapter. 
(2)  Legal penalties and/or remedies. 
a.  Fine and/or sentence. Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city and shall be punished either by a fine not less than $100.00 per day and not greater than $1,000.00 per day, or by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in jail, or both a fine and jail, or work alternate. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
b.  Other legal remedies. In any case in which a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(3)  Other legal remedies. In any case in which any land is, or is proposed to be, used or activities are undertaken in violation of these regulations or any amendment thereto adopted by the mayor and council, the city, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 13, § 13.5, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 34-343—34-372. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT 

Sec. 34-373. - Effective date. 
(a)  Effective on adoption. These regulations shall be in full force and effect on January 29, 2013, following the adoption by the mayor and council of the city, and shall apply to any land disturbance permit for which an application is received after the effective date of these regulations. 
(b)  Grandfather provisions; development permit application received prior to adoption. Any subdivision or other project for which a valid and complete application for a development permit shall have been received prior to the effective date of these regulations shall be considered "grandfathered" and, at the developer's option, may proceed to completion and building permits may be issued under the subdivision regulations of the city in place prior to the effective date of these regulations, provided that the development permit is or can be issued within 90 calendar days of said effective date and all time frames associated with said permit are observed. 
(c)  Grandfather provisions; development permit issued prior to adoption. Any subdivision or other project for which a development permit has been issued prior to the effective date of these regulations shall be considered "grandfathered" and, at the developer's option, may proceed to completion and building permits may be issued under the terms of said permit and the subdivision regulations of the city in place prior to said effective date. 
(d)  Grandfather provisions; clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading. Any subdivision or other project for which only a clearing, clearing and grubbing, or grading permit shall have been issued prior to effective date of these regulations shall be brought into conformance with these regulations prior to issuance of a development permit. Administrative modifications in accordance with article XII of this chapter shall be granted as necessary and appropriate where full compliance is not feasible or cannot reasonably be achieved because of the stage of development, limitations imposed by the site, or design parameters. 
(e)  Building permits. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to affect the validity of any building permit lawfully issued prior to the effective date of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 14, § 14.1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-374. - Amendments. 
(a)  By mayor and council. These regulations may be amended from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council of the city. Such amendments shall be effective as of their date of adoption unless otherwise stated in the adopting resolution. 
(b)  Grandfather provisions; development permit application received prior to adoption. Any subdivision or other project for which a valid and complete application for a development permit shall have been received prior to the adoption of an amendment to these regulations may, at the developer's option, proceed to completion and building permits may be issued as though no amendment had been approved, provided that the development permit is or can be issued within 90 calendar days of said amendment and all time frames associated with said permit are observed. 
(c)  Grandfather provisions; development permit issued prior to adoption. Any subdivision or other project for which a development permit has been issued prior to the adoption of an amendment to these regulations may, at the developer's option, proceed to completion and building permits may be issued as though no amendment had been approved. 
(d)  Grandfather provisions; clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading. Any subdivision or other project for which only a clearing, clearing and grubbing, or grading permit shall have been issued prior to adoption of an amendment to these regulations shall be brought into conformance with the amendment (if applicable) prior to issuance of a development permit. Administrative modifications in accordance with article XII of this chapter shall be granted as necessary and appropriate where full compliance is not feasible or cannot reasonably be achieved because of the stage of development, limitations imposed by the site, or design parameters. 
(e)  Building permits. No amendment to these regulations shall be construed to affect the validity of any building permit lawfully issued prior to the adoption of said amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 14, § 14.2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-375. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of these regulations is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or void, the validity of the remaining portions of these regulations shall not be affected thereby, it being the intent of the mayor and council of the city in adopting these regulations that no portion thereof or provision of the regulations contained herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of the unconstitutionality or invalidity of any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 14, § 14.3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 34-376. - Conflicting regulations. 
All regulations or parts of regulations of this Code in conflict with these regulations shall be and the same are hereby repealed in their portions so in conflict; provided, however, that it is not the intent of these regulations to repeal or affect any law of the state, or any code or ordinance of the city adopted as a requirement of a state law, in which case the most restrictive requirement shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-02, art. 14, § 14.4, 1-29-2013) 
Chapter 38 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. VII, § I, ¶ III; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.; issuance of mobile home location permits and display of decals, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492; the Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXATION 

Sec. 38-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mobile home means a mobile home or a manufactured home, as such terms are defined in the Act known as "The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act" (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.); provided, however, that those mobile homes which qualify the taxpayer for exemption under state law shall not be considered mobile homes and subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 70-26) 
Sec. 38-20. - Jurisdiction of article. 
Every mobile home located anywhere in the city on January 1 is subject to ad valorem taxation by the taxing jurisdiction authorized to impose an ad valorem tax on the property. Taxes shall be charged against the owner of the property, if known, and against the specific property itself, if the owner is not known. A mobile home shall be returned for taxation in this city if it is the owner's domicile, unless the mobile home is primarily used in connection with some established business enterprise located in a different city or county, in which case it shall be returned for taxation in the city or county where the business is located. Mobile homes situated in the city but owned by nonresidents shall also be returned for taxation in this city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 70-27) 
Sec. 38-21. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any owner or occupant of a mobile home or property owner having a mobile home located on their property within the confines of the city who fails to comply with this article or any part of this article, shall be charged with each and every violation and, upon their being found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished by a fine, in an amount not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 for every violation and/or imprisonment for a period not in excess of 60 days. Persons who violate section 38-24 or 38-26 shall be subject only to the penalties provided therein. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 70-28) 
Sec. 38-22. - Annual permit required. 
Each year, every owner of a mobile home subject to taxation in the city shall return the same for taxation and pay the taxes due thereon at the time the owner makes application for the mobile home location permit, or at the time of the first sale or transfer of the mobile home after December 31, or on May 1, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 70-29) 
Sec. 38-23. - Application for permits; forms. 
(a)  The mayor, city council or a designee are hereby authorized and empowered, subject to the specific provisions of this article, to prescribe application, permit and decal forms and thereafter to alter and change the same. The city clerk is empowered to require that applicants furnish such information in writing as may be reasonably required to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
(b)  The mayor, city council or a designee are hereby authorized and empowered to enforce all provisions of this article. 
(c)  The tax commissioner or a designee thereof shall be the enforcement official for each of the provisions adopted in this article, and the qualifications of the enforcement personnel shall be established under the rules and regulations of the department or city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 70-30) 
Sec. 38-24. - Location permit and decal. 
(a)  Required; display. Each year, every owner of a mobile home situated in the city shall, on or before May 1, obtain from the county clerk a mobile home location permit which shall be issued upon proof of payment of taxes. The issuance of a permit by the county clerk shall be evidenced by the issuance of a decal, which shall be the same color as prescribed by state law, which shall reflect the city being the city of issuance and the calendar year for which the permit is issued. The decal shall be prominently attached and displayed where the decal shall be easily visible for inspection. 
(b)  Penalty for violation of section. It shall be unlawful to fail to attach and display on a mobile home the decal as required. Any person who violates this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00, except that, upon receipt of proof of purchase of a decal prior to the date of the issuance of a summons, the fine shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 70-31) 
Sec. 38-25. - Time limit for obtaining location permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of each mobile or manufactured home to locate the home within the city and allow the home to remain so located for more than seven days without the display of a decal issued by the issuing authority of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 70-32) 
Sec. 38-26. - Issuance of relocation permit and decal; fees; display of decal; violation. 
(a)  Specifications of decal. Any owner of a mobile home who has made application for the location or relocation of a mobile home and whose application meets the qualifications of this article shall be issued a permit and shall likewise be issued a decal. The decal to be issued with a permit authorizing location of a mobile home within the county shall be the same color as prescribed by state law and shall be affixed to the mobile home at all times it is within the confines of the city. The decal issued with the permit authorizing relocation of a mobile home shall be red in color and shall be affixed to the mobile home at all times the mobile home is being transported within the confines of this state. These decals shall be designated in such a manner and affixed to mobile homes in such manner as to cause them to be easily visible for inspection. 
(b)  Location fee. Each application for a permit authorizing the location of a mobile home required by this article shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be paid to the city clerk before such permit shall be issued. 
(c)  Relocation fee. Each application for a permit authorizing the relocation of a mobile home required by this article shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be paid to the city clerk before such permit shall be issued. 
(d)  Transport without display of decal. It shall be unlawful for any person to move or transport any mobile home which is required to and which does not have attached and displayed thereon the decal provided for in this section. 
(e)  Penalty for violation of section. Any person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or both. Violation of this section may be prosecuted in any court of competent jurisdiction in the manner prescribed for the enforcement of city ordinances. 
(f)  Fee. The permit fees shall be in amounts as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 70-33) 
Sec. 38-27. - Notice to other city or county governments of relocation. 
Whenever a permit authorizing the relocation of a mobile home is issued and the mobile home is to be relocated within the confines of another city or county in this state, the city clerk of this city shall notify the other city or county of the date of the issuance of the relocation permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 70-34) 
Sec. 38-28. - Other mobile home regulations. 
The issuance of any permit under the provisions of this article shall in no way be construed as superseding the requirement for the location of mobile homes as the location may be contained within other city ordinances or other actions of the city planning and zoning commission. The issuance of a permit under the provisions of this article shall not prohibit the planning and zoning commission from requiring a relocation of the mobile home to a place where the mobile home is lawfully permitted, but in such case the owner of the mobile home shall apply for and obtain a permit for the relocation as if the relocation were the result of his initiative. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 70-35) 
Sec. 38-29. - Requirements for owners, managers and operators of mobile home parks. 
(a)  Mobile home owners required to be permitted. No owner, manager or operator of a mobile home park shall permit any mobile home to be located or relocated within the confines of the park for residential use unless the permit required by this article shall have been obtained or applied for. No owner, manager or operator of any mobile home park shall permit any mobile home presently located within the limits of the park owned or operated by him to remain in the park after the date of this article unless a permit authorizing the continued location as required by this article shall have been obtained or shall have been applied for. 
(b)  Inventory of mobile homes. Every owner, manager or operator of a mobile home park is required to give to the city clerk or a designee an inventory of all mobile homes based in the park as of January 1 of each year. This shall be done no later than 5:00 p.m. of the first business day of the year. 
(c)  Registration of mobile home. Every owner, manager or operator of a mobile home park is required to notify all mobile home owners within the park of the requirement to register their mobile home for tax purposes with the city clerk. 
(d)  Notice to owners of required relocation permit. Every owner, manager or operator of a mobile home park is required to notify all mobile home owners within the park of the requirement to obtain a city relocation permit before moving their mobile home. 
(e)  Report of removal of mobile home. Every owner, manager or operator of a mobile home park is required to report to the city clerk any mobile home removal from the park prior to the mobile home being removed, if known, or upon discovery by the owner, manager or operator, if unknown. 
(f)  Notification of change of ownership of mobile home. Every owner, manager or operator of a mobile home park is required to notify the city clerk of any change of ownership of a mobile home within the park within 30 calendar days of such change. 
(g)  Monthly report. Every owner, manager or operator of a mobile home park is required to submit a monthly report recapping any changes in ownership of mobile homes in the park, any mobile homes moved out and any mobile homes moved into the park within the month of the report. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 70-36) 
Sec. 38-30. - Failure to obtain permits prohibited. 
No person shall occupy any mobile home as a residence nor permit any other person to occupy the mobile home as a residence unless a permit shall have been obtained as provided by this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 70-37) 
Chapter 42 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Abatement. 
Where it is determined that there exists in the city a dwelling or other building or structure which is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use, or where there exists in the city a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, and where such determination is made by the director of the department of planning and development or his designated enforcement official, such official shall have the power to have repaired, closed or demolished any such dwelling, building or structure, or to cause to be abated any such unsafe or unsanitary conditions which create a public health hazard or general nuisance in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, which are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference within this section. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-26) 
Sec. 42-2. - Mandatory abatement of graffiti nuisances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person having a legal or equitable interest in a parcel of real property to permit graffiti to remain on a structure located thereon for a continuous period of more than 72 hours. For purposes of this section, the term "graffiti" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2. 
(b)  In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction determines that a person has violated the provisions of this section, the court may, on its own motion, or at the request of the city, issue an order directing the city to remove the graffiti from the property on such terms as the court deems appropriate. The court may also specify that the property owner may be liable for the cost incurred in the removal of the graffiti. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-27) 
Sec. 42-3. - Discharge of weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm within the residential areas of the City of Peachtree Corners. This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his/her duty, or to prohibit any citizen from discharging a weapon when lawfully defending persons or property (including without limitation domesticated pets), or destroying a dangerous wild animal. This section shall not apply to bb guns or air pellet rifles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge any bow or crossbow within the residential areas of the City of Peachtree Corners without a current Georgia hunting license and written permission of the owner(s) of any property where such discharge of bow or crossbow will occur. This section shall not apply to archery target practice. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09-80, § I, 11-15-2016) 
Secs. 42-4—42-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within the motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14. 

Sec. 42-23. - Loud, unnecessary or unusual noise—Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the county, and which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability more than 50 feet from the point of origin of this sound or noise. However, within a designated entertainment district, sound levels shall abide by, and be measured in accordance with, the provisions of section [6-411]. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-46; Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 2, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 42-24. - Same—Enumeration. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary sounds or noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the county, except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of this signaling device and the sounding of this device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of this signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up is prohibited. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is reasonably necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which this machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of the set, instrument, phonograph machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the room, building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure is prohibited. Announcements over loudspeakers shall only be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, and the like. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity, is prohibited. 
(5)  Noisy animals or birds. Anyone who keeps or maintains an animal or bird that unreasonably disturbs the comfort or repose of any person, because the animal or bird is emitting frequent or long-continued sound or noise, and who continues to keep, maintain or allow any animal or bird to so disturb the comfort or repose of any person shall be deemed in violation of this section, provided that the person keeping or maintaining the animal or bird has been first notified in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the complaining party that this animal or bird being kept by the addressee is unreasonably disturbing his comfort or repose. This section shall be liberally construed to accomplish the objective of the section, and the person making this written notification need not use the exact words of this section to the addressee so long as the notification sufficiently informs the addressee of the nature of the disturbing noise emitted by the animal or bird. Upon receipt of a certified letter notifying the person keeping or maintaining such animal or bird, such person shall be required to immediately comply with this section. This section shall not apply to horses, livestock, poultry or other farm animals, provided they are maintained in accordance with city zoning regulations or ordinances. 
(6)  Construction or repair of buildings . The erection, excavating, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays and between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturdays is hereby prohibited, except that the building inspector may determine when the loss or inconvenience that would result to any party in interest is of such a nature as to warrant special consideration, then the building inspector may grant a permit for a period not to exceed ten days or less for this work to be done between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Saturday construction hours may only be conducted with the approval of the city manager or his designee. This approval may be rescinded if complaints are received. 
(7)  Transportation of metal rails, similar materials. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks, or in any manner so loaded as to cause unreasonably loud noises or as to unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of those streets or other public places is prohibited. 
(8)  Pile drivers, hammers, similar equipment. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by unreasonably loud or unusual sounds or noises, is prohibited. 
(9)  Blowers and motors. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noises due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, is prohibited, unless the noise from this blower or fan is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler device reasonably sufficient to deaden the noise. 
(10)  Sound trucks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles during such hours, and with such unreasonable volume as would constitute a public nuisance, is prohibited. 
(11)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler is prohibited, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger upon request of proper authorities. 
(12)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, or motor boat is prohibited, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(13)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create unreasonably loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises is prohibited. 
(14)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of unreasonably loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers is prohibited. 
(15)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any unreasonably excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of the institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospitals, is prohibited, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets indicating that it is a school, hospital or court street. 
(16)  Hawkers, peddlers, vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood is prohibited. 
(17)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention is prohibited. 
(18)  Operation of motor vehicles . The operation of motor vehicles, including cars, trucks, motorcycles, upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle access or pedestrian walkway, or street, public or private, so as to create unreasonable noise and to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the inhabitants of the neighborhood is prohibited. This prohibition includes the operation of trash trucks and garbage vehicles prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. weekdays and prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. on weekends. 
(19)  Operation of domestic power tools and motorized lawn maintenance equipment . The operation of domestic power tools and motorized lawn maintenance equipment including grass mowers and leaf blowers shall only be conducted between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekends and holidays. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-47; Ord. No. 2016-02-65, § 1, 3-15-2016) 
Sec. 42-25. - Same—Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform this work during the day. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-48) 
Secs. 42-26—42-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PHOSPHORUS REDUCTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Sale or use of cleaning agents containing phosphorus prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-27.1. 

Sec. 42-54. - Declaration of policy. 
O.C.G.A. § 12-5-27.1 provides that whenever a local government entity is required by the environmental protection division to reduce phosphorus in its wastewater being discharged into the waters of the state, such local government entity shall pass an ordinance mandating the retail sale of low phosphorus household laundry detergent as part of its phosphorus reduction process. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city to encourage the use of clean, phosphate-free, household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than 0.5 percent phosphorus by weight. The city finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in wastewater discharge so as to protect the state's rivers and lakes downstream; promote health, safety and welfare; and prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the county that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-71) 
Sec. 42-55. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Household laundry detergent means a laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
(1)  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is intended to be used for non-laundry cleaning purposes. 
(2)  A detergent used in dairy, beverage, or food processing cleaning equipment. 
(3)  A phosphorus acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner, or metal conditioner. 
(4)  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, or health care facilities or in agricultural production. 
(5)  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning. 
(6)  A detergent manufactured, stored, or distributed for use or sale outside of the state. 
(7)  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory, and engineering laboratory. 
(8)  A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provided laundry services for a hospital, health care facility, or veterinary hospital. 
Phosphorus means elemental phosphorus. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-72) 
Sec. 42-56. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each sales transaction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-73) 
Sec. 42-57. - Court action authorized. 
In addition to the penalty provided in section 42-56, the city may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-74) 
Sec. 42-58. - Action for damages. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this article and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding therefor. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-75) 
Sec. 42-59. - Prohibited sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than 0.5 phosphorus by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes cleaning purposes. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-76) 
Secs. 42-60—42-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Smoke-free Air Act of 2005, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 et seq. 

Sec. 42-77. - Title. 
This article shall be known, cited and referred to as "Peachtree Corners Clean Indoor Air Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-121) 
Sec. 42-78. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The mayor and city council does hereby find that: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy non-smokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. 
(2)  Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. 
(b)  Accordingly, the mayor and city council find and declare that the purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and public and private places of employment; 
(2)  To guarantee the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air; and 
(3)  To recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-122) 
Sec. 42-79. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Business means any corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership, professional corporation, enterprise, franchise, association, trust, joint venture, or other entity, whether for-profit or nonprofit. 
Employee means an individual who is employed by a business in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Employer means an individual or a business that employs one or more individuals. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, homes for the chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. This definition shall not include long-term care facilities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-8-81(3). 
Infiltrate means to permeate an enclosed area by passing through its walls, ceilings, floors, windows, or ventilation systems to the extent that an individual can smell secondhand smoke. 
Place of employment means an enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer that employees utilize during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, and hallways. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a licensed child care, adult day care, or health care facility. The term "place of employment" does not include vehicles used in the course of employment. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a licensed child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" includes a bar area within any restaurant. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Secondhand smoke means smoke emitted from lighted, smoldering, or burning tobacco when the person smoking is not inhaling, smoke emitted at the mouthpiece during puff drawing, and smoke exhaled by the person smoking. 
Service line means an indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted tobacco product, including cigarettes, cigars, and pipe tobacco. 
Smoking area means a separately designated enclosed room which need not be entered by an employee in order to conduct business that is designated as a smoking area and, when so designated as a smoking area, shall not be construed as to deprive employees of a nonsmoking lounge, waiting area, or break room. 
Sports arena means enclosed stadiums and enclosed sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-123) 
Sec. 42-80. - Smoking prohibited in city facilities. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities of, including buildings owned, leased, or operated by the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-124) 
Sec. 42-81. - General prohibition of smoking in public places. 
Except as otherwise specifically authorized in section 42-83, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-125) 
Sec. 42-82. - General prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in section 42-83, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of employment, including, but not limited to, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(b)  Such prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all current employees and to each prospective employee upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-126) 
Sec. 42-83. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 42-81 and 42-82: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care, adult day care, or health care facility; 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than 20 percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated; 
(3)  Retail tobacco stores, provided that secondhand smoke from such stores does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Long-term care facilities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-8-81(3); 
(5)  Outdoor areas of places of employment; 
(6)  All workplaces of any manufacturer, importer, or wholesaler of tobacco products, of any tobacco leaf dealer or processor, all tobacco storage facilities, and any other entity set forth in O.C.G.A. § 10-13A-2; 
(7)  Private and semiprivate rooms in health care facilities licensed under O.C.G.A. title 31 that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom have written authorization by their treating physician to smoke; 
(8)  Bars and restaurants, as follows: 
a.  All bars and restaurants to which access is denied to any person under the age of 18 and that do not employ any individuals under the age of 18; or 
b.  Private rooms in restaurants and bars if such rooms are enclosed and have an air handling system independent from the main air handling system that serves all other areas of the building and all air within the private room is exhausted directly to the outside by an exhaust fan of sufficient size; 
(9)  Convention facility meeting rooms and public and private assembly rooms contained within a convention facility not wholly or partially owned, leased, or operated by the state, its agencies and authorities, or any political subdivision of the state, municipal corporation, or local board or authority created by general, local, or special Act of the General Assembly while these places are being used for private functions and where individuals under the age of 18 are prohibited from attending or working as an employee during the function; 
(10)  Smoking areas designated by an employer which shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The smoking area shall be located in a non-work area where no employee, as part of his work responsibilities, shall be required to enter, except such work responsibilities shall not include custodial or maintenance work carried out in the smoking area when it is unoccupied; 
b.  Air handling systems from the smoking area shall be independent from the main air handling system that serves all other areas of the building and all air within the smoking area shall be exhausted directly to the outside by an exhaust fan of sufficient size and capacity for the smoking area and no air from the smoking area shall be re-circulated through or infiltrate other parts of the building; and 
c.  The smoking area shall be for the use of employees only; 
the exemption provided for in this subsection shall not apply to restaurants and bars; 
(11)  Common work areas, conference and meeting rooms, and private offices in private places of employment, other than medical facilities, that are open to the general public by appointment only; except that smoking shall be prohibited in any public reception area of such place of employment; and 
(12)  Private clubs, military officer clubs and noncommissioned officer clubs. 
(b)  In order to qualify for exempt status under subsection (a) of this section, any area described in subsection (a) of this section, except for areas described in subsection (a)(1) of this section, shall post conspicuously at every entrance a sign indicating that smoking is permitted. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-127) 
Sec. 42-84. - Owner's election. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that the entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area is a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of section 42-85(a) is posted. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-128) 
Sec. 42-85. - Posting of signs and removal of ashtrays. 
(a)  "No smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it may be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article. 
(b)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of the area, unless such ashtray is permanently affixed to an existing structure. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-129) 
Sec. 42-86. - Educational program. 
The county board of health may engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this article to citizens affected by it and to guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance with it. The program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-130) 
Sec. 42-87. - Enforcement. 
The county board of health and the chief of police, and their duly authorized agents, are authorized and empowered to enforce compliance with this article and, in connection therewith, to enter upon and inspect the premises of any establishment or business at any reasonable time and in a reasonable manner. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-131) 
Sec. 42-88. - Cooperation. 
The county board of health may annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the county to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-132) 
Sec. 42-89. - Violations and penalties. 
A person smoking tobacco in violation of this article shall be deemed to have violated a city ordinance and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-133) 
Sec. 42-90. - Construction. 
(a)  This article shall not be construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(b)  This article shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 42-134) 
ARTICLE V. - PET SOLID WASTE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 42-91. - Title. 
This article shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Peachtree Corners Pet Solid Waste Regulations Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2018-02-117, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 42-92. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid waste in the City of Peachtree Corners so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02-117, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 42-93. - Definitions. 
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Immediate shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay. 
Owner/keeper means any person who shall possess, maintain, house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the owner of such pet. 
Person means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
Pet means a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal) kept for amusement or companionship. 
Pet solid waste means waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet; excrement 
Proper disposal means placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly emptied by a refuse collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and disposal. Disposal into a storm drain or storm water system is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02-117, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 42-94. - Requirement for disposal. 
(a)  All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that person. 
(b)  On any property owned or possessed by that person, all pet owners and keepers are required to properly dispose of their pet's solid waste as frequently as necessary to prevent a public health nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02-117, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 42-95. - Exemptions. 
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is being used for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02-117, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 42-96. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this Article shall be enforced by the City of Peachtree Corners Code Enforcement Division. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02-117, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 42-97. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed: 
(1)  $10.00 for the first offense; 
(2)  $25.00 for the second offense within a year of the first offense; and 
(3)  $50.00 for the third and any subsequent offenses within a year of the first offense. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02-117, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Chapter 46 - PAWNSHOPS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; municipal authority to license and regulate pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136; duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automated reporting system means a computer-based system, specified by the chief of police, designed to record and transmit data and information electronically. 
Employee means: 
(1)  Any owner or pawnbroker who, in the performance of his duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into contact with members of the public; 
(2)  Any person working for an owner or pawnbroker; or 
(3)  Any person who is employed on a part-time or full-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop. 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the power of sale on default. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this chapter. 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawnshop transaction means to take or receive any article of property, from any customer, by pawning, pledging, trading, exchanging, purchasing, or other means. 
Police department means the Gwinnett County Police Department. 
Third party administrator means any individual, business or corporation designated by the chief of police to administer the reporting requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-1) 
Sec. 46-2. - Annual permit required. 
All persons, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or similar place, pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property shall first file an application with the county police department for an annual permit to conduct such business. The issuance of such permit will be based on a criminal history background investigation of the applicant. The cost of the permit/criminal history background investigation shall be a fee in an amount as established by the city. This fee is imposed to cover investigative expenses and/or administrative costs associated with issuing an initial permit for all owners. In the event an owner has more than one pawnshop, then each location will be assessed the above fee. This fee is nonrefundable in the event an applicant, for any reason, is not issued a permit and/or an occupational tax certificate. Owners are required to renew the permit upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee established by the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-2) 
Sec. 46-3. - Permit prerequisite to issuance of occupation tax certificate. 
No occupation tax certificate required by this chapter shall be granted to any person until a permit required by section 46-2 has been issued or approved by the county police department. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-3) 
Sec. 46-4. - Application for permit. 
The application for the annual permit required by section 46-2 shall state the street number and address at which the business is proposed to be operated. The application shall contain the full name, address, phone number, date of birth, photograph, and Social Security number of all persons, including pawnbrokers and employees, having any interest in the proposed business, plus any additional information, including fingerprints, deemed necessary by the licensing and revenue manager and/or the county police department. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-4) 
Sec. 46-5. - Regulation as to employees and managers. 
(a)  No person shall be employed by a pawnshop in any capacity until such person is found to be in compliance with the qualifications as described in this section and has paid a fee which shall be established by the city. Upon complying with the requirements of this chapter, a permit card authorizing such person to be a pawnshop employee will be issued. Each employee and/or manager will be required to renew the permit card annually. The permit card and occupation tax certificate will expire annually, on the date established generally for expiration of the occupation tax certificate. All persons having any interest in the proposed business, including each owner, employee, manager, and pawnbroker, shall, while on the pawnshop premises, have in their possession and available for inspection such permit card. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The following qualifications shall apply to all employees and managers: 
(1)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the county police department, chief of police or his designee and a search of the criminal record of the person completed. Such application shall include the applicant's name, fingerprints, social security number, date of birth, and prior arrest record; though an applicant's arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall not give rise to a presumption or inference of guilt. The applicant must also provide positive identification (only official government issued pictured identification accepted, e.g., U.S. driver's license, passport, military card, or U.S. state identification card). 
(2)  The chief of police or his designee shall conduct a complete and exhaustive search relative to any police record of the applicant. 
(3)  In the event the applicant is qualified for employment in a pawnshop under this section and there is no record of a violation of this chapter, the chief of police or his designee shall issue a permit to the applicant, by mail, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not qualified for a permit and therefore ineligible for employment in a pawnshop, the chief of police or his designee shall notify the person in writing that they are not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and their right to appeal. 
(4)  No person who has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices, shall be issued a permit for the five years preceding the date of application. For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilt or nolo contendere entered under the Georgia First Offender Act, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., shall be ignored; provided, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender status or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(5)  No person shall be issued a permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed, or misrepresented any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application to the police department for a pawnshop permit under this section. 
(6)  All permits issued through administrative error can be terminated and seized by the chief of police or his designee or the city or its designee. 
(7)  Replacement permits will be issued within 30 days of original date, upon paying one-half of the fee charged for pawnshop permits. After 30 days of original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(8)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer or designee of the county police department or employee of the licensing and revenue department. 
(9)  No pawnshop owner shall allow any employee or manager to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in their possession a current valid city permit. For new employees, a receipt issued by the city may be used for a maximum of 30 days from the date of issue. Pawnshop owners are required by this chapter to inspect and verify that each employee or manager has in their possession a valid current pawnshop permit. Issuance of this fee receipt shall allow the applicant to work in the position applied for only until such time as the required criminal history background investigation is completed. The temporary privilege conferred by issuance of this fee receipt shall expire immediately upon completion of such background investigation. If the background investigation indicates that the applicant does not meet the requirements for issuance of a pawnshop permit, the applicant may appeal the denial of the permit as provided in this chapter. However, issuance of this fee receipt and the temporary privilege granted thereby shall not be construed as conferring any right or privilege to the applicant to continue working in the position for which the permit sought during the pendency of the appeal from the denial of a permit under this chapter. 
(10)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a pawnshop occupation tax certificate to file with the chief of police or his designee, the name of the establishment, the occupation tax certificate number and a list of all employees, including their dates of birth, Social Security numbers, home addresses and home telephone numbers, twice annually; during the month of June and again during the month of December. 
(11)  If it is determined that any person issued a pawnshop permit has falsified, concealed, or misrepresented any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme in the application for the pawnshop permit such permit shall be revoked or canceled. 
(12)  County or city employees who are directly involved in the issuance of pawnshop permits or in the regulation of pawnshops shall not be eligible for a permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-5) 
Sec. 46-6. - Denial, suspension or revocation of permit. 
A permit may be denied, suspended or revoked by the chief of police or his designee where the pawnbroker or employee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a permit or fails to meet all qualifications set forth under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-6) 
Sec. 46-7. - Hearings for denial, suspension or revocation of permit. 
No permit shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(1)  The chief of police or his designee shall provide written notice to the applicant of his order to deny, suspend or revoke the permit. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the chief of police may have a review thereof by appeal to the city hearing officer established pursuant to the city alcoholic beverage ordinance. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the chief of police and, in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee. The mayor, city council or a designee at his discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it is determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing such appeal. The city hearing officer may, at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee by a majority vote. The filing fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(2)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the city clerk unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. 
(3)  The findings of the city hearing officer shall be forwarded to the city clerk within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify the appellant of the action of the city hearing officer. 
(4)  The findings of the city hearing officer shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
a.  Contrary to law or ordinances; 
b.  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole; or 
c.  Unreasonable. 
(5)  The findings of the city hearing officer shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of such finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-7) 
Sec. 46-8. - Occupation tax certificate applications, renewals and qualifications. 
(a)  All persons, firms, or corporations desiring to engage in the business, trade or occupation of a pawnshop shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, make application for an occupation tax certificate in the form and manner prescribed by the city. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the information required on all occupation tax returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  Full name, date of birth, and address and Social Security number of applicant. 
(2)  Full names, dates of birth and Social Security numbers of any other persons having an ownership interest in the business. In the case of a corporation, this list shall include owners of ten percent or more of the common or preferred stock. 
(3)  Full names, dates of birth and Social Security numbers and titles of corporate officers where appropriate. 
(4)  Full names, addresses, telephone numbers, and dates of birth, titles and Social Security numbers of individuals to be employed. 
(5)  A copy of the alcohol, tobacco and firearms license, where applicable. 
(c)  All occupation tax certificates granted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire annually, on the date established generally for expiration of the occupation tax certificates. 
(d)  Certificate holders who desire to renew their certificates shall file the application and all applicable fees with the licensing and revenue manager on the form prescribed for renewal of the certificate for the following year. Applications for renewal must be filed on or before the annual deadline provided for all businesses for filing of renewal applications, with payment of tax being due on the date set for occupation taxes generally. 
(e)  All occupation tax certificates granted hereunder shall be for the full calendar year and are not subject to proration. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the renewal applicant to obtain renewal permits as required by this chapter. 
(g)  The following occupation tax certificate qualifications shall also apply: 
(1)  No occupation tax certificate required by this chapter shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or registered resident alien. Where the owner-applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a corporation, a certificate will be issued jointly to the corporation, president or chief executive officer and to the majority stockholder. Where the applicant is a partnership, the certificate may be issued to a partner or general partner. 
(3)  An occupation tax certificate for the practices listed herein may not be issued where the applicant has been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere, and has been released from parole or probation, to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or has been convicted of any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices, within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any pawnshop occupation tax certificate, the applicant shall, by duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither the applicant, nor any of the other owners of the establishment, have been convicted or have plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or have been convicted of any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices. Should any applicant, partner, or officer engaged in operating a pawnshop, after a certificate has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or enter a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or any felony, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices, the certificate and/or permit shall be immediately revoked or canceled. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-8) 
Sec. 46-9. - Suspension or revocation of occupation tax certificate. 
(a)  A certificate may be suspended or revoked by the mayor, city council or a designee where the certificate holder furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a certificate and failing to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The mayor, city council or a designee shall revoke the certificate for any premises where goods are pawned during a period of suspension. 
(c)  The mayor, city council or a designee may suspend or revoke the certificate of any establishment which does not meet the qualifications set forth in this chapter any time such knowledge becomes known to him. 
(d)  An act or omission of a certificate holder, owner of more than 20 percent interest in the establishment, or employee of the certificate holder or establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this chapter, will subject the certificate holder to suspension or revocation of its certificate in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when the mayor, city council or a designee determines to its own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues; provided, however, in the case of an employee, the mayor, city council or a designee must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the certificate holder, were condoned by the certificate holder, or where the certificate holder has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(e)  The mayor, city council or a designee may suspend or revoke the certificate of any establishment whenever it can be shown that a certificate holder hereunder no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the certificate was conditioned or whenever the certificate holder has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to county. 
(f)  Wherever this chapter permits the mayor, city council or a designee to suspend any certificate issued hereunder but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised within the guidelines of this subsection. 
(1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such certificate. 
(2)  The following factors shall be considered on any revocation or suspension as set out above: 
a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this chapter and those set by the licensing and revenue manager. 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing. 
c.  Impact of the offense on the community. 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by the certificate holder. 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the certificate holder to take remedial or corrective steps. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-9) 
Sec. 46-10. - Hearings for the denial, suspension or revocation of certificate. 
No certificate shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(1)  The city hearing officer shall provide written notice to the applicant or certificate holder of his order to deny, suspend or revoke the certificate. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or certificate holder of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or certificate holder who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the mayor, city council or a designee may have a review thereof by appeal to the city hearing officer. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the mayor, city council or a designee and, in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee. The mayor, city council or a designee, at their discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it's determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing such appeal. The city hearing officer may, at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee. The filing fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(2)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the mayor, city council or a designee unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the mayor, city council or a designee. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. 
(3)  The findings of the city hearing officer shall be forwarded to the city clerk within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify the appellant and the chief of police or his designee of the action of the city hearing officer. 
(4)  The findings of the city hearing officer shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
a.  Contrary to law or ordinances; 
b.  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole; or 
c.  Unreasonable. 
(5)  The findings of the city hearing officer shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of such finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-10) 
Sec. 46-11. - Records and information to be maintained; display of pawnshop transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage. 
Engaging in the business of pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling used or previously owned merchandise, furniture, machinery, appliances, utensils, firearms, gold, silver, coins, precious metals, jewelry, and precious stones within the city is hereby declared to be affected with the public interest due to the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. In the public interest and as set forth herein, all pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting all pawnshop transactions. 
(1)  All pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting accurate descriptions of all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold to the pawnbroker. Such description shall include, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and all other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The pawnbroker shall assign a pawnshop transaction number documenting each transaction, and ensure each item received is tagged with the pawnshop transaction number. 
(2)  The tag bearing the pawnshop transaction number must remain attached to the item until the property is disposed of by sale, trade, or other lawful means. This subsection does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however, the pawnbroker shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this subsection. 
(3)  The pawnbroker shall require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a pawnshop transaction. Proper identification is defined as a government-issued photo identification card, such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. 
(4)  The pawnbroker shall also document the name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and social security number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(5)  The pawnbroker shall photograph, with a digital camera or web camera, the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property. The photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnbroker's ticket transaction number and a photograph of the item being pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(6)  The pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any property, the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging, or selling the property. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one pawn transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature should be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property. 
(7)  Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging cannot be accepted by the pawnbroker unless the customer can supply a copy of the original sales receipt, or other proof of purchase from the place of purchase, to the pawnbroker who shall retain the receipt or proof of purchase on file. 
(8)  The pawnbroker shall store the above records, digital images, and fingerprints for a period of four years and make them available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(9)  Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the county police department. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-11) 
Sec. 46-12. - Daily report to police; required format. 
Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report, in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police, of all pawnshop transactions that occurred during 24 hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. 
(1)  Daily reports shall list all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold, the pawn transaction number for each transaction, and a description of the property, including, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and any other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The daily report shall also list the name, address, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and social security number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of the transaction. 
(2)  Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the police department. 
(3)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, pawnshops and pawnbrokers will be notified as soon as possible by the police department. In this event, the pawnbrokers will be required to make records of transactions in paper form as prescribed by the police department. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in section 46-11. Pawnbrokers shall be responsible for maintaining an adequate inventory of these forms. 
(4)  The chief of police or his designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system and required equipment needed. There will be a fee assessed to the pawnshop for each reported transaction. Said fee may be assessed against the persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property. The assessed fee shall not exceed 50 percent of the actual cost charged by the police department or the third party administrator. This fee will be invoiced to the pawnbroker and collected by the chief of police or his designee, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-12) 
Sec. 46-13. - Property not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition; location of property; police holds. 
(a)  All property received through any pawnshop transaction shall be held for at least 30 days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise, except when property is redeemed as per a pawn transaction contract. 
(b)  All property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or purchased shall be held and maintained by the pawnbroker on the premises of the pawnshop or, if impracticable, at such other location as may have been previously approved in writing by the chief of police or his designee. The chief of police shall not approve any off-premises storage facilities located outside the county. 
(c)  The county police department has the authority to place property that is the subject of police investigation on police hold. In that event, the county police department shall notify the pawnbroker of the need for a police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from police hold status or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-13) 
Sec. 46-14. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his agents or employees to receive through any pawnshop any property from minors. A minor, for the purpose of this section, is an individual 17 years of age or under. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-14) 
Sec. 46-15. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The county police department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter. Sworn officers of the county police department and civilian employees designated by the chief of police shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city or county officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-15) 
Sec. 46-16. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, company, corporation or other entity who violates any provision of this chapter may be subject to arrest or summoned to appear in the county recorder's court and, upon conviction or other finding of guilt, be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment, or both. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 82-16) 
Sec. 46-17. - Display of certificate at place of business. 
Any occupational tax certificate issued under this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place of the business of the licensee and within public view. Such occupational tax certificate shall be shown to any appointee of the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. O2017-04-93, § I, 5-16-2017) 
Chapter 50 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule power to adopt local land development plans, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Incorporation by reference. 
The development regulations of the city, together with all amendments are incorporated by reference as part of this Code. An official copy of such ordinance and amendments is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 86-1) 
Sec. 50-2. - General organization, review and recommendation. 
The mayor and city council or a designee shall prepare and update as necessary plans for the city regarding land use types and locations, transportation facilities and other city resources and facilities, and shall review all proposed amendments to the city zoning resolution and prepare recommendations thereon for the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 86-2) 
Sec. 50-3. - City planning commission. 
(a)  Creation. There shall be created a planning commission which shall have the powers and duties stated in, and be subject to and governed by, the regulations set forth in this chapter and Code. 
(b)  Composition. All planning commission members must be appointed by the mayor and the city council. 
(c)  Membership. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the city council shall establish qualifications for members of the planning commission. 
(2)  Each planning commission member must be a resident of the city. Should the member move out of the city, he may remain active until the mayor and city council appoint his replacement. 
(3)  Planning commission members must attend two-thirds of the meetings in a calendar year. Failure to do so warrants removal from the board. 
(4)  The planning commission shall consist of seven members, who shall be appointed pursuant to the procedures established in this chapter and who shall conduct the meetings of the commission pursuant to this chapter, as well as the requirements. 
(d)  Terms. 
(1)  Members shall serve a two-year term, except as otherwise provided herein, which terms shall be staggered, and may be reappointed following the same procedures as outlined in this chapter. In order to stagger the terms of office for the planning commission, members of the planning commission will be appointed to identifiable posts. Members of posts A, B, and C shall be appointed to initial terms of office beginning immediately after their effective appointment and expiring on January 15, 2013. Members of posts D, E, F and G shall be appointed to initial terms of office beginning immediately after their effective appointment and expiring on January 15, 2014. Thereafter, for successive terms of office, such terms shall be for two years. The planning commission serves at the pleasure of the mayor and the city council and may be removed as provided in the city Charter, as amended from time to time. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term of such vacancy in the same manner as the original appointment with said appointment serving the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(2)  The mayor and councilmembers may serve on the planning commission so long as they remain elected to office. A former councilmember or mayor may serve on the commission, but such person shall not take the place of the elected member. 
(3)  Planning commission members filling vacancies shall serve the remainder of the term to which they were appointed. A consecutive appointment is permissible. 
(4)  Any planning commission member may be removed for cause by the mayor and a majority of the city council. 
(e)  Quorum. A majority of actual planning commission members establishes a quorum. Any action taken requires a majority of affirmative votes of the quorum present. 
(f)  Procedure. 
(1)  The planning commission shall make its rules of procedure and determine its time of meetings. The date and time of each meeting, as well as agenda items to be considered, shall be publicized in the same manner as meetings of the city council. 
(2)  The planning commission shall meet monthly in accordance with an established schedule of meetings as prepared by the city clerk. 
(3)  All meetings at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records maintained by the planning commission shall be public records, unless expressly excepted by a provision of O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.), and the Georgia Open Records Act. The planning commission shall keep minutes of their formal proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, and records of their examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the mayor and each member of the city council. The minutes of the meetings shall be a public record. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting closed sessions when permitted by O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.), the Georgia Open Meetings Act, and O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.), the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(g)  Training. The city council may establish a mandatory training program for planning commission members. 
(h)  Election of chair and vice-chair. The appointed members of the planning commission shall elect a chair and vice-chair. Elections of such positions shall occur annually. The vice-chair may be appointed to the duties of the chair when deemed necessary by emergency or when the chair is no longer able to perform those duties assigned, as determined by the mayor. The duty of the chair shall be to conduct the meetings in accordance with the procedures set forth by the planning commission, and the vice-chair shall conduct the meetings in the chair's absence. 
(i)  Function. It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to review and make recommendations for action by the mayor and city council on the following: all applications for annexation where there is an associated change in zoning, rezoning, concurrent variances, applications for use permits, amendments to the text of the city zoning ordinance, the city comprehensive plan, the future land use/development map, and the zoning map. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the mayor and city council from hereafter assigning other duties or remanding a case back to the planning commission. 
(j)  Recommendations. 
(1)  At the close of each public hearing, the chair of the planning commission shall call the members to order for consideration and a vote on the issue currently before them. The vote of the planning commission shall be nonbinding and shall be made in the form of a recommendation to the mayor and city council from the following list: 
a.  Approval as recommended by staff with recommended conditions; 
b.  Approval as recommended by staff with revised conditions as presented by the planning commission; 
c.  Denial. 
(2)  The planning commission must render a recommendation pursuant to this subsection (j), except that the planning commission may defer an issue for no more than one month if requested by the applicant/owner, if a new site plan is received less than seven days prior to the meeting, or in order to receive additional information necessary to make a recommendation to the mayor and city council at the time of a deferral motion. The specific reason for the deferral and the specific materials or information requested as necessary to render a recommendation shall be stated. 
(k)  Reimbursements. The planning commission may receive reimbursement for customary expenses incurred in conjunction with any authorized activity of the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 86-3) 
Sec. 50-4. - Withdrawal of zoning amendment applications. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that an applicant for an amendment to the zoning map may withdraw such application without prejudice only until such time as the legal advertisement of a public hearing thereon is placed. 
(b)  No application shall be allowed to be withdrawn under any circumstances after public notice of the public hearings has been placed. All applications having been advertised shall be considered by the city and shall receive final action. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 86-4) 
Secs. 50-5—50-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUFFER, LANDSCAPE AND TREES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-27. - Intent. 
This article shall apply to all properties or portions thereof located within the city, to the extent of the provisions contained herein. The mayor and council hereby finds that the protection and preservation of trees, the planting of new trees and other landscape material, and the provision of buffers between dissimilar uses as part of the land development process is a public purpose and provides for the public health and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 1-1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-28. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to preserve and enhance the natural environment. This is accomplished through the preservation, protection and planting of trees and other landscape material, particularly those trees recognized herein as canopy and understory trees, and the provision of natural and/or planted buffers between dissimilar uses as part of the land development process. This article is intended to further the city's policy that all development sites where trees are most commonly removed will achieve upon project completion a uniform standard related to tree coverage, landscaping and buffers. In addition, trees are recognized for their importance in shading and cooling, noise and wind reduction, prevention of soil erosion, production of oxygen, dust filtration, fostering air quality through carbon dioxide absorption, providing wildlife habitat, and contributing to the aesthetic and economic value of real property. 
(b)  This article is also intended to further the city's policy of encouraging all individuals or firms who propose to develop land, and which are required to meet the requirements of this article, to consider the use of water-efficient landscaping principles and techniques (xeriscaping). 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 1-2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-29. - Title. 
This article shall be known as "The Buffer, Landscape, and Tree Ordinance of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia," and may be referred to generally as "the buffer ordinance," or "the landscape ordinance," or "the tree ordinance," or, as used herein, "this article." 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 1-3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-30. - Definitions of words and phrases. 
(a)  In construing the provisions hereof and the meaning of each and every word, term, phrase, or part thereof, where the context will permit, the definitions of words as contained in the zoning resolution, supplemented by the following, shall apply: 
Authorized registered professional. 
(1)  The term "authorized registered professional" means: 
a.  A landscape architect who is licensed in the state in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-23-1(2), (3); 
b.  A land surveyor who possesses a current certificate of registration issued by the state in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 43-15-2(6), (7) and 43-15-13; or 
c.  A professional engineer who possesses a current certificate of registration issued by in the state in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 43-15-2(10), (11) and 43-15-9. 
(2)  An authorized registered professional shall know and understand the limits of their professional expertise, certification, license or registration and shall not perform work which is outside of the scope of said professional expertise, certification, license or registration. An authorized registered professional shall be liable for complying with all state laws and rules and licensing board requirements that apply to their particular profession, including ethical standards, and shall be liable for failure to meet the applicable standards of professional care. All documents and drawings submitted to the city by an authorized registered professional shall bear that person's certification, license, registration or seal, as appropriate. The certification, license, registration or seal of an authorized registered professional on documents and drawings submitted to the city shall certify that the documents and drawings comply with all applicable city ordinances, rules and regulations and shall certify that the documents and drawings are based on personal knowledge of the conditions depicted thereon and that the accuracy and completeness of the documents and drawings have been verified by field inspection of the facilities depicted thereon. 
Buffer means land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance, to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other conditions, to minimize physical passage to non-similar areas, or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter. 
Construction buffer means land area in which there is no disturbance until a certificate of occupancy has been issued on the building lot at which time the construction buffer is removed. A construction buffer is a type of buffer which is temporary and remains in effect during the construction of a project. 
*Enhanced buffer means land area in which there is no disturbance with the exception for disturbance related to additional required plantings, specific to the zoning case and for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 
*Landscaped buffer means land area in which grading is allowed and re-vegetation to a buffer standard is required specific to zoning case. Replanted per approved landscape plan. 
*Natural, undisturbed buffer means land area in which there is no disturbance and no grading allowed, except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 
Stream buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. The definition of stream buffer is governed by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3(2). 
Per section 50-52(c), "Buffers in which vegetation is non-existent or is inadequate to meet the screening requirements of the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance shall be planted with supplemental plantings so as to provide an effective visual screen". 
Canopy tree means a tree that, under normal forest conditions, will compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and generally will reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
City means the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 
Clearing means the removal of vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means. 
Critical root zone means the minimum area beneath a tree that must be left undisturbed. The CRZ is a concentric circle centering on the specimen tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to 1.5 times the number of inches of the trunk's diameter at breast height (4.5 feet). Example: the CRZ radius of a 20-inch diameter tree is 30 feet. 
Department means the city department of planning and development, as established by the city mayor and council, and as operated through the actions and administration of the appointed director of said department or his designee. 
Development regulations means the adopted regulations providing for the subdivision and development of real property within the city, as amended from time to time by the mayor and council of the city. 
Diameter, tree, means the diameter of a tree measured as follows: 
(1)  For existing preserved trees, at a point 4.5 feet above the ground; 
(2)  For new replaced trees, at a point six inches above the ground. 
Director means the director of the department of planning and development or his designee. 
Dripline means a line on the ground established by a vertical plane extending from a tree's outermost branch tips down to the ground; i.e., the line enclosing the area directly beneath the tree's crown from which rainfall would drip. 
Floodplain, 100-year, means those lands subject to flooding, which have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year; and specifically, the floodplain as shown on the flood boundary and floodway map as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
Grading means the placement, removal, or movement of earth by use of mechanical equipment on a property. 
Green space means that as defined in the zoning resolution. 
Hardwood tree means any tree that is not coniferous (cone bearing) or needle bearing. 
Land disturbance permit (LDP) means any permit other than a building permit issued by the city that authorizes clearing or grading activities on a site or portion of a site. This permit may be a clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading, or development permit, as defined and authorized by the development regulations of city. 
Landscape strip means land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
Modification means a type of administrative appeal that may be granted by the director only where specifically authorized in this article. 
Monetary compensation monies means a dollar amount for a tree that is stored in the tree bank. 
Monetary compensation value means a unit of measurement that when multiplied by the tree density unit allows a given dollar amount for a tree to be stored in the tree bank. 
Open space means that as defined in the zoning resolution. 
Screening means a method of shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, or the like. 
Shrub means a woody plant of relatively low height, as distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk. 
Softwood tree means any coniferous (cone bearing) tree. 
Specimen tree means any tree that meets one or more of the identification criteria listed in section 50-119. It is based on the tree's size, type, condition, location or historical significance. See section 50-119 for specific criteria defining specimen trees. 
Timber harvesting means the felling, loading and transporting of timber products (pulpwood, etc.). The term "timber harvesting" may include both clear cutting and selective cutting of timber. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually having a main stem or trunk and many branches, and at maturity normally attaining a trunk diameter greater than three inches at any point and a height of over ten feet. 
Tree bank. 
(1)  Option One: Trees are planted by the developer at an alternate site; or 
(2)  Option Two: A place of storage of monetary compensation for trees. 
Tree banking. 
(1)  Option One: The process whereby the developer plants and installs trees on an alternative site chosen by the developer with prior approval from the director. 
(2)  Option Two: The process of storing monetary compensation for trees with prior approval from the director. 
Option One will result in the planting of trees at the following sites, including, but not limited to, fire stations, libraries, schools (excluding city parks and recreation properties), and revitalization projects in community improvement districts within the same district in which the development is located or within five miles of such district. Option Two will result in the planting of trees at parks, greenways, fire stations, and libraries within the same district in which the development is located or within five miles of such district. 
Tree canopy calculation means a number given in square feet to a tree or group of trees that reflect the overall canopy at maturity of the trees. See Appendix A which is on file and available for public review in the office of the city clerk for the square feet and section 50-116(c) for calculation requirement. 
Tree density standard (TDS) means the minimum number of tree density units per acre which must be achieved on a property. 
Tree density unit (TDU) means a credit assigned to a tree, based on the diameter of the tree, in accordance with tables contained in this article. 
Tree preservation and/or replacement plan (TP/RP) means a plan that identifies tree protection areas where existing trees are to be preserved and where proposed replacement trees are to be planted on a property to meet minimum requirements, as well as methods of tree protection to be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information. 
Tree protection area (TPA) means any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees which are proposed to be preserved in order to comply with the requirements of this article. The tree protection area shall include no less than the total area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the dripline of the tree or group of trees collectively. 
Tree thinning means selective cutting or thinning of trees only for the clear purpose of good forestry management in order to protect said forest from disease or infestation and in no way shall be construed as clearcutting. 
Understory tree means a tree that, under normal forest conditions, grows to maturity beneath overstory trees and will generally reach a mature height of at least ten feet but less than 40 feet. 
Xeriscaping means a method of landscaping utilizing materials which are water-efficient (refer to division 5 of this article for principles and techniques). 
Zoning buffer means a buffer required by the zoning resolution or as a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval for a specific property. 
Zoning resolution means the zoning resolution of the city, as amended from time to time by the mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 2-1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-31. - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, clause, or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article in whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 9-2, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 50-32—50-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUFFER REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50-51. - Applicability. 
Buffers shall be required between dissimilar districts or uses in accordance with the provisions of the zoning resolution or as a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 3-1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-52. - Standards for permanent buffers. 
(a)  Width of buffers. Buffers shall meet the minimum width requirements contained in the zoning resolution, except as authorized to be reduced by the applicable buffer reduction process, as follows: 
(1)  As specified in the "Minimum Buffer Strip Requirement Table"; 
(2)  As specified in a residential zoning district for a permitted nonresidential use (e.g., a church, temple, synagogue, etc.); or 
(3)  As required by a condition of zoning, special use, or variance approval. 
(b)  Screening requirements. 
(1)  Buffers shall be natural, undisturbed, and free of encroachments except as authorized by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval, or as authorized herein, and shall contain the existing tree cover and vegetation as well as any supplemental plantings or re-plantings as may be required. 
(2)  Buffers shall be of such nature and density so as to screen activities, structures and uses on the property from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot and shall further provide a yearround effective visual screen. 
(3)  Buffers required along side property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required by the director in order to observe the sight distance requirements contained in the development regulations, or as authorized by a condition of zoning, special use, or variance approval. 
(4)  In situations where the required buffer width is partially or completely contained within an existing easement (e.g., power or natural gas transmission, etc.), the screening requirements of this division shall be met outside of the easement area. 
(c)  Supplemental plantings. 
(1)  Buffers in which vegetation is non-existent or is inadequate to meet the screening requirements of this division shall be planted with supplemental plantings so as to provide a yearround effective visual screen. 
(2)  Supplemental plantings and re-plantings shall consist of a combination of evergreen and deciduous trees adaptable to the region. Deciduous trees shall be two inches in diameter and evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height. Evergreen trees planted shall be a minimum of six feet in height at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. The tree types shall be from Appendix A which is on file and available for public review in the office of the city clerk. All shrubs planted shall be a large growing species, shall be a minimum of three feet in height at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least ten feet at maturity. 
(3)  All supplemental plantings shall be installed to allow for proper plant growth and maintenance. 
(4)  All supplemental plantings in buffers shall be limited to 33 percent of one genus of tree. Calculations are required on tree preservation/ tree replacement plan. 
(5)  Leyland Cypress, Cuppressus leylandii may be used in supplemental replanting in buffers and shall not exceed 33 percent of total buffer trees. Leyland Cypress is not allowed to fulfill regulatory density requirements. Leyland Cypress can be used for screening purposes. 
(d)  Non-vegetative screening. 
(1)  Non-vegetative materials utilized to satisfy the screening requirements of this division, in addition to the use of existing vegetation and/or supplemental plantings, may consist of walls, fences, earthen berms or any combination thereof. 
(2)  If walls or fences are to be utilized, their placement and installation shall be such so as to cause minimal disturbance of existing vegetation and located so as to provide an effective visual screen. 
(e)  Disturbance or encroachments. 
(1)  Ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any associated easements shall not encroach into a buffer except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g., stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes) may encroach into the buffer as near to perpendicular as practical. 
(2)  Supplemental plantings or re-plantings of vegetation, or authorized non-vegetative screening devices shall be authorized to encroach into a buffer provided there is minimal disturbance of any significant existing vegetation. 
(3)  Land disturbance is authorized in areas of a buffer that are devoid of significant vegetation, provided that the final grade and re-plantings of vegetation meet the screening requirements contained herein. 
(4)  Dying, diseased or dead vegetation may be removed from a buffer provided minimal disturbance occurs. Vegetation thus removed shall be replaced where necessary to meet the screening requirements contained herein. 
(f)  Protection during land disturbing activities. 
(1)  During authorized land disturbing activities, buffers shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during, construction. 
(2)  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with best management practices or as required by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 3-2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-53. - Standards for construction buffers. 
(a)  Where required. Construction buffers shall only be required where specifically provided as a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval. 
(b)  Time constraints. Construction buffers shall only be in effect during the construction period of a project and shall terminate upon project completion. In the case of a residential subdivision, a construction buffer shall terminate upon each individual lot with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal dwelling. 
(c)  Disturbance or encroachments. 
(1)  Construction buffers shall be natural, undisturbed and free of encroachments, except as authorized by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval, or as authorized herein. 
(2)  The encroachment of ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sediment basins, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any associated easements into a construction buffer shall not be authorized except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g., stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes), and natural bottom detention ponds (sediment basins must be located outside of the construction buffer) and their appurtenant structures which require no grading and removal of trees may encroach upon the construction buffer. 
(3)  If the construction buffer on a residential lot is devoid of existing trees and vegetation, and a tree survey is submitted to document this situation prior to conducting land disturbing activities (including clearing) on the lot, then the department may authorize the encroachment of a building or structure into the construction buffer for a distance not to exceed ten feet. 
(d)  Protection during land disturbing activities. 
(1)  During authorized land disturbing activities, construction buffers shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during, construction. 
(2)  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with best management practices or as required by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 3-3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-54. - Required buffers (street frontage buffer). 
(a)  A street frontage buffer is required for new single-family residential subdivision developments zoned R-100 Modified, and R-60 that is 50 feet in width. The street frontage buffer shall remain undisturbed and natural, except for entrance features, necessary street construction activities, right-of-way crossings, and corner right-of-way miters or radii. If the required street frontage buffer is void of vegetation, it shall be replanted to provide an effective visual screen, which may include landscape berms and decorative fences. The landscape plan shall be submitted, reviewed and approved by staff landscape architect or designee prior to issuance of a development permit. Trees in the street frontage buffer can be counted toward meeting tree density units. No-access easements, as described in section 50-85, shall be included within the street frontage buffer and shall be landscaped as part of and in accordance with the street frontage buffer requirements. 
(b)  The director is hereby authorized to grant a modification for compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 3-4, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 50-55—50-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50-82. - Applicability. 
(a)  Nonresidential and multifamily uses. Nonresidential and multifamily uses shall provide for and maintain landscape plantings on-site as follows: 
(1)  In a landscape strip at least ten feet in width adjacent to any street right-of-way abutting the property and running the length of the entire property frontage; 
(2)  In areas adjacent or internal to off-street parking lots that are required by the zoning resolution to contain more than five off-street parking spaces; 
(3)  As required by a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval; and 
(4)  The director is hereby authorized to grant a modification of up to 50 percent of the ten-foot landscape strip width provided the strip is not required by a condition of zoning, special use, modification, variance or waiver approval. 
(b)  Residential subdivisions. Residential subdivisions shall provide for and maintain landscape plantings on-site as set forth in section 50-85 in the following circumstances: 
(1)  In no-access easements that are required by the development regulations along the line of double frontage lots abutting upon a major thoroughfare; and 
(2)  As required by a condition of zoning, special use, modification, variance or waiver approval. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 4-1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-83. - Landscape strip planting requirements. 
(a)  Ten-foot wide landscape strips. Landscape strips which are required to be ten feet in width shall contain landscaping and plantings within or adjacent to the strip as follows: 
(1)  One tree for each 25 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Deciduous trees shall be at least two inches in diameter and evergreen trees shall be six feet in height at time of planting. Trees shall be a species native or suitable to this region. 
(2)  One shrub for each 25 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Each shrub shall be a species native or suitable to this region. 
(3)  Trees and shrubs required herein may be planted and spaced singly or in groups as authorized by the director so long as the total number of plantings is achieved. 
(4)  The remaining ground area shall be sodded, seeded or hydroseeded with grass, and/or planted with groundcover species and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof. 
(b)  Five-foot wide landscape strips. Landscape strips which are required to be five feet in width shall contain landscaping and plantings within or adjacent to the strip as follows: 
(1)  One tree for each 50 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Deciduous trees shall be at least two inches in diameter and evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height at time of planting. Trees shall be a species native or suitable to this region. 
(2)  One shrub for each 50 linear feet of strip length shall be provided. Each shrub shall be a species native or suitable to this region. 
(3)  Trees and shrubs required herein may be planted and spaced singly or in groups as authorized by the director so long as the total number of required plantings is achieved. 
(4)  The remaining ground area shall be sodded, seeded or hydroseeded with grass, and/or planted with groundcover species and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof. 
(c)  Landscape strips wider than ten feet. Tree and shrub quantities in landscape strips that are required to be wider than ten feet by a condition of zoning, special use, variance or waiver approval shall be proportional to their width (e.g., a 20-foot wide landscape strip would require two trees and two shrubs for each 25 linear feet of strip length). 
(d)  Encroachments into landscape strips. Required landscaped strips shall not be encroached upon by parking spaces, driveway surfaces or stormwater detention facilities except that driveway crossings may traverse such strip as near to a perpendicular alignment as practical. Signs may also be located in such strip. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 4-2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-84. - Off-street surface parking lot planting requirements. 
Off-street surface parking lots which are required to contain more than five parking spaces shall contain landscaping and plantings as follows: 
(1)  Trees shall be provided and maintained adjacent to, and in the interior portions of, parking lots in a ratio of one tree for each seven parking spaces. In addition, every parking space shall be within 60 feet of the trunk of a tree. 
(2)  Deciduous trees shall be at least two inches in diameter and evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height. Canopy trees listed in Appendix A which is on file and available for public review in the office of the city clerk, A.2 Parking Lot and Street Tree Species List, shall be selected, planted, and maintained. Any plantings beyond the minimum requirements may come from any of the Appendix A which is on file and available for public review in the office of the city clerk. 
(3)  The minimum planting area or island for each canopy tree shall be at least 200 square feet. If shared with other trees, 80 square feet for each additional tree shall be added. 
(4)  The minimum planting area or island for each understory tree shall be 100 square feet. If shared with other trees, 40 square feet for each additional tree shall be added. 
(5)  Each planting area or island shall not be less than four feet in width in any direction. 
(6)  Ground areas shall be sodded, seeded or hydroseeded with grass and/or planted with groundcover species, and/or provided with other landscaping material, or any combination thereof. 
(7)  Paved or striped islands greater than 50 square feet shall not be allowed. These areas shall contain landscape plantings. 
(8)  Topping trees is not allowed. Trees removed or having had their tops cut after compliance with this division shall be replaced with the equivalent inches of removed trees. 
a.  Trees removed due to disease or insect infestation upon the written advice and findings of the county extension service or the state forestry commission shall be replaced in accordance with the minimum standards contained in this division. 
b.  Appropriate pruning and healthy tree management shall be according to the standards as followed by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
(9)  The director is hereby authorized to grant a modification of tree species in cases of power easements. 
(10)  No more than 33 percent of all proposed trees to be planted may be of any one genus. 
Sec. 50-85. - No-access easement screening requirements. 
No-access easements which are required by the development regulations, or as a condition of zoning, special use or variance approval, shall be screened as follows: 
(1)  Planted with a single line of evergreen trees at least six feet in height and spaced no greater than ten feet apart; 
(2)  Contain a solid or decorative fence at least four feet in height; or 
(3)  Contain such other landscaping treatments or grade changes that will produce a partial screening effect as authorized by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 4-3, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 50-86—50-113. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TREE PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50-114. - Applicability and exemptions. 
(a)  Application; exemptions. This article shall apply to any activity on real property which requires the issuance of a land disturbing permit except as excluded in this section. Table A: Summary of Applicability and Exemptions, at the end of this section, summarizes those activities which are exempt from the provisions of this division and those for which a tree preservation and/or replacement plan must be approved prior to issuance of a land disturbing permit. 
(b)  Grandfathered projects. 
(1)  This article shall not apply to any portion of a property included within the limits of a valid land disturbing permit issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, provided that all time constraints relating to the permit issued shall be observed. In no event shall any grandfathered project be extended for a greater time period than 24 months from the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(2)  Projects which were included within the limits of a land disturbing permit issued prior to June 23, 1987, which was the effective date of the county tree ordinance, shall be grandfathered from the requirements of this article to the extent of the time constraints imposed upon said permit by the development regulations. 
(3)  The requirements of this division may be waived by the department for a land disturbing permit which is to proceed with development of a larger project, at least 75 percent of the land area of which has already received a permit or permits initiating clearing or grading activities prior to June 23, 1987, which was the effective date of the county tree ordinance. 
(c)  Horticultural or agricultural operations. 
(1)  All plant or tree nurseries and botanical gardens shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this division in relation to those trees which are being grown for relocation and continued growth in the ordinary course of business, or for some public purpose. 
(2)  All orchards of trees in active commercial operation shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this division for bona fide agricultural purposes only. 
(3)  Land clearing or clearing and grubbing activities for clearly agricultural purposes in the RA-200 zoning district shall be exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(4)  Timber harvesting (selective cutting or clear-cutting) for pulpwood or sawtimber shall be exempt within the RA-200 zoning district. In other zoning districts, such activities shall be authorized only in accordance with the issuance of a land disturbing permit under the requirements of this division. 
(d)  Removal of disease or insect infestation. Upon the written advice of the county extension service or the state forestry commission in accordance with commonly accepted forestry practices and a finding of disease or insect infestation, the director may authorize the removal of trees to prevent the transmission of disease or infestation, to prevent the danger of these trees falling, or to prevent potential injury to life and property. The owner/developer, prior to the removal of these trees, shall notify the director, identifying the location of the infested property, and shall submit to the director the written finding of the county extension service or the state forestry commission. 
(e)  Tree thinning. Upon the written advice and findings of the county extension service or the state forestry commission, the thinning of trees (selective cutting only) in zoning districts other than RA-200, solely for the purpose of good forestry management, may be permitted upon authorization by the director and shall require the submittal and approval of a tree preservation and/or replacement plan. Permits authorizing tree thinning shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  The property shall have been initiated for rezoning by the city, rather than the property owner, from RA-200 to its present zoning classification. 
(2)  The property shall not have been subdivided. The property shall have the same configuration since June 9, 1970, when the county comprehensive zoning tax maps were adopted. 
(3)  A 75-foot undisturbed buffer (not a zoning buffer) shall be provided and maintained along the entire perimeter of the property, including road frontages, during the land disturbing activity, except for authorized access crossings. 
(4)  The property shall be required to meet a tree density standard of 24 units per acre upon completion of authorized land disturbing activities. 
(5)  The owner/developer shall utilize the recommended best management practices (BMPs) as established by the state forestry commission. 
(f)  Zoning buffer exclusion. Existing trees proposed to be retained preserved, and new trees proposed to be planted, in order to meet the buffer requirements of the zoning resolution or conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval, shall not be considered in fulfilling the requirements of this division. 
(g)  Easement exclusion. Properties possessing natural gas, petroleum or electric power transmission easements, or major sanitary sewer main (greater than eight inches in diameter) or water main (greater than 16 inches in diameter) distribution easements, may exclude the land area contained in the easement from the total acreage of the property in fulfilling the tree density standard provided that no improvements (e.g., parking lots, tennis courts, driveways, stormwater detention facilities, etc.) are proposed within the easement. If any improvements are proposed within the easement, then the land area so utilized within the easement for the improvements, plus an additional ten feet of land area surrounding the improvements, shall be used to fulfill the tree density standard. 
(h)  Lake and pond exclusion. Properties with a lake or pond greater than one acre in size may exclude the land area contained in the lake or pond from the total acreage of the property in fulfilling the tree density standard. 
Table A  Summary of Applicability and Exemptions 

 
* Limits of buffers and tree protection areas shall be designated with protective tree fencing prior to, or concurrent with, commencement of activities, consistent with exemption allowances. 
Additional areas may be designated by the department to remain undisturbed based on land use plan. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 5-1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-115. - Permits. 
(a)  Land disturbing permit required. Land disturbing activities shall not commence until such activities have been authorized by issuance of an appropriate land disturbing permit under the provisions of the development regulations. Once a final plat has been recorded, land disturbing activities on residential lots shall not occur until a building permit has been obtained. 
(b)  Tree preservation and/or replacement plan required. For projects not exempt from the provisions of this division, and not included under subsection (c) of this section, a tree preservation and/or replacement plan shall be submitted, along with the tree canopy calculation, and the other documents required by the development regulations for the issuance of a clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading, or development permit. 
(1)  Tree preservation and/or replacement plans, including the tree canopy calculation, and related documentation shall be reviewed by the department for conformance to the provisions of this division along with and at the same time as all other plans required for a requested land disturbing permit under the provisions of the development regulations. 
(2)  Clearing, grading and development activities shall conform in all respects with the approved tree preservation and/or replacement plan. Any revisions to the proposed development of a property, and any changes reflected in a subsequently submitted permit application, shall be shown on a revised tree preservation and/or replacement plan and be approved as part of the new or revised permit prior to the commencement of such changed activities. 
(c)  Limited land disturbing projects. 
(1)  Projects which propose only limited development activities may be issued a land disturbing permit without a tree preservation and/or replacement plan under the following circumstances: 
a.  Private or public utility easements and public greenways on public access easements and private or public utility easements shall not be required to submit a tree preservation and/or replacement plan if the proposed land disturbing activities are strictly limited to those directly related to the placement of required soil erosion and sedimentation controls, the installation of public or private utilities, the installation of public greenways on public access easements and private or public easements, or other required improvements expressly required by the city or by a condition of zoning, special use, modification, waiver or variance approval. 
b.  Residential recreation areas, individual multifamily residential and attached townhomes (not on individual lots), and nonresidential projects (not involving the subdivision of the property) may not be allowed to undertake activities limited to clearing, or clearing and grubbing only, without approval of a tree preservation and/or replacement plan. Additional areas may be designated by the department to remain undisturbed as may be reasonably required with consideration given to the proposed use of the property, as well as adjacent properties, in accordance with the city's land use plan. The limits of clearing or clearing and grubbing shall be established no closer to the boundaries of all said undisturbed areas than the driplines of the trees that are located within said areas. 
(2)  For any property for which a tree preservation and/or replacement plan was not required prior to issuance of a land disturbing permit under the provisions of this section, all areas required to be undisturbed shall be provided with protective tree fencing along the limits of clearing or grading which adjoin existing trees in accordance with the provisions found in section 50-117(a). These measures shall be in place prior to beginning clearing or grading activities and shall be maintained throughout the land disturbing period. 
(d)  Residential lots and subdivisions. Owners and/or developers of single-family detached residential lots and subdivisions shall comply with this division by planting street trees in all residential subdivisions and two trees per lot, as a part of providing 16 TDUs per acre. Existing trees shall be counted toward the TDUs. 
(1)  Individual lot trees. A minimum of two trees, at least two inches in diameter, shall be planted or preserved on each individual lot prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Roots within the drip line area of preserved trees shall remain undisturbed or the tree cannot be counted as a required tree. Planted trees shall be a species listed in Appendix A which is on file and available for public review in the office of the city clerk. The location of two trees per lot is not limited to the front yard. Trees can be planted in any location on the lot except in utility and drainage easements and septic drain fields. 
(2)  Street trees. Underground utilities are required when planting street trees. Street tree requirements are as follows: 
a.  Street trees shall be at least three inches in diameter. The quantity of trees shall be at least one tree per each 50 linear feet of street (both sides of the street). Trees shall be planted in the street right-of-way. Trees shall be located at least three feet from the back of curb unless a modification is granted by the director. Street trees listed in Appendix A which is on file and available for public review in the office of the city clerk, shall be selected, planted and maintained. Maximum allowable genus of street trees shall be 33 percent of entire subdivision or one genus per street. Street trees count towards meeting the 16 TDUs per acre. 
b.  Developers shall enter into a performance surety agreement with the department guaranteeing tree planting within two years of the date of recording of the final plat. The director is authorized to grant a modification from the time limit. The performance surety shall be provided at the time of recording the final plat. In addition, a street tree planting plan shall be submitted to and approved by the department prior to planting by the developer. Street tree planting shall be delayed from June through August. 
c.  Street trees shall be maintained and cared for by the property owner adjacent to the tree except in subdivisions in which the property owners association provides maintenance and care. Maintenance shall include replacement and trimming as necessary. A maintenance responsibility statement shall be provided on the final plat. A modification may be granted by the director for genus and species substitution for street trees. 
(3)  16 TDUs per acre and tree protection areas. Prior to the issuance of a development permit, a tree preservation plan shall be prepared and approved for residential subdivisions indicating compliance with the tree density standard of 16 tree density units per acre. Preserved trees shall be grouped together in tree protection areas (including driplines or critical root zones whichever is greater) consisting of at least three trees. Preserved individual 12-inch or greater diameter trees may also receive credit provided they are protected by a tree protection area (including dripline or critical root zone, whichever is greater). Planted and preserved trees count towards tree density units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 5-2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-116. - Tree density requirements. 
(a)  Tree density standard. On each property for which a tree preservation and/or replacement plan is required, existing trees shall be retained and new trees shall be planted such that the property shall attain or exceed a tree density standard of 16 tree density units per acre, exclusive of any acreage within a zoning buffer and any trees required to be preserved or planted within a zoning buffer and except any other land area allowed to be excluded by this division. Trees, both existing and new, shall be reasonably distributed throughout the site, with emphasis on tree groupings to achieve aesthetic results following professional landscaping standards. Trees, including street trees, may be retained or planted for credit within a public street right-of-way if granted authorization by the department of transportation. 
(b)  Tree density standard calculation. The tree density standard shall be calculated by summing the following credits and dividing by the total acreage of the project included within the limits of the permit application (but excluding any acreage included within a zoning buffer and other land area allowed to be excluded by this division): 
(1)  Credit for existing trees proposed to be preserved on the site shall be calculated by multiplying the number of trees (by diameter) times the units assigned in Table B of this section, Credit for Existing Trees. Credit shall be given all trees preserved on a property having a diameter of three inches or more, except trees located in a required zoning buffer. 
(2)  Credit for new trees proposed to be replaced on the site shall be calculated by multiplying the number of trees (by diameter) times the units assigned in Table D of this section, Credit for Replacement Trees. Credit shall be given for all new trees replaced on a property except for trees one inch or less in diameter and new trees planted in a required zoning buffer. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum two inches in diameter and evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height. Multi-trunked trees shall only be given credit by measuring the single largest trunk and not the cumulative total of the various trunks. Tree-form shrubs shall not be given credit for satisfying the required tree density standard. 
(3)  Credit for specimen trees preserved on the site shall be calculated by multiplying the number of trees (by diameter) times the units assigned in Table C of this section, Credit for Specimen Trees. Credit shall be given for all specimen trees preserved on a property except for those located in a required zoning buffer where partial credit may be given. A specimen tree located within a buffer with a critical root zone extending beyond the buffer is allowed partial credit toward tree density units. The partial credit is based on the percentage of CRZ that is outside of the buffer. For example: given a 30-inch specimen tree's CRZ extends by 20 percent over the buffer line, then the developer receives 20 percent of the credit for a 30-inch existing specimen tree (19.6 x .20 = 3.92 TDUs). To determine the percentage of CRZ outside of the buffer simply measure the area of the CRZ circle. Then measure the area of CRZ outside of the buffer. Divide the smaller number into the larger number and that is your percentage of CRZ. For example: given a specimen tree's CRZ is 6,000 square feet, 1,200 square feet is outside of the buffer. Divide 1,200 by 6,000 and the answer is 0.2. In other words, 20 percent of the CRZ is outside of the buffer. 
(4)  Additional credits shall be granted under the following circumstances: 
a.  For specimen trees see section 50-119 and Table C of this section. 
b.  Existing trees to be preserved within a minimum yard area (as required by the applicable zoning district) or within a 100-year floodplain shall be granted a bonus credit of 50 percent of the units assigned in Table B unless the tree is located within a required zoning buffer. 
(5)  There shall be no more than 33 percent of any one genus of tree for overall site. Provide all calculations on plan. 
(c)  Tree canopy calculation. 
(1)  The tree canopy calculation is required for all new developments and existing developments adding structural or site improvements as defined in section 50-114. 
(2)  The tree canopy shall be calculated by assigning square feet of canopy to each tree proposed and each tree preserved. Square feet of canopy can be found in Appendix A which is on file and available for public review in the office of the city clerk. Stands of three or more trees can be computed with polygons and given in terms of square feet. Include buffer trees, landscape strip trees, parking lot trees and any tree preserved or replaced. Add the total square feet of canopy. Take the total site acreage and convert that to square feet. Divide the total square feet of canopy into the total square feet for the site and list it as a percentage. Provide calculations on the tree preservation/replacement plan. There is no minimum or maximum tree canopy percentage required at this time. 
(3)  Example: 

 
(d)  Tree bank. 
(1)  The intent of the buffer, landscape, and tree ordinance requirements is to ensure that a minimum number of trees are replaced and/or preserved on newly developed or redeveloped sites. The tree bank is an alternative option and may be used only in the event the site tree density or recompense tree requirement cannot be met on-site due to hardship. Hardship must be documented by the developer and presented to the director before the tree bank may be utilized. The tree bank provides two options, which are described in full below. 
(2)  Trees used to meet requirements for parking lots, landscape strips, street frontage buffers, or buffer replanting must be planted on site and are excluded from the tree bank procedures. Trees that are required to meet minimum tree density units and/or recompense requirements can be contributed toward the tree bank in accordance with Option One or Option Two below. 
a.  Option One, planting trees off-site. Install an equal amount of required tree density units in the form of an approved number of trees on an alternate site. In this case, the following criteria shall be observed: 
1.  The city department of planning and development, in conjunction with the tree advisory committee, has prepared a non-exclusive list of alternate Option One sites. The city department of planning and development has contacted the owners of these sites and these owners have expressed an interest in receiving trees from the tree bank. Persons wishing to utilize Option One should consult with the city department of planning and development to see if their required tree density units can be located on one of these alternate sites. The developer may present the city department of planning and development with alternate sites. Planting on individual residential lots is prohibited. 
2.  The developer shall submit a tree preservation/tree replacement plan showing a location for the planted trees on the proposed site. The developer shall also provide calculations on the plan for tree density or recompense trees from the developed site. The site plan shall state the size, genus, species, and quantity of trees to be planted. Each tree must be two inches in diameter at a minimum. For trees in which double recompense is required, each tree must be three inches in diameter at a minimum. Recompense calculations must be shown on plan. 
3.  If the proposed site is not one of the alternate sites, discussed above, an authorization from the title holder of the site indicating that it agrees to the planting of trees by the developer upon the site shall also be submitted along with the tree preservation/tree replacement plan. 
4.  The site for the trees shall be within the same district in which the development is located or within five miles of the original development per the director's approval. 
5.  Trees are to be maintained and guaranteed for one full year after planting by the developer. Any trees that die during the one-year time period must be replaced by the developer. Standards for transplanting shall be in keeping with those established by the International Society of Arboriculture, as included in the Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual, latest edition. 
b.  Option Two, monetary compensation for trees. A developer may choose to provide the city department of planning and development with monetary compensation for trees. If this alternative for the development is chosen, then the following criteria shall be observed: 
1.  Provide tree density calculations on the tree preservation/tree replacement plan. Show the total amount of tree density units that cannot be met on site. 
2.  Multiply the tree density units that cannot be met on site by the monetary compensation value. The product of those two numbers shall be provided on the tree preservation/tree replacement plan. Contact the planning and development certified arborist or landscape architect for the current monetary compensation value. 
3.  Provide a certified check in the amount of the product given on the tree preservation/tree replacement plan made out to the city. Give the certified check to a development review section planner along with a copy of the tree preservation, tree replacement plan. 
4.  The monies collected for the tree bank Option Two may be used by the department of planning and development, community services, and/or support services for the planting of trees at parks, greenways, fire stations, and libraries within the same district in which the development is located or within five miles of such district. Alternate planting locations may be approved by the director of the department of planning and development. Standards for administering these alternative compliance methods: 
(i)  The director must review and approve all requests for alternative compliance. In no instance shall the alternative compliance options be used to comply with any other ordinance requirement than the tree density or specimen tree requirement. 
(ii)  The site development permit shall be issued after the director has approved the request for either compliance option and received the necessary documentation and funds. 
_____
Table B Credit for Existing Trees  (measured at 4.5 feet above the ground) 

 
Note: Tree diameter for existing trees is measured at 4.5 feet above the ground. 
Note: Tree diameter fractions may be "rounded up" if 0.5 inches or greater or "rounded down" if less than 0.5 inches.         
Table C Credit for Specimen Trees  (measured at 4.5 feet above the ground) 

 
Note: Tree diameter for existing trees is measured at 4.5 feet above the ground.         
Table D Credit for Replacement Trees  (measured at six inches above the ground) 

 
Note: Tree diameter for new replacement trees is measured at six inches above the ground. 
Note: Tree diameter fractions may be "rounded up" if 0.5 inches or greater or "rounded down" if less than 0.5 inches. 
Note: Multi-trunked trees shall be given credit by measuring the single largest trunk only. Tree-form shrubs shall not be given credit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 5-3, 1-29-2013) 
_____
Sec. 50-117. - Tree preservation and replacement requirements. 
(a)  Guidelines and standards for tree preservation and density. The following guidelines and standards shall apply to trees proposed to be preserved for credit toward meeting the minimum required tree density standard on a property: 
(1)  Tree protection areas. The root system is generally within the dripline or critical root zone. To protect these critical roots, a tree protection area shall be established around each tree or group of trees to be retained. 
a.  The tree protection area shall include no less than the total area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the dripline or critical root zone of the tree or group of trees collectively. 
b.  Layout of the project site utility and grading plans shall avoid disturbance of the tree protection area. 
c.  Construction site activities, such as parking, materials storage, concrete washout, burnhole placement, etc., shall be arranged so as to prevent disturbances within tree protection areas. 
(2)  Protective barriers. 
a.  Protective tree fencing shall be installed between buffers and tree protection areas and areas proposed to be cleared, graded, or otherwise disturbed on the site, prior to any land disturbance. 
b.  All tree protection areas are recommended to be designated as such with "tree save area signs" posted in addition to the required protective fencing. Signs requesting subcontractor cooperation and compliance with tree protection standards are recommended for site entrances. 
c.  All tree protection areas must be protected from soil sedimentation intrusion through the use of silt screens or other acceptable measures placed up-slope from the tree protection area. 
d.  All protective tree fencing and all erosion control barriers must be installed prior to and maintained throughout the land disturbing and construction process, and should not be removed until final landscaping is installed. 
(3)  Encroachment. If encroachment into a tree protection area occurs, which causes irreparable damage to the trees, the tree preservation and/or replacement plan shall be revised to compensate for the loss. Under no circumstances shall the developer be relieved of responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this division, nor shall plan revision activities stop the department from instituting action for violation of this division. 
(b)  Replacement trees to comply with density standard requirements. Replacement trees proposed to be planted for credit toward meeting the minimum required tree density standard on a property shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The spacing of replacement trees must be compatible with spatial site limitations and with responsible consideration towards species size when mature. 
(2)  Trees selected for planting shall be a species listed on Appendix A which is on file and available for public review in the office of the city clerk. Standards for transplanting shall be in keeping with those established by the International Society of Arboriculture, as included in the Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual, latest edition, or similar publications. Refer to the American Association of Nurserymen publication "American Standard for Nursery Stock" (ANSI Z60, 1973) for plant material quality specifications. Refer to the Manual of Woody Landscape Plants (Michael Dirr, 1983, Castle Books) or similar publications for information on tree species site requirements. 
(3)  Trees selected for planting must be free from injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and must be of good vigor, so as to ensure a reasonable expectation of survivability. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 5-4, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-118. - Tree species lists. 
Tree species lists are found in Appendix A which is on file and available for public review in the office of the city clerk. The director is authorized to administratively add and delete species to both lists. Except as specifically approved by the director as a modification, only the trees listed shall be given credit towards meeting the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 5-5, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-119. - Specimen trees. 
(a)  Meeting and specimen tree survey plan required. 
(1)  Specimen trees are required to be preserved. A preliminary meeting shall take place on site between the certified arborist, authorized registered professional or urban forester contracted by the developer and the planning and development certified arborist or authorized registered professional and a determination shall be made at that time which trees are identified as specimen trees. A site visit prior to approval of the concept plan will allow for incorporation of specimen trees into the overall site design. 
(2)  A specimen tree survey plan is required to be submitted with the concept plan and shall be prepared by a certified arborist, authorized registered professional, or urban forester. Any tree that meets the following criteria is considered a specimen tree and shall be shown on the specimen tree survey plan. Identification criteria (meeting both of the following): 
a.  Tree size. 

 
b.  Condition. 
1.  A life expectancy of greater than ten years. 
2.  A sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or hollow, and less than 20 percent radial trunk dieback. 
3.  No more than one major and three minor dead limbs (hardwoods only). 
4.  No major insect problem. 
5.  No major pathological problem (fungus, virus etc.). 
6.  Small native flowering tree if considered a rare species. 
7.  Exceptional quality. 
8.  Of historical significance. 
(3)  At the preliminary site visit, specimen trees shall be identified and wrapped with green/white striped plastic flagging. 
(4)  Planning and development certified arborist, authorized registered professional, or third-party certified arborist, authorized registered professional, or urban forester shall conduct a second site visit prior to any land disturbance or permit issuance. Specimen trees identified at the preliminary meeting shall be re-inspected and tree protection fencing for those specimen trees will be inspected for compliance. Specimen trees identified on the specimen tree survey plan shall have a tree protection fence at the critical root zone or dripline and shall be wrapped with green/white striped plastic flagging. 
(b)  Specimen tree stands. Specimen tree stands are required to be preserved. At the preliminary site meeting the certified arborist, authorized registered professional or urban forester contracted by the developer meet with planning and development certified arborist, authorized registered professional or third-party certified arborist, authorized registered professional or urban forester and determine which trees are identified as specimen tree stands. If groupings of trees are designated as specimen tree stands, they are required to be preserved and shown on the tree survey plan. Specimen tree stands shall be marked as listed above in subsection (a)(3) of this section. Identification criteria (meeting one or more of the following): 
(1)  Contiguous group of trees that contain one or more specimen trees and the specimen trees are interlocked with other members of the stand in such a manner as to endanger the specimen tree if other members of the stand were to be removed. 
(2)  Stand of historical significance. 
(3)  Exceptional aesthetic quality or striking characteristics. 
(4)  Unique, of a rare or unusual species. 
(c)  Specimen tree preservation. Additional density credit will be given for the preservation of specimen trees given tree preservation is followed per the guidelines listed below and in this division. Credit for any successfully saved and maintained specimen tree is listed in Table C of this division, Credit for Specimen Trees. 
(1)  The critical root zone shall include no less than the minimum area beneath a tree that must be left undisturbed. The CRZ is a concentric circle centering on the specimen tree's trunk with a radius equal in feet to 1.5 times the number of inches of the trunk's diameter at breast height (4.5 feet) or the dripline, whichever is greater. For example: The CRZ for a 24-inch diameter tree trunk is a 36-foot radius concentric circle from the trunk of the tree. However, if the dripline extends further than the 36-foot circle that dripline shall take precedence. 
(2)  The layout of utility lines, easements, and grading shall be outside the critical root zone or dripline. 
(3)  There shall be no parking, construction material storage, bury pits, concrete or gravel wash out within critical root zones, driplines, and tree save areas. 
(4)  Critical root zone or dripline of specimen trees and tree save areas shall remain undisturbed with the following exceptions: 
a.  Thinning is allowed and may include manual removal (no motorized/wheeled or track vehicles) of non-specimen trees. Stumps may be ground provided there is no grading disturbance. 
b.  The manual removal of the following plants is allowed: Kudzu; Japanese Honeysuckle, Lonicera japonica; Japanese Climbing Fern, Lygodium japonicum; Mimosa, Albizia julibrissin; Multiflora Rose, Rosa multiflora; Autumn Olive, Elaeagnus umbellata, Chinese Privet; Ligustrum sinense; Chinese Tallow Tree, Sapium sebiferum. A commercial applicator license and a pesticide contractor License are required by the contractor if the use of herbicides is necessary for noxious plant material removal. 
c.  Non-vegetative material may be removed manually. 
d.  Thinning and clearing of any vegetative material in the CRZ shall be done in the landscape installation phase of development. 
e.  A maximum of 30 percent of disturbance is allowed within the critical root zone given specific circumstances. Specific circumstances include, and are not limited to, sidewalks, boardwalks, and paths. Any proposed disturbance shall be reviewed and approved by the director. 
(d)  Specimen tree protection. 
(1)  The tree protection fence shall be placed at the dripline or critical root zone of the trees. 
(2)  Tree protective fencing shall be located at the dripline or the critical root zone prior to any land disturbance. Planning and development certified arborist, authorized registered professional, or third-party certified arborist, authorized registered professional or urban forester shall conduct a site visit prior to any land disturbance to inspect tree protection fencing. 
(3)  Specimen trees and clearing limits shall be shown on the site plan, grading plan, erosion control and sedimentation plan, utility plan, and tree preservation/tree replacement plan. 
(4)  The top vegetative cover within the critical root zone or dripline shall remain undisturbed. Mulch may be applied if the certified arborist, authorized registered professional or urban forester finds it will benefit the tree. If mulch is applied, it shall be aged hardwood mulch, and it shall be applied at the landscape installation phase of the project. 
(5)  Tree protection fencing shall be a minimum of four feet in height and be one of the following: 
a.  Orange mesh type fabric or polyethylene laminar safety fencing. 
b.  Two-inch by four-inch posts and one inch by four inch rails. 
c.  Chainlink fence, minimum four feet in height. 
(6)  Tree protection fences must have signage in both the English and Spanish language that reads "Stay Out," "No Entrada," and "Tree Save," "Salve un Arbol," posted on the fence every 20 feet, with a minimum of four signs. 
(7)  Specimen trees and stands of specimen trees shall be protected from silt. Type C silt fencing must be placed along the outer uphill edge of tree protection zones where land disturbance is taking place. 
(8)  A bond is required for specimen trees consistent with city policy. 
A stop work order will be issued if the project is found to be out of compliance with the specimen tree sections. 
(e)  Specimen tree survey. 
(1)  A specimen tree survey is required in addition to the concept plan and shall be to scale and shall be prepared, certified or sealed by a certified arborist, authorized registered professional, or registered urban forester. The specimen tree survey shall be submitted as a separate sheet in the concept plan set. The specimen tree survey is required in the concept plan set prior to submittal of the construction drawings. The concept plan must be approved before the approval of the construction drawings. A preliminary meeting shall take place on site between the certified arborist, authorized registered professional or urban forester contracted by the developer and the planning and development certified arborist or authorized registered professional and a determination shall be made at that time which trees are identified as specimen trees. At a minimum, the following items shall be shown on the tree survey: 
a.  Specimen trees are to be located and labeled with their diameters and genus. The dripline or critical root zone (whichever is greater) shall be delineated on plan. 
b.  Specimen tree stands are to be located and labeled with their diameters, genus, quantity, and critical root zone or dripline (whichever is greater), and shall be delineated on the tree survey plan. 
c.  Location of existing structures shall be shown on plan. 
d.  Project name, developer's name and contact information, designer's name and contact information shall be shown on plan. 
e.  Prior to the issuance of any type of land disturbance permit, planning and development certified arborist, authorized registered professional or third-party certified arborist, authorized registered professional, or urban forester shall conduct an on-site tree inspection to check for tree protection measures. 
(2)  Concept plan. At a minimum, the following items shall be shown on the concept plan: 
a.  Specimen trees; 
b.  Dripline or critical root zone of specimen tree and tree save areas; 
c.  Building footprint; 
d.  Driveways; 
e.  Parking lot; 
f.  Utility lines and easements; 
g.  Limits of disturbance; 
h.  Detention areas; 
i.  Project name, owner/developer's name and contact information, designer's name and contact information; 
j.  In the case of trails and greenways that are not located on public access easements and public or private utility easements show the proposed trail or greenway, show the trail or greenway limits of clearing, show a 25-foot corridor on either side of the trail or greenway limits of clearing and show any specimen tree that is within that trail or greenway corridor. It is encouraged to relocate the trail or greenway outside of the critical root zone of the specimen trees. If the trail or greenway cannot be relocated outside of the critical root zone of the specimen tree, then the specimen tree cannot be counted toward meeting the tree density units. The director is hereby authorized to review for alternative trail or greenway configurations; 
k.  Given a site with limited land disturbance, a tree survey is required for the area within the land disturbance and 50 feet beyond the limits of the disturbance line. 
(3)  Additional information required for specimen trees on site plan, grading plan, erosion control and sedimentation plan. 

 
_____ 
(4)  Exemptions. The following are exempt from a tree survey and concept plan: 
a.  Small sites in which it is clearly visible from one vantage point that there are no specimen trees on site will not be required to submit a tree survey or concept plan. The city shall require a letter from the certified arborist, authorized registered professional or urban forester certifying there are no specimen trees on site. 
b.  A site that has been previously graded or cleared under a development permit or land disturbance permit and in which there are no specimen trees on site is not required to submit a tree survey or concept plan. The city shall require a letter from the certified arborist, authorized registered professional or urban forester certifying there are no specimen trees on site. 
(f)  Specimen tree removal. 
(1)  With director approval. 
a.  If a specimen tree previously identified on the specimen tree survey to be preserved cannot be preserved due to site constraints, the developer shall submit to the director a statement of hardship alleging a necessity for removal of the specimen tree and site design alternatives. The director is hereby authorized to make a determination whether a specimen tree may be removed. Examples of hardship include, but are not limited to, a tree's proximity to overhead transmission lines and topography after site design options have been exhausted. Hardship factors require due justification and shall include documentation. Plans showing justification shall include specimen tree survey, existing and proposed contours, proposed site/concept plan, and photos of the tree. 
b.  The director is hereby authorized to determine recompense requirements when a specimen tree requires removal based on site constraints. Recompense requirements shall not count toward existing specimen tree density units. 
c.  If specimen tree removal is approved by the director, recompense tree units generated from removal of a specimen trees shall not be counted toward any landscape requirement, such as parking lot, landscape strip or buffer trees. 
d.  The director is hereby authorized to make a final determination whether a tree is a specimen tree and whether it has historical significance. 
(2)  Without director approval. 
a.  If a specimen tree is removed without prior approval from the director, the penalty to replace that tree is two times the tree density units of the specimen tree removed. The replacement trees shall be three inches in diameter or greater. 
b.  If a specimen tree is removed without director approval with no residual evidence of its condition with the exception of the trunk, the diameter of the trunk will determine if the tree was of specimen quality. Required recompense units shall be two times the tree density units of the specimen tree removed. Replacement trees shall be three inches or greater. 
c.  If there is site evidence that a specimen tree is removed without plan approval and there is no residual evidence of its condition or trunk diameter, recompense requirements shall be a minimum of two 28-inch hardwood trees. The property owner will be required to plant 34.4 tree density units on site in addition to other site density requirements. 
(g)  Specimen tree options. The following are suggested guidelines for successful specimen tree preservation: 
(1)  Specimen tree value. At the option of developer and contractor a value of the tree can be computed and displayed on the tree protection fence during construction. Once the value is computed it can be written down in the English and Spanish languages on a weatherproof placard and placed on the tree protection fencing. The monetary replacement value of a specimen tree can be computed in two different ways: 
a.  A certified arborist may compute the value using the standard ISA plant appraisal method. 
b.  The replacement value of the tree is defined as the cost to replace a tree based on the requirements in subsection (f) of this section. Compute the value by taking the diameter of the specimen tree and match it to the existing credit unit value for that tree. The result is the total number of credit units attributed to the specimen tree. For this example the tree was removed without prior director approval, therefore the tree density unit for the specimen tree must be multiplied by two. Take the total and divide by 0.6 (a three-inch diameter replacement tree is worth 0.6 units). The result is the number of trees necessary to replace the specimen tree. Multiply the number of trees needed by the cost of the tree, including planting, labor and materials. The result is the total cost to replace the specimen tree or "the value" of the specimen tree. 
(2)  Example. Given a 36-inch diameter oak tree: 
a.  Credit value = 28.4 Credit Units. 
b.  A three-inch diameter replacement tree = 0.6 credit units (See Table D of this division). 
c.  28.4 times two = 56.8. 
d.  56.8 divided by 0.6 = 94.66 replacement trees needed. 
e.  95 times $250.00 (estimated cost) = $23,750.00 = Value of the tree. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 5-6, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 50-120—50-136. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PLAN AND PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 50-137. - Water-efficient design consideration. 
(a)  Policy. It is the policy of the city to encourage individuals or firms who prepare the plans and plats required by this division to consider the use of water-efficient landscaping principles and techniques as one of the criterion to be used in plant selection and design. 
(b)  Principles and techniques of water-efficient landscaping (xeriscaping). The recommended principles and techniques to be considered are as follows: 
(1)  Proper location and design. Locating plants where they will naturally thrive and not require excessive water and maintenance to survive, as well as grouping plants by water needs, and limiting and concentrating high water using plants. 
(2)  Turf selection. Limiting turf areas, and selecting turf grasses that can survive the variable rainfall conditions in this region. 
(3)  Efficient watering. Once plants are established, avoid watering during periods of normal rainfall and during droughts, watering every week to ten days or less depending on the drought tolerance of the plants. 
(4)  Soil improvements. Loosening and breaking up the soil beyond the immediate planting area to allow better water absorption and to promote deep roots. 
(5)  Mulching. Using mulch to hold moisture in the soil which helps maximize the benefits of watering as well as preventing weeds. 
(6)  Plant selection. Selecting plants native or suitable to the region according to their watering requirements and optimum locations. 
(7)  Maintenance. Maintaining the landscape to maximize water conservation, such as increasing mowing heights and avoiding fertilizing during dry spells. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 6-1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-138. - Buffer and landscape plan specifications. 
The following outline the required elements of the plans and plats mentioned throughout this division: 
(1)  A buffer and landscape plan shall be prepared for any project wherein buffer areas or other landscaping areas or treatment are required by this division, the zoning resolution, conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval, or other regulations of the city, and shall be approved prior to issuance of a development permit. While the plan shall cover, at a minimum, the required buffer and landscape areas, the plan can be combined with a general landscaping plan for the entire project and/or a tree preservation and/or replacement plan, at the developer's option. 
(2)  The buffer and landscape plan shall be shown on a site plan or boundary survey drawn to the same or a larger scale as the other plan documents prepared for the development permit application and shall cover the same area. 
(3)  The buffer and landscape plan shall contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Project name and land district, land lot, and acreage. 
b.  Developer's name and telephone number. 
c.  The name, address, and telephone number of the authorized registered professional, urban forester, or certified arborist responsible for preparation of the plan. 
d.  Boundary lines of each buffer or other landscape area, appropriately labeled. 
e.  Delineation of undisturbed buffer areas, and any other areas wherein trees are proposed to be retained to meet city requirements, along the driplines of the trees or groups of trees contained therein. These areas shall be treated in accordance with the tree protection area requirements contained in this article, and labeled as such. Protective barriers and signage as required by this division shall be shown as to location and detailed. 
f.  General location of all proposed trees, shrubs, vines, groundcovers, mulching, and other features proposed within the buffer/landscape area. A scale sufficient to clearly indicate all details shall be used, along with a north arrow. 
g.  Within areas involving or adjacent to land form changes, existing and finish grade topographic lines at an interval of no more than two feet may be required. 
h.  For new plant materials to be installed, a plant material list, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Common and botanical names of all proposed plants. 
2.  Plant quantities. 
3.  Size and condition of plants. (Example: one-inch diameter, six-foot height, balled and burlapped.) 
4.  Spacing. 
5.  Remarks as necessary to ensure proper plant selection upon installation. (Example: specimen, multi-trunked.) 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 6-2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-139. - Tree preservation and/or replacement plan specifications. 
(a)  Tree preservation and/or replacement plans shall be prepared by an authorized registered professional, urban forester, or certified arborist in accordance with the specifications for such plans contained herein. 
(b)  The tree preservation and/or replacement plan shall be shown on a copy of a preliminary plat, concept plan or site plan, with the exception of a permit to conduct tree thinning, as appropriate to the proposed development, drawn to the same scale as the other plan documents prepared for a land disturbance permit application on the property, and shall cover the same area. The plan may be combined with a required buffer and landscape plan for the project, at the option of the developer. 
(c)  The tree preservation and/or replacement plan shall provide sufficient information and detail to clearly demonstrate that all applicable requirements and standards of this division will be fully satisfied. 
(d)  The tree preservation and/or replacement plan shall contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Project name, land district, land lot, north arrow and scale. 
(2)  Developer's name, address, and telephone number. 
(3)  The name, address, and telephone number of the authorized registered professional, urban forester, certified arborist or other authorized individual responsible for preparation of the plan, in accordance with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, and the seal or statement of professional qualifications of said person (which may be attached separately). 
(4)  Delineation of all minimum yard areas, buffers, and landscape areas as required by the zoning resolution or conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval. 
(5)  Total acreage of the site and total acreage exclusive of all zoning buffer areas. 
(6)  Delineation of all areas located within a 100-year floodplain. 
(7)  Existing trees to be retained in tree protection areas: Trunk location and size (to the nearest inch in diameter at 4.5 feet above the ground) of individual trees proposed to remain for credit toward meeting the minimum tree density standard on the property. Groups of three or more trees whose driplines combine into a single tree protection area may be outlined as a group and their number, by diameter, shown in the summary table. If the number and size of all existing trees to remain on the site exceeds the required tree density standard for the entire site, only those trees required to meet the minimum tree density standard must be shown. All tree protection areas are to be outlined and labeled. 
(8)  Tree protection measures. 
a.  A detail or description of the protective tree fencing to be installed, and the location of such measures, which, at a minimum, shall follow the dripline of all trees to be retained along adjoining areas of clearing, grading, or other construction activity. 
b.  Measures to be taken to avoid soil sedimentation intrusion into tree protection areas, and the location of such devices. 
c.  Proposed location of temporary construction activities, such as equipment or worker parking, materials storage, burn holes, equipment washdown areas, and entrance pads. 
d.  Proposed type and location of any tree save area signs or other pertinent signage. 
(9)  If replacement trees are proposed to be planted in order for the property to achieve the required tree density standard, the replacement trees shall be shown and their spacing and diameter identified, to the extent needed to achieve the minimum requirements. Trees grouped together in tree planting areas may be listed on the summary table by total number in the grouping, by size. 
(10)  A summary table of the number of existing trees to remain and new trees to be planted, by diameter to the nearest inch at 4.5 feet above the ground for preserved trees and at six inches above the ground for replaced trees, shall be shown along with calculations showing the tree density achieved for the site. Additional credits shall be noted where applicable (see section 50-116(d)(4)). Groupings of trees in tree protection areas and areas for new tree planting may be keyed to the summary table by area rather than having each tree individually labeled on the plan. 
(e)  The plan sheet which shows the grading plan, including existing and proposed contour lines, shall indicate the dripline location of all tree protection areas through the use of shading on the plans. The exact location of each tree is not desired to be shown, only the limits of the tree protection area and any other areas which are not to be disturbed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 6-3, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 50-140—50-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - COMPLIANCE 

Sec. 50-162. - Artificial materials prohibited. 
All artificial plants, trees, shrubs, grass or other vegetation shall be prohibited from fulfilling the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 7-1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-163. - Warranty or maintenance surety. 
Upon final installation of new trees, shrubs or other landscape material planted to meet the requirements of this article, and following acceptance by the department in accordance with the procedures set forth in the development regulations, the owner shall either provide proof of warranty or post a maintenance bond or other acceptable surety, warranting the new trees, shrubs or landscape material for a period of no less than one year. This section shall not apply to individual residential lot trees. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 7-2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-164. - Inspection. 
(a)  The department shall perform an inspection of the plantings and landscape materials required by this article prior to expiration of the one-year warranty or maintenance period. The owner shall be notified of any replacements or restoration that must be made to maintain compliance with this article or conditions of zoning, special use or variance approval. 
(b)  Required landscape material found to be dead or near death shall be replaced prior to release by the department of the warranty or maintenance surety. In no case shall replacement be delayed greater than 30 days from notification unless a performance bond is posted with the department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 7-3, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-165. - Performance surety. 
(a)  Compliance prior to certificate of occupancy or final plat approval. In the event that new trees proposed to be planted to achieve the tree density standard as set forth in the tree regulations contained herein, or other trees or landscape material required to be planted as set forth in the buffer regulations or landscape regulations contained herein, are not installed upon application for a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval as appropriate to the project, then a performance bond or other acceptable surety in an amount equal to 110 percent of the value of the new trees or landscape material and their installation shall be posted with the department in accordance with the performance bonding requirements and provisions of the development regulations. 
(b)  Compliance upon permit completion or expiration. Properties where a permit is issued to conduct land disturbing activities that do not require the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the approval of a final plat, or said activities as authorized are completed or the permit expires, shall comply with the tree density standard of this article as follows: 
(1)  Clearing, clearing and grubbing, or grading only permits. Replacement trees proposed to be planted to achieve the tree density standard of this article which are not planted upon completion or prior to expiration of a clearing, clearing and grubbing, or grading permit shall be planted within 30 days of the completion or expiration of said permit unless a performance bond is posted with the department. 
(2)  Development permits. Replacement trees proposed to be planted to achieve the tree density standard of this article which are not planted upon expiration, as opposed to completion, of a development permit shall be planted within 30 days of expiration of said permit unless a performance bond is posted with the department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 7-4, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-166. - Continuing maintenance. 
(a)  The owner, occupant, tenant, and respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the perpetual maintenance and protection of buffers, trees and landscape plantings required by this article. Homeowners are exempt from this maintenance requirement for the individual lot tree or tree protection area option of division 4 of this article unless these trees are protected by a conservation easement. 
(b)  The department is hereby authorized to order diseased, infested, dying, dead or damaged landscaping required herein to be replaced. 
(c)  Buffers that, over a period of time, lose their screening ability shall be replanted to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Replacement trees and landscaping shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 7-5, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 50-167—50-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND APPEALS 

Sec. 50-186. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the responsibility of the director to enforce this article. The director shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading, development or building permit, or to withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy or approval of a final plat, and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof, where tree removal or damage occurs in violation of this article or the provisions of the approved tree preservation and/or replacement plan for the site. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 8-1, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-187. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person violating a provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city, and, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, may be punished either by a fine not less than $100.00 per day and not to exceed $1,000.00 per day, or confinement in jail not to exceed 60 days, or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this article on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of said suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law which may include mandatory attendance at an educational program regarding tree preservation. The owner of any property wherein a violation exists, and any builder, contractor, or agent who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 8-2, 1-29-2013) 
Sec. 50-188. - Appeals, modifications and waivers. 
(a)  Variance from the zoning resolution. The preservation of trees may be considered as a condition peculiar to a piece of property in support of a request for a variance from the literal application of the provisions of the zoning resolution, under the procedures and requirements contained therein. 
(b)  Appeals. Appeals of the interpretation of the requirements of this article by the director shall be filed and processed in accordance with the appeal procedures as set forth in the development regulations. 
(c)  Waivers. Waiver requests of the requirements of this article shall be filed and processed in accordance with the waiver procedures as set forth in the development regulations. 
(d)  Modifications. Modification requests, where this article specifically authorizes their granting, shall be filed and processed in accordance with the modification procedures established by the development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 8-3, 1-29-2013) 
Secs. 50-189—50-214. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - AMENDMENT 

Sec. 50-215. - Procedure for amending in certain considerations. 
This article may be amended from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council of the city. Such amendments shall be effective as specified in the adopting resolution. 
(1)  Lots of record for which a building permit shall have been issued prior to the effective date of an amendment to this article shall be considered "grandfathered" and may proceed to completion under the terms of the permit and regulations in place prior to the amendment. 
(2)  Subdivisions or projects for which a development permit shall have been issued prior to the effective date of an amendment to this article shall be considered "grandfathered" and may proceed to completion under the terms of the permit and regulations in place prior to the amendment. 
(3)  Subdivisions or projects for which only a clearing, clearing and grubbing, or grading permit shall have been issued prior to the effective date of an amendment to this article shall be made to comply with the requirements of the amendment prior to the issuance of a development permit. 
(4)  Subdivisions or projects for which a valid and complete application for a development permit shall have been received prior to the effective date of an amendment to this article shall be considered "grandfathered" and may proceed to completion under the regulations in place prior to the amendment provided that a development permit is obtained within 90 calendar days of the effective date and subject to the time limitations of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01-04, § 9-3, 1-29-2013) 
Chapter 54 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-02-70, adopted Feb. 28, 2016, repealed the former ch. 54, §§ 54-1—54-23, and enacted a new ch. 54 as set out herein. The former ch. 54 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of July 1, 2012, §§ 86-100—86-121; Ord. No. 2012-07-62, §§ 1—22, adopted July 24, 2012; Ord. No. 2014-07-29, § 2, adopted Aug. 19, 2014. 

Sec. 54-1. - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds that signs provide an important medium through which persons may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard, a detriment to property values, to the city's general public welfare, as well as create an aesthetic nuisance. Some signage has a single targeted function and identification of such signage by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of providing addresses, which is of benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. Signs at the entrances to subdivisions or major developments favor a similar purpose in enabling both the traveling public and emergency personnel to quickly located entrances for the purpose of either visitation or responding to emergency calls. While such signage is referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter are unrelated to the content of the speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. Holiday decorations, such as strings of light, are not signs, but rather seasonal ornamentation not controlled by this chapter. By enacting the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the city council intends to: 
(1)  Balance the rights of persons to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(2)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and others within the city; 
(3)  Reduce traffic hazards, pedestrian hazards, and other hazards; 
(4)  Promote and maintain the aesthetic qualities of the city; 
(5)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(6)  Promote economic development; 
(7)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-2. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall be as defined in the most recent edition of The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above-referenced text shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: The word "erected" includes the word "constructed," "moved," "located" or "relocated"; The term "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
Accessory ground sign means a permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support, and which is accessory and subordinate to a primary ground sign. 
Accessory structure means a structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. 
Accessory use means a use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
Aggregate sign area means the combined sign surface area of all signs on a lot, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs. 
Animated sign means any sign or portion thereof involving motion, flashing, blinking, scrolling rotation or varying light intensity. 
Banner means a piece of fabric or similar material, intended to be temporary in nature, that is attached to a pole, enclosed in a frame, or mounted in some manner as a temporary sign. Flags meeting the definition of this chapter are excluded from the definition of the term "banner." 
Billboard . See oversized signs. 
Building means any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building space, gross , means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building from the exterior face of the exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but excluding any space where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet. 
Changeable copy sign means a sign that is capable of changing the position or format of word messages or other displays on the sign face or change the visible display of words, numbers, symbols, and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods, provided these changes are actuated by either a control mechanism or manually on the face of the sign. Tri-vision signs and LED signs are specifically excluded from the definition of changeable copy sign. 
City means the geographic boundaries of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 
County means Gwinnett County, Georgia. 
Department means the city department of planning and development, and any associated subordinate divisions, sections, and units thereof. 
Director means the director of the department of planning and development, who may act through designees. 
Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Entrance sign means a permanent sign located at the public street or private driveway entrance to a residential development, residential subdivision development or nonresidential subdivision development. 
Flag means a piece of fabric or other flexible material solely containing distinctive colors, patterns, standards, words or emblems used as the symbol of an organization or entity. 
Flashing sign . See animated sign. 
Ground sign means a permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support. 
Ground sign height means the distance in vertical feet from the elevation of the adjacent dedicated public street, edge of pavement, to the highest point of the sign structure. For property with an elevation higher than the adjacent public street, the height shall be measured from ground level at base of sign to the highest point of the sign structure. The ground shall not be altered for the sole purpose of providing additional sign height. 
Indirectly illuminated sign means a sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Interior project directional sign means a sign located no closer than 100 feet from the exterior public street entrance of a nonresidential project, at a street intersection of private streets, or along a private driveway within the project. The purpose of this sign is to provide more definitive directional information concerning the whereabouts of the tenants. 
Internally illuminated sign means a sign illuminated by an internal light source. 
Landscape strip means land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
LED sign means any sign or portion thereof that uses light emitting diode technology or other similar semiconductor technology to produce an illuminated image, picture, or message of any kind, whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED technology of any kind, whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light emitting diodes (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL), or any other similar technology. For purposes of this chapter, an LED sign is not considered a form of changeable copy sign. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Map or zoning map means the zoning map of the city. 
Monument-type sign means a permanent ground sign designed so that the base of the sign face is flush with the supporting base, and the supporting base is flush with the ground and extends the full width of the sign face. 
Multi-faced sign means a sign structure with more than two sign faces situated so that each sign face is facing a different direction. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign lawfully existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or any amendment thereto, but that would not be permitted under the terms of this chapter or any subsequent amendment. 
Oversized signs means a ground sign which exceeds 30 feet in sign height and/or 300 square feet of sign surface area. 
Parkway means a divided or undivided classified roadway, including Peachtree Parkway (Ga. Hwy. 141). 
Person includes the terms "individual," "firm," "partnership," "corporation," "association," and all other legal entities except governmental bodies. 
Planned commercial/office/industrial development means a contiguous area or subdivision of land, planned and maintained as a single entity and containing one or more structures to accommodate retail, service, commercial, office or industrial uses, or a combination of such uses, and appurtenant common areas and accessory uses incidental to the predominant uses (i.e., office park, shopping center, industrial park). 
Portable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, signs posted on the roofs or truck beds of vehicles, signs converted to "A" or "T" frames, umbrellas used for advertising, and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operation of the business for purposes other than signage. 
Primary ground sign means a permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support. 
Principal use means the primary or predominant purpose for which a lot is occupied and/or used. 
Projecting sign means a sign projecting more than six inches from the outside wall or walls of any building upon which it is located. 
Road frontage means the distance on which a parcel of land adjoins a public street or public road right-of-way dedicated to and accepted by the city or its predecessor Gwinnett County for vehicular traffic or over which the city or county may hold a prescriptive easement for public access, and including designated and numbered U.S. and state highways. 
Roof sign means a sign erected and constructed wholly on or over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, or extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
Sidewalk (sandwich) sign means a moveable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located. 
Sign means an object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. 
Sign face means the area or display surface of a sign which is used for the message and is part of the sign surface area. 
Sign, off-premises , means a real estate sign which advertises or directs attention to property other than on the premises on which the sign is located. 
Sign structure means poles, beams, columns, posts, foundations, or other means providing structural support for the sign surface area to which the sign is affixed. 
Sign surface area means the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof, which encompasses the entire sign inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
Special use permit means a use listed in the zoning resolution as being permitted, if it meets stated conditions and is approved by the city council of city. 
Standard informational sign means a sign with an area not greater than four and one-half square feet, with a sign face for short-term use, containing no reflective elements, flags, or projections, and which, when erected, stands at a height no greater than two and one-half feet, and is mounted on a wooden stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than one and one-half inches. 
Streamer means any long, narrow flag, banner, tinsel or roping which is hung or strung from any structure to another structure or the ground. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground. 
Subdivision directional sign means an off-premises sign which provides directions to property. Subdivision directional signs are placed at intersections, directing traffic to a specific project. 
Temporary sign means a sign of a non-permanent nature, including portable signs, weekend directional signs and sidewalk (sandwich) signs, as defined by this section. 
Trailer sign means any sign which is mounted on wheels and which may be moved from one location to another. 
Tri-vision sign means a sign designed with a series of triangular slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three different sign messages in rotation. For purposes of this chapter, a tri-vision sign is not a changeable copy sign. 
Used or occupied includes the term "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
Wall sign means a sign applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface which does not project more than six inches from the outside wall of such a building or structure. 
Weekend directional sign means an off-premises sign which provides directions to property. 
Window sign means a sign installed flush with the interior or exterior of a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
Yard, front , means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected parallel to the street to the side lines of the lot. Corner lots shall be considered to have two front yards. 
Yard, rear , means an open space on the same lot with a principal building or use, unoccupied except by an accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building or use projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side , means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use located between the building or use and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zoning board of appeals means the zoning board of appeals of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-3. - General provisions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, alter the structure, or erect a sign without a sign location permit or temporary sign permit. A change in the copy of a sign or advertising device shall not constitute an alteration. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-4. - Sign permit application. 
Applications for sign permits shall be submitted by the sign owner or his agent upon official forms furnished by the department. Applications shall be complete and shall include the following: 
(1)  The type of sign, and cost of sign construction. 
(2)  The street address of the property upon which subject sign is to be located. In the absence of a street address, a method of location acceptable to the department shall be used. 
(3)  For ground signs: A site plans drawn to scale, showing the proposed location of all primary and accessory ground signs on subject property. The site plan includes, at a minimum, a closed boundary survey of the property, gross acreage, the proposed sign location, street right-of-way lines, public or private easements, driveway locations and parking spaces. 
(4)  Sign details, including a scaled elevation of the size and height and of the proposed sign from ground level and adjacent street level. 
(5)  The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area, if there is more than one sign face. 
(6)  The gross building space of all buildings on the property. 
(7)  The names and addresses of the owners of the real property upon which the sign is to be located. 
(8)  Written consent of the property owner, or his agent, granting permission for the placement and/or maintenance of subject sign. The signature of consent may be electronic subject to the requirements of state law. 
(9)  The name, address and phone number of the sign contractor. 
(10)  Where other signs are already in existence on the property, the application must state the locations, dimensions and height of said existing signs, as well as the type or nature of the signs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-5. - Expiration date. 
A sign location permit shall expire if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been erected, installed and completed within six months after the date of permit issuance; provided, however, that one six-month extension of the permit shall be granted if an additional permit extension fee has been paid prior to the expiration date of the initial permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-6. - Sign permit fees. 
A sign location permit or temporary sign permit shall not be issued until the appropriate application has been submitted, the fees have been paid, as established by resolution of the city council, and a review is conducted by the city within the timeframe dictated by this chapter and it is determined that the application and sign comply with the appropriate provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-7. - Labels required on signs. 
(a)  For each wall or ground sign, other than temporary signs, an official sticker bearing the same number as the permit will be issued. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or his agent to affix the sticker to the sign so it will be easily read from ground level. The absence of an official sticker shall be prima facie evidence that the sign has been, or is being, erected or installed in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  For each temporary sign permit, the permit holder or permit holder's agent shall keep the official permit on file at the premises as evidence of permit issuance. The absence of an official permit shall be prima facie evidence that the sign has been, or is being, displayed in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-8. - Permit approval, denial or revocation. 
(a)  Procedure . 
(1)  An action by the department to approve or deny a sign permit shall be taken within 30 days of receipt of a complete sign permit application. 
(2)  The director shall deny permit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, incomplete applications, and applications containing any false material statements. A violation of any provision of this chapter and any other applicable state laws or city ordinances will be grounds for revoking a permit granted by the county or city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the director shall revoke the permit. Should the director deny or revoke a permit, the reasons for the denial or revocation are to be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application, postmarked on or before the 30 th business day after the director's receipt of the application, or by hand delivery to the applicant at time of denial. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, not the date of the original submission. A permit shall not be denied or revoked except for due cause, being the violation of the provisions of this chapter, other applicable ordinances, state or federal law, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)  Appeal . A person whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the director of planning and development to the zoning board of appeals within 20 days of the receipt of the letter of denial. Notice upon receipt of the appeal, the board of zoning appeals shall hear the appeal application within 30 days of the receipt of the appeal, unless the appellant otherwise requests, and shall make its decision to affirm or reverse the denial within 45 days of the date of the hearing. Notice of the ZBA hearing shall be given to the appellant in writing no later than ten days prior to the hearing and a sign identifying said appeal hearing shall be placed on each of the property frontages facing a public roadway. The signs shall be the size and color as determined by the director of planning and development and shall be placed on the property no later than ten days prior to the hearing and shall be at the expense of the appellant. 
(c)  Certiorari . In the event a person whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city zoning board of appeals, they may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-9. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  The lawful use of a permanent sign existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter may be continued in nonconformance with the requirements of this chapter, except that the nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged, altered, modified, improved or rebuilt. A nonconforming sign may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe condition and neat and orderly appearance. A change in the advertising message on the sign shall not constitute an alteration or modification of the sign. 
(b)  No structural repair or change in shape, size or design shall be permitted except to make a nonconforming sign comply with all requirements of this chapter. Routine maintenance and changing of copy shall be permitted as long as such maintenance or changing of copy does not result in or change the shape, size, or design. However, if a nonconforming sign is rendered structurally unsound due to an act of God, such as tornadoes, hurricanes, floods, etc., the owner of said sign may repair the sign without bringing said sign into compliance with the Code, so long as the owner does not expand or change the nonconformity in any way. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign structure may not be replaced by another nonconforming sign structure, except where changed conditions beyond the control of the owner warrant the signs repair. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-10. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  The following types of signs or advertising devices are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city: 
(1)  Roof signs. 
(2)  Streamers. 
(3)  Portable signs. 
(4)  Multi-faced signs. 
(5)  Animated signs. 
(6)  Signs placed within public rights-of-way, except publicly owned, authorized or maintained signs which serve an official public purpose. 
(7)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, rock, post, curb, utility pole, natural feature, official street sign or marker, traffic control sign or device, or other structure, except as may be set forth herein. 
(8)  Any sign placed or erected on property without the permission of the owner. 
(9)  Individual or aggregate window signs exceeding 20 percent of the window area per building elevation. 
(10)  Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(11)  Signs which simulate an official traffic control device, warning sign, or regulatory sign or which hide from view any traffic control device, signal or public service sign. 
(12)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing abilities. 
(13)  Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic or which otherwise pose a hazard to traffic due to structural deficiencies in the structure of such signs. 
(14)  Signs which advertise any activity, service, or product prohibited by the laws or regulations of the United States. This section shall not prohibit signs promoting the legalization of any matter presently prohibited by federal, state, or local law. 
(15)  Signs which obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation, or shall prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof, as well as signs attached to any fire escape. 
(16)  Signs which do not conform to applicable building and electrical codes. 
(17)  Signs for which a permit is required that do not display the sign permit number and the name and address of the person responsible for erecting and maintaining the sign. 
(18)  Signs which are in violation of the rules and regulations of any zoning overlay district presently existing or as may later be created. 
(19)  Any sign constructed of non-durable material, including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard or flexible plastic that has been displayed for more than 60 days. Nothing herein shall prohibit such a sign from being replaced by an identical sign. This provision does not apply to temporary signs as governed by this chapter. 
(20)  Signs located on any substandard lot created after the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which is created solely for its utilization for signage purposes and is not otherwise a permitted lot, by right or by permit, exception or variance by the zoning ordinance, unless the substandard lot is created as the result of governmental action. 
(21)  Abandoned commercial signs. Commercial signs, including sign structures, shall be deemed abandoned if the business, service or commercial transaction to which it relates has been discontinued for 90 days. The sign face on said abandoned signs must be replaced with either a blank face, if the sign is capable of said substitution, or rendered in a non-message format until a new tenant is available. If the abandoned sign is composed of more than just the sign face, this provision shall not be construed as requiring the removal of the remaining structure of the sign. 
(22)  Any sign that is structurally unsound, or is a hazard to traffic or pedestrians. 
(23)  Dilapidated or neglected signs. A sign (including sign structure) will be dilapidated or neglected if it does not present a neat and orderly appearance, which may be manifested by the following: rust or holes on or in the sign or sign structure, or broken, missing, loose or bent parts, faded or flaking paint, non-operative or partially non-operative illuminating or mechanical devices or missing letters in sign copy. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-11. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Generally. The following types of signs or advertising devices shall be permitted only by issuance of a temporary sign permit allowing use of this type advertising for a period of 21 consecutive days. In no case shall the same premises be allowed a temporary sign permit more than four times in a 12-month period. A fee, as established by the city council, shall be paid for each temporary sign permit. Upon expiration of the temporary sign permit, the permittee shall remove the air or gas filled device, searchlight, or banner, including any temporary supporting structure. 
(1)  Air or gas filled devices not exceeding: 
a.  20 feet in height and 150 square feet of area in a nonresidential zoning district. 
b.  Four feet in height and 16 square feet of area in a residential zoning district. 
(2)  Except as exempted under section 54-12, banners which display a message, logo, statement, or commercial message shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  Each banner shall not exceed 16 square feet. 
b.  Each banner must be individually attached to a pole, mast, arm, or other structure. 
c.  For any lot, banners shall be limited to one banner per public street frontage. 
d.  Banners must be maintained in good condition. 
e.  Noncommercial banners are excluded from determination of aggregate sign area. 
(3)  Search lights and similar devices. 
(b)  Signs on single-family residential parcels. All signs erected on single-family residential parcels in the city shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  The aggregate sign area of all signs on a single-family residential parcel shall not exceed 16 square feet consisting of either one sign that is 16 square feet in area or up to four signs, the aggregate of which may not exceed 16 square feet 
(2)  No sign shall be erected to a height greater than three feet. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Parcels may contain standard informational signs, subject to the aggregate sign area allowance, without a permit or fee, placed so that they are located entirely on private property. 
(6)  In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, if such property is located at the entrance to any residential subdivision, then such property may contain no more than one permanent sign per entrance. Such signs may be lighted by single-flood, indirect lighting only, which may not be directed onto the street or vehicular traffic. 
(7)  All signs erected shall be supported by independent means by use of a wooden stake or metal frame inserted directly into the ground. 
(8)  Window signs are not allowed. 
(9)  No sign erected on a single-family residential parcel may be illuminated except as allowed under subsection (b)(5) of this section. 
(c)  Real estate and construction sign. The following types of signs shall be permitted only by issuance of a temporary sign permit allowing use of this sign for a period of one year. The sign permit may be renewed annually up to three times if the sign is maintained in good condition and the property is still for sale and / or under construction. 
(1)  Real estate sign. One sign up to 32 square feet in size shall be allowed on property that is being marketed for sale or lease. 
(2)  Construction sign. One sign up to 32 square feet in size shall be allowed on property that has an active site development or building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-03-119, § I, 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 54-12. - Flags. 
(a)  All flags shall be displayed on purpose-built, professionally fabricated flagpoles, which may be vertical or mast-arm flagpoles. In nonresidential districts, flagpoles shall not exceed the allowed height provided for a structure or building in the applicable zoning district, or 50 feet, whichever is less. Flagpoles in residential districts shall not exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure on the lot, whichever is less. 
(b)  The maximum dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height. The hoist side of the flag shall not exceed 20 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. In addition, flags are subject to the following limitations: 

 
(c)  Each lot or parcel shall be allowed a maximum of one flagpole. 
(d)  A maximum of two flags shall be allowed per flagpole. 
(e)  Flags displaying a logo, message, statement, or commercial message and banners not meeting the definition of a flag contained herein shall conform to all applicable ordinances pertaining to signs. 
(f)  A vertical flagpole must be set back from all property boundaries a distance which is at least equal to the height of the flagpole. 
(g)  Flags and flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, and to the extent applicable shall be in compliance with the building code. Flagpoles with broken halyards shall not be used and flags which are torn or frayed shall not be displayed. 
(h)  This section shall not be construed to restrict the right to display eligible flags as banners or noncommercial signage as provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
(i)  A sign permit is not required for flags. 
(j)  Noncommercial flags are excluded from the determination of aggregate sign area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-13. - Signs exempt from specified provisions of this chapter. 
The following types of signs are exempt from the requirements of this chapter unless otherwise expressly prohibited under section 54-9. However, all of these signs shall abide by the height and setback requirements as specified in section 54-16 (sign table). 
(1)  Non-illuminated temporary freestanding signs (excluding banners which are regulated in accordance with section 54-11). For each residential or nonresidential lot, the quantity of these signs shall be limited to either one sign that is 16 square feet in area or up to four signs, the aggregate of which may not exceed 16 square feet. In addition, each sign shall not be greater than three feet above ground level. These signs shall not be located within the public street right-of-way and shall be no closer than ten feet to the back of curb of a public roadway. 
(2)  Signs for the sole purpose of displaying street numbers as may be required by other ordinances and other signs required by law. Such signs shall be no more than four inches per numeral in residential districts and 12 inches per numeral in commercial and industrial districts. 
(3)  Signs erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance of his duties. 
(4)  Signs on private property prohibiting trespassing in accordance with state law. 
(5)  Any sign not visible from public thoroughfares. 
(6)  Window signs not exceeding 20 percent of the available window space per building elevation. 
(7)  One official sign per road frontage, as required by the state, identifying vehicle emissions inspection stations licensed by the state, not to exceed four square feet. 
(8)  Swinging or projecting signs not exceeding three square feet or projecting more than four feet and attached under the eave or awning of a building above a business entrance. 
(9)  Signage on courtesy benches, trash receptacles, newspaper boxes, automated teller kiosks and phone booths, not exceeding eight square feet of sign area and not located within the required front yard setback for the zoning district. Limited to one bench sign and one trash receptacle sign per lot. 
(10)  Signage on coin-operated beverage dispensers, limited to three per lot and not located within the required front yard setback for the zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-14. - Maintenance and appearance of signs. 
(a)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition, so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. Neglected or dilapidated signs shall be manifested by the following: rust or holes on or in the sign or sign structure, or broken, missing, loose or bent parts, faded or flaking paint, non-operative or partially non-operative illuminating or mechanical devices or missing letters in sign copy. The director may require the sign be removed after due notice for any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. 
(b)  The department shall give the owner a minimum of ten but not more than 30 days written notice to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign. If the owner refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the department may have the sign removed at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-15. - Illumination of signs. 
(a)  No sign shall give off light which glares, blinds or has any other such adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. No illuminated sign shall be constructed or maintained within 75 feet of the property line of any single-family residential lot. 
(b)  No sign shall have blinking, flashing, or fluctuating lights or other illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness or color. 
(c)  Colored lights shall not be used at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. Neither direct nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create a hazard to operators of motor vehicles. 
(d)  Illumination of signs in residential districts shall be prohibited with the exception of project identification signs and nonresidential uses, including, but not limited to, institutional or commercial use. Illuminated signs located within any residential district may only be indirectly illuminated. 
(e)  LED signs shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
_____
Sec. 54-16. - Maximum heights, maximum sizes, setback requirements and quantity of signs permitted. 
Signs incorporated in the city shall be permitted and regulated in accordance with the following sign table, unless otherwise regulated, prohibited or exempted herein: 
SIGN TABLE 

 
(1) No sign shall be located closer than ten feet to the back-of-curb of a public roadway. 
* Properties with multiple road frontages may transfer a maximum of 50 percent of the allowable square footage from one road frontage to the other. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-10-103, § I, 11-20-2017) 
_____
Sec. 54-17. - Oversized signs. 
Oversized signs shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Oversized signs may be permitted as an allowed use within the C2, C-3, and M-2 districts, or by special use permit within the M-1 district, if located on properties that are adjacent to principal arterials, major arterials or state or national highways. Oversized signs shall be prohibited along parkways or roads designated as residential arterials as shown in the city comprehensive plan, as adopted and amended. If the city has not yet adopted a comprehensive plan, the currently existing county comprehensive plan shall control for the purposes of this section. 
(2)  Oversized signs shall not be placed within 500 feet of a dwelling, residential zoning district, city or county building, church, school, day care, park, cemetery, or right-of-way of a parkway. 
(3)  Oversized signs shall not be less than 1,250 feet from the limits of any overlay zoning district where they are prohibited, or from any other oversized sign in any direction, on either side of the same right-of-way or along another right-of-way. 
(4)  Oversized signs shall be completely independent of any building or other structure, excluding the sign structure. 
(5)  Oversized signs shall meet the area, public street frontage, side yard, and rear yard requirements of the zoning district in which located. 
(6)  The maximum sign area of all display surfaces shall not exceed 672 square feet per sign structure. For double-faced signs, these maximum sign areas shall apply to each side of the sign structure. 
(7)  No oversized sign shall contain more than one face per side, nor more than two sides. 
(8)  The maximum height and minimum front yard setback from the street right-of-way for oversized signs are: 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-18. - Convenience stores and service stations with pump islands. 
Convenience stores and service stations with pump islands may have additional signage subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Two signs per canopy face with a maximum of eight square feet per sign. 
(2)  Spreader bars (signs located under canopy over pumps islands) shall be limited to no more than two signs per spreader bar, not to exceed four square feet per sign. However, total square footage for all spreader bars shall not exceed 24 square feet. 
(3)  For an accessory car wash, if a separate drive-through car wash building is on site, two additional wall signs may be allowed not to exceed eight square feet each. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-19. - Interior project directional sign. 
Interior project directional signs are authorized in all developments or planned subdivisions of land within any nonresidential zoning district subject to the following: 
(1)  May not be located within 100 feet of an entrance to a project. 
(2)  Maximum sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
(3)  Maximum sign height shall not exceed four feet. 
(4)  Setback from right-of-way may be zero feet. 
(5)  Only one such sign may be located at each internal intersection of private driveways or public streets within the project. 
(6)  The purpose of the sign is to provide more definitive directional information concerning the whereabouts of tenants within the development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-20. - Variances. 
(a)  Where a literal application of this article, due to special circumstances, would result in an unusual hardship in an individual case, a variance may be granted by the zoning board of appeals pursuant to procedures set forth including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Exceptional conditions pertaining to the property where the sign is to be located as a result of its size, shape, or topography, which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area. 
(2)  The applicant would be deprived of rights that are commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(3)  Granting the variance would not confer on the applicant any significant privileges which are denied to others similarly situated. 
(4)  The exceptional circumstances are not the result of action by the applicant. 
(5)  The requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to allow the applicant to enjoy the rights commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(6)  Granting of the variance would not violate more than one standard of this article. 
(7)  Granting the variance would not result in allowing a sign that interferes with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(b)  Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variances shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. No variance shall transfer to a new owner or occupant of the property. 
(c)  The staff or community development department shall conduct a site inspection of, and shall prepare an analysis of, each application for variance applying the criteria and standards set forth in this section. Said staff shall present its findings and recommendations in written form to the board at least seven days prior to the public hearing thereon. 
(d)  Relief from the application of the provisions of this chapter by use of variances granted by the board shall be granted only upon a finding of hardship as previously defined. Hearing on such variances shall be noticed and a final decision rendered by the board using the same time frames and notice requirements as for appeals under this chapter. 
(e)  In the event of dissatisfaction with the decision of the zoning board of appeals, a person may petition for a writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-21. - Enforcement and penalties. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director of planning and development. 
(1)  The director or designee may issue a citation for violation of this chapter by any person, including, if applicable, the owner, manager or tenant of the lot on which a sign is located; for a sign erected, altered, maintained, converted, or used in violation of this chapter; or in violation of any other applicable ordinance, including, but not limited to, building or electrical codes. 
(2)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or by confinement in jail for a total time not to exceed 180 days, or both, and may not be stayed or suspended. 
(3)  The city may seek affirmative equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to cause the removal or repair of any sign in violation of this chapter or other city ordinances. 
(4)  The director or his designee may remove any sign or structure illegally placed upon a public right-of-way without any notice and may dispose of said sign or structure by taking it to any landfill. Such removal and disposal of illegally placed signs shall not preclude the prosecution of any person for illegally placing such signs in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-22. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, or word of this chapter is declared and adjudged to be invalidated or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect as if such portion so declared or adjudged unconstitutional were not originally part of this chapter, even if the surviving parts of the ordinance result in greater restrictions after any unconstitutional provisions are stricken. The city council declares that it would have enacted the remaining parts of this chapter if it had known that such portion thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. The city council declares its intent that should this chapter be declared invalid, in part or in whole, signs are to be subject to regulations applicable to structures contained in other ordinances, including the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-70, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 54-23. - Subdivision directional signs. 
Subdivision directional signs shall be permitted within any zoning district, provided they serve a temporary purpose, are maintained in an attractive and sound manner, and are removed at the owner's expense. They are intended to encourage parties involved in subdivision development projects in proximity to one another to work together and place directional information for multiple projects on one sign or sign structure. Subdivision directional signs may be allowed for a period of time from the beginning of the project until ten days following the sale of the final property. Subdivision directional signs shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Shall not be located within ten feet of the pavement of any street and shall not be permitted on any public right-of-way. 
(2)  Shall not be illuminated or affixed in any manner to trees, street or light poles, utility poles, other signs or sign structures. 
(3)  Shall be made of wood. 
(4)  Shall include the name, address and phone number of the owner or party responsible for the removal and maintenance of the sign. This information must be written in weatherproof ink or paint on at least one face of the sign in letters not exceeding one-half-inch in height. 
(5)  Shall be located no greater than two miles or two intersections as shown on the long range road classification map, whichever is greater, from the project or property to which they refer, as measured along existing streets. 
(6)  Signs prohibited under this chapter shall not be used as a subdivision directional sign. 
(7)  Subdivision directional signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in total sign area per face with no one project allowed more than four total square feet per face (four projects per face) and shall not exceed eight feet in height, excluding embellishments which shall not exceed two feet above the maximum height of the sign structure. 
(8)  Subdivision directional signs shall be limited to four per intersection with no more than one per corner. 
(9)  Subdivision directional signs shall be located within 200 feet of an intersection but no closer than 20 feet from the intersection. 
(10)  These signs require a sign permit. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 86-116) 
Chapter 55 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-04-123, adopted June 27, 2018, amended Ch. 55 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 55, §§ 55-1—55-21, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2014-06-28, 7-15-2014; Ord. No. 2016-09-79, 10-18-2016. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 55-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Commercial establishment. Private, nonresidential business entity that generates commercial solid waste 
Commercial solid waste. All types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial waste. 
Contractor. The service provider designated by the city to provide municipal solid waste collection services. 
Garbage. All residential and commercial garbage shall mean "municipal solid waste" as defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22. 
Municipal solid waste. All solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings, construction or demolition waste, and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Plastic carts. Carts provided by the city or its contractor capable of being emptied by mechanical means. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-2. - Materials not acceptable for collection. 
The following materials shall not be collected by the city or its contractor: 
(1)  Dangerous materials or substances, such as poisons, acids, caustics, infected materials and explosives. 
(2)  Unusual quantities of materials resulting from the repair, excavation or construction of buildings or structures such as earth, plaster, mortar and roofing materials. 
(3)  Materials which have not been prepared for collection in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  The solid wastes resulting from industrial processes. 
(5)  Tree trimmings where trees are trimmed or cut for compensation whether the compensation be in cash or in the wood from the trees trimmed or cut except in the case of a natural disaster. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to mix yard trimmings with other solid municipal waste except as permitted by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-3. - Inspection. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city manager or designated representative, to make inspection trips at regular intervals to determine whether or not garbage is being properly collected, removed and disposed of as required by this Code or any applicable health ordinance. In the event it is found that such ordinance or regulations are being violated, appropriate and timely action shall be taken to ensure full compliance with the provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-4. - Service required; exceptions; penalties; fee increases. 
(a)  Every household and commercial establishment in the city shall subscribe to the sanitation service provided by the city except as expressly authorized by this chapter. 
(b)  Those persons found guilty of improper disposal of any garbage shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Improper disposal shall include placing waste along roadways, vacant lots, another person's cart, and similar situations. 
(c)  The monthly sanitation fee shall be established in the agreement between the city and the contractor, which may be amended from time to time, and shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-5. - Collection to be carried on in systematic and efficient manner. 
(a)  The collection, removal and disposal of all garbage shall be carried on in a systematic and efficient manner, keeping the entire city in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Collection hours shall be between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-6. - Plastic carts—Provided by city. 
(a)  Plastic wheeled carts shall be required for street-side residential collection service. The responsibility for obtaining such cart shall be upon the owner or occupant of the premises desiring and otherwise eligible, by the terms of this article, for street-side collection service. The owner or occupant of the premises is required to contact the City Peachtree Corners or its contractor and request the delivery of a cart. 
(b)  Additional carts may be purchased from the city or its contractor by the owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-7. - Same—Placement for collection. 
All residential garbage shall be placed in the cart for collection. The cart shall be placed at street-side for collection purposes. If the cart is not near the street-side at collection time, this will indicate no service is needed. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-8. - Same—Non-street-side collection. 
Non-street-side collection will be provided for households within the city limits if all persons abiding in the household meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Physically unable to walk a cart to the curb, due to being confined to a bed or confined to a wheelchair, or, 
(2)  Physically unable to roll a garbage cart to street side, as certified by a medical doctor, or, 
(3)  Older than 65 years of age, 
(4)  For those persons who are head of household and age 70 years or older, backyard service will be provided at a rate of 50 percent of the normal residential customer rate. Each household desiring to receive backyard service must apply to city hall with the appropriate information. The household information will be verified and a decision provided. If the applicant is denied, the decision may be appealed to the governing body. 
The exception will be reevaluated each 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-9. - Same—Time limit at street-side and storage of cart. 
The cart shall be placed at street-side no earlier than 3:00 p.m. on the day before the scheduled collection day and the cart shall be removed from street-side no later than 9:00 a.m. on the day after collection. The cart shall then be stored or placed only in the rear yard or inside enclosed structures where they are not visible from the street. Townhome or condo units with a common wall or walls bordering the adjacent unit, which are unable to store refuse bins and carts in rear yard or enclosed structure due to lack of exterior access, must store refuse bins and carts as close to the townhome or condo unit as possible. Violations of this section shall be reported to the department of community development. Upon receiving a complaint, the department shall investigate such complaint. Any party failing to remove the cart from street-side within the specified time after receiving the notice shall be in violation of this code section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-10. - Same—Replacement. 
(a)  The city shall have the authority to require the replacement of any cart that is so worn or damaged as to hinder the effective street-side collection program. 
(b)  Any cart that is damaged or destroyed through the negligence or misuse of the city shall be replaced at the expense of the city. The city shall have the authority to determine in each case of damage whether the damage is sufficient to require replacement. 
(c)  In all other cases in which a cart is rendered unserviceable, the city may replace the cart and charge the property owner for all replacement costs incurred in connection with the replacement. 
(d)  The property owner shall be responsible for replacement of any lost or stolen cart. 
(e)  Deposits for city garbage carts being returned will be based upon the condition of the cart returned, ordinary wear and tear expected. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-11. - Material not to be collected from premises where violation exists. 
The city or its contractor is not required to collect from premises where the provisions of this article are violated. The failure to collect any trash or garbage from the premises because of a violation of the provisions of this article shall not relieve the persons responsible for such violation from prosecution and penalty therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-12. - Confinement of animals which interfere with collectors. 
Occupants of premises shall facilitate collections of garbage by confining animals which might interfere with collectors. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-13. - Frequency of collections. 
(a)  Residential. Except as otherwise provided in this article and except in the case of an emergency or under circumstances over which the city manager or authorized representative has no control, the city or its contractor shall collect, remove and dispose of all household garbage in the city once per week. 
(1)  If a holiday should fall during the week in which an area is due a regular collection, such collection shall be made on the following work day, unless otherwise announced by the city. 
(2)  Refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, furniture and similar items will be collected in accordance with terms established by the agreement between the city and its contractor. Collections shall be made at the property line and such items shall be placed at the property line no sooner than 24 hours prior to the appointed time of collection. The occupant of the premises shall be responsible to see that locks or doors of refrigerators, ice boxes or containers are removed. 
(b)  Commercial. The city or its contractor shall collect, remove and dispose of all garbage and commercial solid waste generated at each commercial establishment on a regular basis, provided the material is placed in an approved commercial collection container. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-14. - Disposition so as to avoid pick-up service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage, dirt, dead animals or other refuse in any container provided or maintained by any owner, occupant, or tenant or lessee using or occupying any building, house or structure within the city for residences, schools, churches, colleges, lodges, commercial businesses in any quantity to avoid providing or subscribing to a service for the pick-up of garbage, dirt, dead animals or other refuse at the residence or the site of the operations of the business of such persons. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-15. - Depositing refuse in container of another. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or intentionally deposit garbage into the garbage container of another person. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-16. - Garbage to be drained or wrapped before placing therein. 
(a)  All garbage that is mixed with water or other liquids shall be drained before being put in the garbage or trash container. 
(b)  All animal matter that is subject to decomposition shall be well-wrapped in paper or other material before being deposited in such container. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-17. - Tampering with contents. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to uncover, pilfer, dig into, turn over or in any manner tamper with any garbage container belonging to another. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of public garbage containers for their intended purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-18. - Collection service fees. 
(a)  Residential. 
(1)  The fee for residential collection services shall be billed annually for the next year. 
(2)  The fee shall be due no later than December 15 of the current calendar year for the next year of service. Any owner or occupant who fails to pay the fee by December 15 shall be considered delinquent and shall be subject to penalties. 
(3)  Failure of the owner or occupant to remit the fee by the specified due date as described in this code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Commercial. 
(1)  The fee for front end load and roll off services shall be billed monthly. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-19. - Rates. 
The rates and charges for the collection of residential and commercial garbage within the city limits shall be established in the agreement between the city and the contractor and available on the city's website. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-20. - Exclusive franchise rights. 
All municipal solid waste accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city or its contractor, except as expressly authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-21. - Solid waste collection firms protected under O.C.G.A. § 36-80-22. 
(a)  To receive protection under O.C.G.A. § 36-80-22 a solid waste collection firm must first establish that at least 30 days prior to the enactment of this chapter, the firm was providing solid waste collection services in the city pursuant to a contract with a private, nonresidential business entity or person required to have a business license. 
(b)  A contract between a solid waste collection firm and a private, nonresidential business entity or person required to have a business license shall not be invalidated by this chapter provided the contract was entered into and performance on contract began at least 30 days prior to the enactment of this chapter. 
(c)  A solid waste collection firm protected under O.C.G.A. § 36-80-22 that wishes to continue performance on an eligible contract with a private, nonresidential business entity or person required to have a business license shall submit a copy of all contracts they wish to continue performance on as an addendum to the firm's renewal application for a business occupational tax certificate. 
(d)  Applications for a business occupational tax certificate submitted by a solid waste collection firm not protected by O.C.G.A. § 36-80-22 shall be denied. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any solid waste collection firm that is not protected under O.C.G.A. § 36-80-22 to collect, convey, or dispose of any municipal solid waste accumulated in the city, unless expressly authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-22. - Violations, enforcement, and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter may be subject to enforcement actions, restrained by injunction, and/or otherwise sanctioned in any manner permitted by permitted by law. 
(b)  Solid waste firms, their agents, servants, employees, and any other such party responsible for any violation or failure to comply with this chapter may be cited for such violation(s). 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce these rules and regulations, and in performance of this duty the city manager or such authorized representative is hereby authorized to enter, at any reasonable hour, any premises as may be necessary for such enforcement. The code enforcement officers shall issue actual citations upon the request of the city manager. 
(d)  Violations of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with section 1-7 and cited to a court having jurisdiction for prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Sec. 55-23. - Severability. 
If any article, section, part, subpart, subsection, paragraph, item, sentence, clause, or phrase or word of this chapter is declared or adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining portion of the chapter, which shall remain of full force and effect as if such offending portions were not originally part of this chapter. The city declares that it would have enacted the remaining provisions or parts of this chapter had it known the offending portions would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-123, 6-27-2018) 
Chapter 58 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Advanced Broadband Collocation Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-66B-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for the siting of all wireless, cellular, television and radio telecommunications towers and antennas. The goals of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas; 
(2)  Minimize the total number of towers within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to residents of the city; 
(3)  Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites among service providers; 
(4)  Locate telecommunications towers and antennas in areas where adverse impacts on the community are minimized; 
(5)  Encourage design and construction of towers and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts; and 
(6)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to deliver such services to the community effectively and efficiently. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-31) 
Sec. 58-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall be as defined in The Latest Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (2007, Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above-referenced text shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary usage and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence, section and article in which they occur. 
(b)  For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  The term "erected" includes the terms "constructed," "located" or "relocated." 
(2)  The term "map" or "zoning map" means the zoning map of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 
(3)  The term "parcel" includes the term "plot" or "lot." 
(4)  The term "person" includes the terms "individuals," "firms," "partnerships," "corporations," "associations," "governmental bodies" and all other legal entities. 
(5)  The term "used" or "occupied" includes the term "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alternative tower structure means clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission towers, manmade trees (without accessory buildings/structures), and similar natural or manmade alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Co-location means the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower or alternative tower structure. 
Department means the city department of planning and development. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Geographic antenna placement area means the general vicinity within which the placement of an antenna is necessary to meet the engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting need. 
Governing authority means the mayor, city council or a designee thereof of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 
Height , when referring to a tower or other structure, means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower structure or appurtenance. 
Preexisting towers and antennas means structures as set forth in section 58-3(d). 
Public officer , as used in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, means the director of the city department of planning and development. 
Scenic views means those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the city comprehensive plan. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telecommunication towers, manmade trees (with accessory buildings/structures) and other similar structures. 
Visual quality means the appropriate design, arrangement and location of tower structures in relation to the built or natural environment to avoid abrupt or severe differences. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-32) 
Sec. 58-3. - Application of chapter. 
(a)  District height limitations. Except as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, the requirements of this chapter shall govern the location of telecommunications towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of 50 feet. 
(b)  Governmental exemption. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to governmental facilities and structures. 
(c)  Amateur radio; receive-only antennas. This chapter shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is 75 feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator from the operator's residence, or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna. 
(d)  Pre-existing towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall not be required to meet the provisions of this chapter, other than the requirements of sections 58-40 and 58-41. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this chapter as "preexisting towers" or "preexisting antennas." 
(e)  Additional antennas. If an additional antenna is co-located upon a preexisting tower after adoption of this chapter, then fencing and landscaping requirements of sections 58-37 and 58-38 shall be met as part of the permitting process. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-33) 
Sec. 58-4. - Removal of abandoned towers and antennas. 
(a)  Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period exceeding six months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the structure within 60 days of receipt of notice from the department notifying the owner of such abandonment. If said tower or antenna is not removed within said 60 days, the city may, in the manner provided in the O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease utilizing the tower. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of a permit for the construction of a tower or antenna, the owner of the tower or antenna facility shall procure a bond or a letter of credit from a surety with an office located in the county, in an amount not less than $25,000.00 conditioned upon the removal of the tower and/or antenna, should it be deemed abandoned under the provisions set forth in subsection (a) of this section. Such bond or letter of credit must be renewed at least every two years during the life of the tower or antenna. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-34) 
Sec. 58-5. - Legal status provisions. 
Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width, depth or size of yard or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or covenants, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or covenants require more restrictive standards than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statutes or covenants shall govern. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-35) 
Sec. 58-6. - Annual registration of telecommunications towers. 
(a)  On or before May 1 of each calendar year, the owner of any telecommunications tower shall register such tower with the director of the county department of planning and development on a form (or via electronic means) substantially similar to that attached from which this provision was derived [Ordinance No. TC-2011-01] as Exhibit "A." The initial annual registration shall identify such telecommunications tower by tax parcel number, physical street address, and/or GIS coordinates, and shall describe all structures and equipment on site associated with such telecommunications tower. Annually thereafter, each subsequent registration shall identify any transfer of ownership of such tower, and/or any modifications to such tower which occurred during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  For all telecommunications towers which were constructed more than ten years prior to the submittal of the annual registration, at least once every three years the owner of such tower shall submit certification to the director that such tower was inspected and that a registered professional engineer has determined that no signs of defect, disrepair, or other hazardous condition exist. 
(c)  Any telecommunications tower owner which owns more than 20 towers that are subject to subsection (b) of this section shall be deemed to be in compliance with its requirements so long as all of such towers which are more than ten years old are inspected within three years of the first deadline for registration under this section. 
(d)  The annual registration fee for each telecommunications tower shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time for the first registration year and in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time per tower per year thereafter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-36) 
Secs. 58-7—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 58-31. - Principal or accessory use. 
A tower and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary structure, and is considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structure. An existing use or structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning district requirements, including, but not limited to, setback, buffer and other requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or tower may be located on a leased area within such lot or parcel. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-51) 
Sec. 58-32. - Inventory of existing sites. 
(a)  The county department of planning and development shall maintain an inventory of all towers or alternative tower structures, active and inactive, which are present in the city. This inventory shall include specific information about the location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, tower type and general suitability for antenna co-location of each tower, and other pertinent information as may be decided by the department. 
(b)  To facilitate the co-location of antennas, each applicant seeking to locate a new tower, alternative tower structure or antenna, or modify any such existing structure, shall provide to the department an affidavit setting forth an inventory of its existing towers or alternative tower structures as provided for below. The applicant shall specifically identify its towers or alternative structures, active or inactive, which are present in the city. Applicants seeking to erect an amateur radio tower or antenna shall be exempt from this provision. 
(c)  The applicant's affidavit shall include all of its structures that are within the jurisdiction, in whole or in part, of the city, or within one mile of the border of the city, and shall include specific information about the location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, tower type and general suitability for antenna co-location of each tower, and other pertinent information as may be required by the department. The department may share such information with other applicants for a tall structure permit under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate towers or antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; provided, however, that the department shall not, by sharing such information, in any way be deemed to have represented or warranted that such sites are available or suitable. 
(d)  An application for a tall structure permit shall not be considered complete without this affidavit of inventory. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-52) 
Sec. 58-33. - Co-location; design requirements. 
In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all towers, except amateur radio towers, shall be designed to accommodate the co-location of cellular telecommunication antennas according to the following: 
(1)  For towers up to 125 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least two providers; and 
(2)  For towers greater than 125 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least four providers. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-53) 
Sec. 58-34. - Co-location; availability of suitable existing structures. 
(a)  No new tower, except amateur radio towers, shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the department and the mayor, city council or a designee thereof that no existing tower or existing alternative tower structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts and shall consist of more than mere conclusory statements that no existing tower is suitable. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of one or more of the following: 
(1)  That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within the geographic antenna placement area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  That existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and related equipment. 
(3)  That the applicant's proposed antennas would cause electromagnetic interference with the antennas on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(4)  That the cost or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(5)  That the applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(b)  For each of the above, the applicant must submit an affidavit listing the existing towers which were considered, and ultimately rejected, by the applicant and provide a detailed explanation of why the existing towers are not usable. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-54) 
Sec. 58-35. - Aesthetics. 
The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the design and construction of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this chapter. 
(1)  Towers and/or antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At all tower sites, the design of all buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and building environment. 
(3)  For antennas installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical ground equipment shall be a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive. 
(4)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. In the event that a tower requires lighting by virtue of its height, the city may require the construction of the tower at a lower height in order to avoid lighting requirements. 
(5)  No signage or other identifying markings of a commercial nature shall be permitted upon any tower or alternative tower structure within the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-55) 
Sec. 58-36. - Setbacks and separation. 
The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers: 
(1)  Towers shall be set back a distance equal to one-half of the height of the tower, from its base, to any public right-of-way or property line of the lot or parcel containing the tower. All towers in residentially-zoned areas in excess of 50 feet shall be set back a distance equal to the full height of the tower from any adjoining off-site residential structure. 
(2)  Guy-wires and accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum accessory use location and setback requirements. 
(3)  In zoning districts other than C-l, C-2, C-3, O-I, OBP, M-l and M2, or county-owned property, towers over 100 feet in height shall not be located closer than 1,500 feet from any existing tower that is over 100 feet in height. This requirement shall not apply to amateur radio towers. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-56) 
Sec. 58-37. - Security fencing/anti-climbing devices. 
(a)  All towers and supporting equipment shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Fencing shall be of chainlink, wood or other approved alternative. 
(b)  Amateur radio towers and antennas, or receive-only antennas, shall not be subject to the provisions of this section unless compliance is required by the governing authority through the tall structure permit process. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-57) 
Sec. 58-38. - Landscaping. 
The following requirements shall govern landscaping surrounding all towers: 
(1)  Where adequate vegetation is not present, tower facilities shall be landscaped with a landscaped strip of plant materials which effectively screens the view of the tower compound. Landscaped strips shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and located outside the fenced perimeter of the compound. Landscaped strips shall satisfy the minimum design and planting requirements for buffers established in the city buffer, landscape and tree ordinance. 
(2)  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Where natural vegetation around the perimeter of the site would provide an adequate visual screen, an undisturbed buffer may be utilized. 
(3)  Amateur radio towers and antennas, or receive-only antennas, shall not be subject to the provision of this section unless compliance is required by the mayor, city council or a designee thereof through the tall structure permit process. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-58) 
Sec. 58-39. - Review of tower and antenna erection by aviation division. 
If, upon receipt of an application for the erection of any tower or alternative tower structure governed by this chapter, the department deems that the proposed structure may interfere with the use of the airways of the city or county by the public or interfere with the operation of existing or proposed airport facilities, then a copy of the application shall be submitted to the county airport division of the department of transportation for review and recommendation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-59) 
Sec. 58-40. - Federal requirements. 
All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more or less stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-60) 
Sec. 58-41. - Building codes; safety standards. 
To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee of a tower or alternative tower structure shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with the standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Telecommunications Industry Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the department concludes that a tower fails to comply with all applicable codes and standards, or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon receipt of written notice by the owner, permittee, or lessee of the tower, said party shall have 15 days to bring the tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner, permittee, or lessee fails to bring the tower into compliance within the 15-day period, the city may remove the tower at the owner, permittee, or lessee's expense. Prior to the removal of any tower, the department may consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee, or subsequent lessee for repair of substandard towers, and may grant a reasonable extension of the above-referenced compliance period. Any such removal by the city shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-61) 
Sec. 58-42. - Change of ownership notification. 
Upon the transfer of ownership of any tower, alternative tower structure, or lot upon which such a structure has been erected, the tower permittee shall notify the department of the transaction in writing within 30 days. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-62) 
Secs. 58-43—58-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITTED USES 

Sec. 58-73. - General compliance. 
The uses listed in this article are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require administrative review or approval of a tall structure permit. However, all such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in article II of this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-81) 
Sec. 58-74. - Co-location of antennas required. 
Applicants for the erection of a tower or placement of an antenna shall be required to co-locate upon an existing tower or alternative tower structure. An exception to co-location shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area utilizing the tower inventory maintained by the department, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 58-34. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-82) 
Sec. 58-75. - Permitted uses. 
If it is adequately demonstrated that antenna co-location, as required in section 58-74, is not possible for a given geographic antenna placement area, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Constructing a new tower, including the placement of a service building or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, in the following zoning districts: 
a.  C-1 (Neighborhood Business District); 
b.  C-2 (General Business District); 
c.  C-3 (Highway Business District); 
d.  O-I (Office-Institutional District); 
e.  OBP (Office-Business Park District); 
f.  M-1 (Light Industry District); 
g.  M-2 (Heavy Industry District); 
provided, however, that all structures shall meet the setback, screening and buffer requirements contained herein, and shall be located a minimum distance of two times the height of the tower from any residentially zoned property. 
(2)  Installation of an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower, such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding nonresidential structure, that is 50 feet in height or greater, if the additional antenna height adds no more than 20 feet to the height of the existing structure, subject to the zoning district restrictions of subsection (1) of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-83) 
Sec. 58-76. - Public notice/appeal. 
(a)  At least ten days prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a tower as a permitted use, the department of planning and development shall cause a sign to be posted on the property and the publication of a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city. Said public notice shall state the nature of the application, street location of the proposal and height of the proposed structure. 
(b)  If, during the public notice period, an objection to the building permit application is raised, the validity of the application and all pertinent documentation shall be determined by the city zoning board of appeals. The objection shall be placed on the first available agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting following the expiration of the ten-day appeal period. The zoning board of appeals shall dispense with the objection by either: 
(1)  A determination that the application is valid and meets all applicable criteria of this chapter, which shall result in the issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  A determination that the application is in error. Applications found to be in error must, as a result, be processed through the tall structure permit process set forth in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-84) 
Sec. 58-77. - Appeal of administrative determination. 
If a building permit application for a tower as a permitted use is determined by the department of planning and development to not meet all applicable criteria of this chapter, the building permit applicant may appeal the determination to the zoning board of appeals. The zoning board of appeals shall dispense with the objection by either: 
(1)  A determination that the application is valid and meets all applicable criteria of this chapter, which shall result in the issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  A determination that the application does not satisfy all applicable criteria of this chapter. Applications which do not satisfy all applicable criteria must, as a result, be processed through the tall structure permit process set forth in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-85) 
Secs. 58-78—58-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS 

Sec. 58-98. - General applicability. 
(a)  The department may administratively approve the placement of additional antennas upon towers or alternative tower structures as set forth in section 58-100. 
(b)  Each applicant requesting an administrative approval under this chapter shall submit a scaled site plan, scaled elevation view and supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including topography (utilizing minimum two-foot contour intervals), tower height requirements, setbacks, access driveways or easements, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and any other information deemed by the department to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter and compatibility with surrounding uses. 
(c)  Amateur radio antennas shall meet the requirements of the city construction code. Certain documentation requirements of this section may be waived by the director for amateur radio antenna applications. 
(d)  The department shall respond to each application within 30 days of its receipt by either approving or denying the application. One 30-day extension of this review period may be exercised by the department if such additional time is deemed necessary to adequately assess the request. If the department fails to respond to the applicant within a maximum of 60 days, the application shall be deemed to be approved. 
(e)  As part of any administrative approval, the department may administratively reduce setback requirements by up to ten percent to compensate for irregularly shaped lots or parcels. 
(f)  If a request for administrative approval is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with the city zoning appendix. In such an instance, the zoning board of appeals may authorize such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the zoning board of appeals that the denial of the variance presents a significant detriment to the telecommunications service provider making application, and that the denial of the variance is insubstantially related to the public welfare. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-101) 
Sec. 58-99. - Co-location of antennas required. 
Applicants for the erection of an antenna, except amateur radio operators, shall be required to co-locate upon an existing tower structure. An exception to co-location shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area utilizing the tower inventory maintained by the depart ment, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 58-34. The applicant must present an affidavit which lists the available existing towers and reasons why co-location on those towers is not possible. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-102) 
Sec. 58-100. - Uses allowed by administrative approval. 
The following uses may be approved by the department after conducting an administrative review: 
(1)  Installation of an antenna on any alternative tower structure, and further including the placement of additional structures or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as such addition does not add more than 20 feet to the height of the existing structure; 
(2)  Installation of an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including a pre-existing tower, and further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-103) 
Secs. 58-101—58-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TALL STRUCTURE PERMIT 

Sec. 58-129. - General requirement. 
(a)  If the proposed location, height, setback or other aspect of a tower or antenna cannot comply with the minimum requirements established in article III or IV of this chapter, then a tall structure permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in any zoning district. 
(b)  The following provisions shall also govern the issuance of tall structure permits for telecommunications and personal wireless service towers and antennas: 
(1)  In granting a tall structure permit, the mayor, city council or a designee thereof may impose conditions to the extent that such conditions are necessary to minimize adverse effects from the proposed tower on adjoining or nearby properties, including limiting the height of proposed towers in residential areas. In no event shall a new tower to be placed on residentially zoned property exceed 100 feet in height. 
(2)  All information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer or qualified industry expert. However, amateur radio antennas shall meet the requirements of all applicable city codes. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-121) 
Sec. 58-130. - Application; contents; fee. 
All applications for a tall structure permit shall be submitted to the department of planning and development. Each application shall contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in section 58-131. An application for a tall structure permit shall not be accepted for processing without the information required in this article. An application fee shall be charged by the department as stated in the schedule of fees and charges. The application fee shall be in an amount as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-122) 
Sec. 58-131. - Exhibits required. 
Each applicant requesting a tall structure permit under this chapter shall submit a scaled site plan, scaled elevation view and supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professional or qualified industry experts, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including topography (utilizing minimum two-foot contour intervals), tower height requirements, setbacks, access driveways or easements, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, affidavit of inventory as set forth in section 58-32, and any other information deemed by the department to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter and compatibility with surrounding uses. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-123) 
Sec. 58-132. - Review of application by a radio-frequency engineer. 
(a)  Within five business days of accepting a tall structure permit application, the department of planning and development shall refer that tall structure permit application to a radio-frequency engineer for review and recommendation. Within 30 business days after receiving the tall structure permit application for review, the radio-frequency engineer shall submit a detailed report and findings regarding the application to the department of planning and development, including, but not limited to, the need for the tower in the proposed location, whether or not the height of the tower should be lower than the height requested by the applicant, and possible alternatives for the location of the tower. These findings shall be submitted to the mayor, city council or a designee thereof and the applicant for review within ten business days of receipt by the department of planning and development, along with any staff report or recommendations prepared by the department of planning and development for the mayor, city council or a designee thereof consideration. 
(b)  The applicant shall have ten business days after receiving the radio-frequency engineer's findings and staff report to withdraw the tall structure permit application without prejudice. If the application is not withdrawn by the applicant within such time period, it shall be placed on the next available agenda for a public hearing by the mayor, city council or a designee thereof, consistent with the notice requirements of section 58-134. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-124) 
Sec. 58-133. - Co-location of antennas required. 
Applicants for the erection of a tower or antenna, except amateur radio operators, shall be required to co-locate upon an existing tower structure. An exception to co-location shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area utilizing the tower inventory maintained by the department, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 58-34. An applicant must provide a detailed affidavit listing all towers within one mile of the proposed tower and explain why it cannot co-locate on each of the existing towers. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-125) 
Sec. 58-134. - Public hearing. 
Applications for tall structure permits shall be reviewed by the planning commission at a public hearing advertised in the manner noted in subsections (1) and (2), below, after a community meeting is held by the applicant. Notice of the community meeting shall be sent to property owners within 1000 feet of the proposed tall structure location and mailed 14 days in advance of the meeting. 
Before taking action upon the proposed tall structure permit, the mayor, city council or a designee thereof shall hold a public hearing on the matter. At least 30 days prior to the date of the public hearing, the following notice requirements shall be met by the applicant: 
(1)  A sign shall be erected, in a conspicuous location, on or adjacent to each road frontage of the property under consideration. The sign shall state the time, place, location, and purpose of the public hearing. 
(2)  A letter shall be sent by regular mail to all property owners of record of abutting parcels, and all residentially-zoned parcels lying in whole or in part within a distance of 1,000 feet of the subject property, giving notice of the public hearing. Owners of record shall be as indicated by the county tax commissioner's records. The letter shall state the same information as required for the sign, referenced in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-126; Ord. No. 2018-03-118, § 1, 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 58-135. - Considerations in approval or denial of a tall structure permit. 
Any denial of a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a resolution signed by the mayor. The governing authority shall consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in acting upon a tall structure permit application under the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  The height and setbacks of the proposed tower; 
(2)  The proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(3)  The nature of uses, as well as the height of existing structures, on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)  The surrounding topography; 
(5)  The surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(6)  The design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(7)  The proposed ingress and egress; 
(8)  The availability of suitable existing towers or other structures for antenna co-location; 
(9)  The impact of the proposed tower upon scenic views and the visual quality of the surrounding area; 
(10)  The evidence submitted regarding the need for the tower in the area, including, but not limited to, propagation maps and other similar materials; 
(11)  The portion of the tower that will be visible from adjacent and nearby residential properties; 
(12)  The number of required trips to the tower site on a monthly basis; 
(13)  The tower's effect on property values of adjacent and nearby residential properties; 
(14)  The ratio of the height of the proposed tower to the height of the tallest adjacent and nearby residential structure; 
(15)  Safety concerns associated with the proposed tower or antenna; 
(16)  The tower's effect upon potential purchasers of adjacent and nearby residentially zoned property; and 
(17)  The coverage or lack of coverage experienced by cell phone users in the area of the proposed tower. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-127) 
Secs. 58-136—58-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 58-154. - Severability. 
In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the chapter if it had known that such parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 108-128) 
Chapter 62 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule powers of municipality to regulate and provide sewage collection and disposal systems, stormwater systems, and water treatment systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6)-(7); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; municipalities authorized to acquire, construct, operate and maintain water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Regulations adopted by reference. 
(a)  Except where such regulations may otherwise conflict with specific provisions contained within this chapter, the water and sewer utility regulations contained in Chapter 114, Utilities, of the Code of Ordinances, Gwinnett County, Georgia, as adopted on September 6, 1994, and later amended by the county board of commissioners, are hereby adopted as the water and sewer utility regulations of the city and are incorporated by reference into this chapter as fully as though set out at length herein. A current copy of the utilities regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk where it shall be available for public inspection. 
(b)  Except where such regulations may otherwise conflict with specific provisions contained within this chapter, where reference is made in Chapter 114, Utilities, of the Code of Ordinances, Gwinnett County, Georgia, to the duties of certain officials named therein, the city manager or his designee shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the city insofar as administrating and enforcing the provisions of the regulations is concerned. 
(c)  Except where such regulations may otherwise conflict with specific provisions contained within this chapter, where reference is made in Chapter 114, Utilities, of the Code of Ordinances, Gwinnett County, Georgia, to the duties of certain county departments, boards, committees, or advisory groups named therein, it shall be deemed to be a reference to similar departments, boards, committees, or advisory groups as established under this Code insofar as administrating and enforcing the provisions of the regulations is concerned. 
(d)  Except where such regulations may otherwise conflict with specific provisions contained within this chapter, where reference is made in Chapter 114, Utilities, of the Code of Ordinances, Gwinnett County, Georgia, to a specific article or section of the "Code of Ordinances, Gwinnett County, Georgia," it shall be deemed to be a reference to similar subject matter as it appears in the corresponding article or section of this Code. 
(e)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the Chapter 114, Utilities, of the Code of Ordinances, Gwinnett County, Georgia, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "County" shall mean "city"; 
(2)  "Local enforcement authority" shall mean "the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia"; 
(3)  "Board of county commissioners" shall mean "mayor and council of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia"; 
(4)  "Local government" shall mean "the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia"; 
(5)  "Jurisdiction" shall mean "the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia"; 
(6)  "County Code" shall mean "this Code"; 
(7)  "Local permitting authority" shall mean "the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia"; 
Sec. 62-2. - Conflicts. 
(a)  In the event that the provisions of Chapter 114, Utilities, of the Code of Ordinances, Gwinnett County, Georgia, in any way conflict with the provisions of this Code, then this Code shall prevail. 
(b)  Where general water and sewer utility regulations of the county conflict with specific water and sewer utility regulations in this Code, then the provisions concerning the specific water and sewer utility regulations in this Code shall prevail. 
Secs. 62-3—62-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-23. - Use of public sewers and maintenance of private sewer lines. 
(a)  Unlawful waste placement. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(b)  Other requirements. The owner of each house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the county, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly into the county wastewater system in accordance with county regulations within 90 days after date of official notice to do so; provided that a public sewer is within 200 feet of an inhabitable structure on the owner's property. 
(1)  The director may grant temporary written exceptions to this requirement, if the county health department director concurs in writing. 
(2)  The county planning and development department may preclude connection to the POTW in certain zones of the city, regardless of a property's proximity to sewer, based upon unified plan criteria and policies. 
(c)  Maintenance of private sewers. All sewer users, including all residential sewer users, are required to maintain building sewers and other private sewer lines and laterals in good condition. Such private sewers shall be maintained to prevent infiltration and inflow of surface water and or groundwater. Failure to so maintain building sewers and other private sewer lines may result in enforcement, including, but not limited to, cease-and-desist orders and administrative fines of up to $1,000.00 per day. 
(d)  Permanent easement restrictions. Permanent easements for sewer facilities are for the county to install, inspect, observe, measure, sample, repair, protect, maintain and operate any portion of the sewer facilities lying within such easement. It is essential that access to the easement not be obstructed. Although the property owner owns the underlying fee simple title to the land within the easement area subject to the easement rights, all construction, digging, grubbing, clearing, filling, or other earth moving or construction activities by the owner in the permanent easement area are prohibited without prior permission from the DWR director or his representative. Permanent structures shall not be permitted within the easement or easement setback. In addition, nonstructural improvements on easements such as walkways and landscaping are subject to removal at the owner's risk. Neither the county nor the city shall not be responsible for replacing anything within the easement that must be removed to access, install, inspect, observe, measure, sample, repair, protect, maintain and operate the facilities. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 114-88) 
Sec. 62-24. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Sewer not available. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 62-23(b), the building sewer shall be connected to a private individual on-site sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Approval by environmental health department. Before an individual on-site sewage disposal system is installed, the owner must first obtain approval from the county health department or other agency having legal jurisdiction. 
(c)  Communal onsite sewage disposal prohibited. Privately financed wastewater disposal plants or septic tanks serving more than one residence or more than one property are prohibited. If a property does not use an individual onsite sewage disposal system, it must be connected to a sewer leading to the POTW. 
(d)  Septic tank leach fields. The type, capacity, location, and layout of individual on-site sewage disposal systems shall comply with the requirements of all local, state and federal agencies, including, but not limited to, stream buffer setbacks. All septic tank and leach field systems or individual on-site alternative systems must have the approval of the county health department. No septic tank system shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet or receiving stream. 
(e)  Maintenance of individual disposal systems, septic tanks, and leach fields. The owner of a private wastewater disposal facility and or a septic tank leach field system shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facility in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city or county and in such manner that a nuisance is not created. The county may by resolution require septic tank pumping on a specified interval for parts or all of the city. 
(f)  Public sewer connection. At the written instruction of the county health department or by the director, a connection to the public sewer shall be made within 90 days at the property owner's expense, and the individual on-site disposal system abandoned according to health department requirements. Failure to connect to public sewer within the allotted time may result in a termination of water service. 
(g)  Public sewer availability. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in subsection (f) of this section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 90 days in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(h)  Safety. All excavations and operation areas for privately financed wastewater disposal systems shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 114-89) 
Sec. 62-25. - Sewer construction standards. 
(a)  Generally. All extensions of the sewer system shall be designed and built in accordance with current DWR standards. The standards shall be those stated in the latest edition of "Sanitary Sewer Installation Regulations and Specifications for Gwinnett County" (DWRSSS), which is available at DWR and at the department of planning and development. No installation of pipe or other materials for sewer extensions shall be allowed until the required information is received and the design is approved by the county. Inspection and acceptance procedures shall be specified in these standards. 
(b)  Prohibitions. No building sewers shall be connected to a sanitary sewer until as-built drawings are received and until the extension has been inspected, tested, and accepted in writing for county operation and maintenance. Flow from sewer extensions into the existing sanitary sewer system is prohibited until as-built drawings are received and until the extension has been inspected, tested, and accepted in writing for county operation and maintenance. Groundwater, rainwater, mud, gravel, and debris shall be kept out of the sanitary sewer system at all times, including during construction. 
(c)  Other regulations. Design and construction of sanitary sewer extension shall comply with all local, state, and federal rules and regulations pertaining to sewer installation, including, but not limited to, rules and regulations for safety, erosion and sediment control, stream buffer protection, wetlands, and water quality standards. 
(d)  Authority. The director is hereby authorized to issue and from time to time amend the DWRSSS. 
(e)  Enforcement. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section may result in enforcement and fines as described in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 114-90) 
Secs. 62-26—62-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRETREATMENT 

Sec. 62-54. - General provisions and definitions. 
(a)  Purpose and policy. This division sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the county, and enables the city and county to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403), and the Regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources at Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. ch. 391-3-6. This division shall apply to all users of the POTW. This division authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits or general permit provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. The objectives of this division are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; 
(3)  Protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  Promote reuse and recycling of treated industrial wastewater and sludge from the POTW; 
(5)  Provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, administration, and improvement of the POTW and the Industrial Pretreatment Program; 
(6)  Enable the city and the county to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject; and 
(7)  Aid in preventing the introduction and accumulation of fats, oils, and greases into the POTW which will or tend to cause or contribute to sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions. Food service establishments and other industrial or commercial establishments generating wastewater containing fats, oils or greases are subject to this article. This article regulates such users by requiring that grease interceptors and other approved strategies be installed, implemented, and maintained in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(b)  Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of water resources (director) shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this division. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated by the director to a duly authorized county employee. 
(c)  Applicability. This division shall apply to all persons located inside or outside the county sewer service area who are users of the county POTW, including jurisdictions served by agreement with the county. 
(d)  Common abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this division, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD5 — biochemical oxygen demand. 
BMP — best management practice. 
BMR — baseline monitoring report. 
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations. 
CIU — categorical industrial users. 
DWR — Gwinnett County Department of Water Resources. 
DWRSSS — Gwinnett County Department of Water Resources Sanitary Sewer Standards. 
EPA — U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
EPD — Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
FOG — fats, oils and grease. 
gpd — gallons per day. 
IU — industrial user. 
mg/l — milligrams per liter. 
NOV — notice of violation. 
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
O&M — operation and maintenance. 
O.C.G.A. — The Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
POTW — publicly owned treatment works. 
RCRA — Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
SIU — significant industrial user. 
SNC — significant noncompliance. 
TSS — total suspended solids. 
USC — United States Code. 
(e)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or the Federal Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Ammonia nitrogen (NH 3 -N) means a colorless gaseous alkaline compound of nitrogen and hydrogen that is soluble in water, measured as nitrogen. 
Approval authority means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources, or EPD. 
Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  The term "authorized or duly authorized representative of the use means: 
a.  If the user is a corporation: 
1.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
2.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to ensure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
b.  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
c.  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(2)  The individuals described in subsections (1)a through c of this definition may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to DWR. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibited discharge standards and as contained in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5 ) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade. 
Building sewer means a privately-owned and maintained sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of the user to the POTW. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
Categorical industrial user (CIU) means an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. All city CIUs are hereby classified as SIUs. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR 405—471. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water. 
Daily maximum means the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a 24-hour period. 
Daily maximum limit means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a 24-hour period. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the 24-hour period. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic or the weighted average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken during that 24-hour period. 
Director of water resources or director means the person designated by the county to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this division. The term "director of water resources" or "director" also means a duly authorized representative of the director of water resources. 
Environmental protection agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, the regional administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source means any source of discharge that is not a new source. 
Fats, oils and grease (FOG) means polar fats, oils, and grease as determined using EPA method 1664A specified at 40 CFR 136.3. Polar FOG concentration is the difference in HEM and SGT-HEM results analyzed by method 1664A. 
Food service establishment means establishments for the preparation or serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term "food service establishment" includes, but is not limited to, restaurants; coffee shops; cafeterias; short order cafes; luncheonettes; taverns; lunch rooms; places manufacturing, wholesaling, or retailing sandwiches, salads or other fast foods; soda fountains; institutions, both public and private; food carts; itinerant restaurants; industrial cafeterias; catering establishments; food vending machines and vehicles and operations connected therewith; and similar facilities by whatever name called. 
Grab sample means a sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Grease trap means a device in which the grease content of non-sanitary sewage is intercepted and congealed, and from which grease is removed for proper disposal. The terms "grease trap" and "grease interceptor" shall be interchangeable. 
Gwinnett County or county means the County of Gwinnett, Georgia, the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners and/or their designee acting on their behalf. 
Holding tank waste means any waste or wastewater from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump trucks used to store, treat or transport waste or wastewater. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source. 
Industrial user (IU) means a source of indirect discharge from industry. 
Instantaneous limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge that, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's or county's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Limitation means any restriction or prohibition established under the Federal Act, the State Act or pursuant to this division on quantities, rates, or concentration, or a combination thereof, of chemical, physical, biological, or other constituents which are discharged from users into a publicly owned treatment works and then into the waters of the state, including, but not limited to, schedules of compliance. 
Local limit means specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the county upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b) and applicable EPD regulations. 
Metered water means the amount of all sources of water, including wells, used by the sewer customer. 
Monthly average means the sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month. For concentration-based limitations, the monthly average shall be the average of all daily average concentrations during a calendar month. For mass-based limitations, the monthly average shall be based upon the average of all daily average concentrations multiplied by the average daily discharge flow for that month. Monthly average calculations shall include the values of all samples taken during the month whether sampled and analyzed by the user or sampled and analyzed by DWR. 
Monthly average concentration limit means the highest allowable average of daily discharge concentrations over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharge concentrations measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month. 
New source. The term "new source" means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b or c of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program, either of the following actions: any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Non-significant industrial user means one which does not meet the definition of a significant industrial user. Non-significant industrial users may be issued an individual discharge permit or a general permit at DWR's sole discretion. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's or county's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Permit or pretreatment permit means any permit issued by DWR to regulate the discharge of pollutants from any user into the POTW and thence to the waters of the state. Permits may be individual SIU permits, individual IU permits for non-significant users, or general permits. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater, including, but not limited to, pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, NH3, BOD5, COD, toxicity, or odor. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard, and except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or slug loadings that might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW. However, where wastewater from a regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility with unregulated wastewater or with wastewater from another regulated process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted pretreatment limit calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the county. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature, and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term "publicly owned treatment works (POTW)" also means the county, as defined in Section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to, and the discharges from, the POTW. 
Septage means waste removed from domestic-strength septic tanks, portable toilets, or chemical toilets. 
Septic tank waste means any sewage from domestic-waste holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage means human excrement and gray water. Gray water includes household showers, dishwashing operations, etc. 
Sewer meter means devices approved by the director for the purpose of establishing the quantity of wastewater discharged by a user. 
Significant industrial user (SIU) means: 
(1)  An IU subject to categorical pretreatment standards (a CIU), including IUs regulated under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; or 
(2)  An IU that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by DWR on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
Significant noncompliance. Significant noncompliance for an IU means that its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l); 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l), multiplied by the applicable TRC. The TRC are 1.4 for BOD, TSS, FOG, NH3-N, Phosphorus and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH; 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that DWR determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in DWR's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violations or group of violations, which may include a violation of BMPs, which DWR determines will adversely affect POTW operations or violate applicable NPDES Permit effluent limitations and requirements. 
Slug load or slug discharge means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
State Act means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.) title 12, art. 2. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Total suspended solids or suspended solids (TSS) means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. 
User means a source of indirect wastewater or sewage discharge. 
Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
Zero discharge permit means a permit issued to an IU, which may include CIUs, and which prohibits the discharge of industrial process wastewater to the POTW. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 114-91) 
Secs. 62-55—62-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG) 

Sec. 62-82. - FOG requirements for food establishments. 
(a)  Additional definitions. Those definitions set forth in division 2 of this article, in O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20, and in DNR Regulations, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-6-.24(2), are adopted and are incorporated by reference into this division as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Food establishment requirements. 
(1)  All food establishments that discharge to the POTW shall provide a grease trap or interceptor as indicated below. Additionally, the director may require any user who generates a wastewater which contains greater than 200 mg/l FOG to install a grease trap. 
(2)  All grease traps and interceptors shall be emptied of all material, including solids and liquids, each time these are serviced. Partial pumping, including skimming, is strictly prohibited. All grease traps and interceptors shall be serviced as specified in this section. All grease traps and interceptors shall be serviced by a state licensed hauler and a completed manifest shall be kept on site by the user for every service event. All grease waste shall be taken to a licensed and approved disposal facility for disposal and in no manner shall any grease trap or interceptor contents be discharged by a hauler to the county collection system, either sewer or stormwater. Any violation may result in full prosecution under all applicable state and local laws and ordinances on the first offense. 
(3)  All facilities installed by any user pursuant to this division shall comply with all other city or county ordinances and with all building codes that may be enforced in the city from time to time. 
(c)  Penalties on noncompliant food establishments. 
(1)  Violations. Violating any provision of this section for a total of three violations within 18 months shall be punishable by a fine for each successive violation not to exceed $1,000.00. Additionally, any user violating any provision of this division may be liable to pay restitution in the discretion of the court for: 
a.  The total cost incurred by the city or county to repair or replace facilities damaged as a result of the violation. 
b.  Any injury or damage to person or property or loss of services resulting from the violation. 
(2)  FOG surcharges. Any user discharging greater than 200 mg/l FOG as measured by any grab sample is subject to a high-strength surcharge in addition to other enforcement and penalties. 
(3)  Abnormal occurrences. If, in the judgment of the director, a user is causing or may cause water pollution to such an extent as to be or become dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare, the director may require such corrective measures as may be necessary for the protection of the public on an emergency basis, and shall have the power and authority to cause all operation of the user to cease until appropriate corrective measures have been taken by issuing an order to the owner or operator thereof directing the cessation of the operation, or by ordering the utility providing water service to the user to cease providing such service. 
(d)  Grease trap regulations for new food establishments. 
(1)  Grease trap requirements. All food establishments discharging wastewater containing FOG to the POTW shall install, operate, and maintain at their own expense a sufficiently sized grease trap necessary to achieve and maintain compliance as indicated below. Installation and maintenance shall conform to the current DWRSSS. 
a.  Outdoor grease traps. New food establishments shall have a grease trap as outlined in the DWRSSS. A size variance may be issued in an extreme case but shall be verified and documented by inspection. The size variance shall conform to DWRSSS size variance guidelines and is subject to approval by the director. All scullery sinks, mop sinks, floor drains, dishwashers, hub drains and open receptacles shall drain into the outside grease trap. 
b.  Outdoor grease trap design. Outdoor grease trap design and installation shall conform to the DWRSSS. The trap shall be located for easy access for user cleaning, pump-out, and official inspection. Dishwasher and food grinder wastewater should be discharged through a suitably sized solids interceptor prior to the emptying into the outdoor grease trap. 
c.  Indoor grease traps. All indoor grease trap design and installation shall conform to the DWRSSS. All scullery sinks shall discharge into an indoor grease trap. 
d.  Mechanical grease traps. Mechanically operated grease traps (Big Dipper, skimmers, etc.) may not be used by any user tied to the POTW collection system. 
e.  Prohibited discharge. It is prohibited to discharge the following materials into an indoor grease trap: 
1.  Wastewater with a temperature higher than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
2.  Acid or caustic trap cleaners. 
3.  Any discharge from a dishwasher without approval from the director. 
f.  Sampling point. To allow for observation, sampling, and measurement of wastewaters, a sampling point on the effluent discharge side of the grease trap, as required by the DWRSSS, shall be provided at the user's expense. The sampling point shall be maintained and kept safe and accessible to the city and county at all times. 
(2)  Variances. All users connected to the county sewage collection system shall install a minimum 1,500-gallon exterior grease interceptor. Variances may be granted if, in the opinion of the director, a limited amount of FOG will be discharged by the user during all aspects of their operation. If a variance is granted, a minimum of a 100-pound grease trap shall be installed along with an effluent test point that meets the testing requirements of the county grease program. If at any time the user exceeds the county discharge limit, the user may be required to upgrade to a minimum of a 1,500-gallon outdoor interceptor at the user's expense. A variance will not be granted if a dishwasher, grill, range top, fryers, or griddle is present, or if the food establishment processes meat. The user may also be subject to any fines or penalties associated with the illegal discharge at the discretion of the director. 
(e)  Grease trap regulations for existing food establishments. 
(1)  Upgrade. If a food establishment in existence prior to codification of the ordinance from which this division is derived has no grease trap or, as documented by inspection, it is determined that the current grease trap is insufficient for the volume of food service waste being treated, the director may require that the establishment upgrade to an adequately sized grease trap and sampling point as outlined in this section. 
(2)  FOG best management practices (FOG BMPs). In order to enhance the overall efficiency of the grease trap, food establishments should implement FOG BMPs to reduce FOG and solids loading to their grease trap. Examples of FOG BMPs are: 
a.  Scraping food from pots, pans, plates and utensils into a garbage can; 
b.  Installation of a solid waste interceptor; 
c.  Pre-washing plates by spraying them off with cold water over a small mesh catch basin positioned over a drain. The catch basin should be cleaned into a garbage can as needed; and 
d.  Pouring all liquid grease and oil from pots and pans into a waste grease bucket stored at the pot-washing sink. Heavy solids buildup of oil and grease on pots and pans should be scraped off into the waste grease bucket. 
(f)  Grease trap maintenance. All grease traps shall be maintained by the owner so as to be in continuously efficient operation. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents by a properly licensed waste hauler. Top skimming, decanting or back flushing of the grease trap or its waste is prohibited. Further, the discharge of liquid, semi-solids, or solids into a grease trap from vehicles after servicing is prohibited. Vehicles capable of separating water from grease shall not discharge separated water into the grease trap or into the wastewater collection system. Cleaning and maintenance of all grease traps shall include removal of materials from the tank walls, baffles, cross pipes, inlets and outlets, both tee's and the cover. Recyclable fats, oils and greases shall not be discharged into the POTW. Any violation in the removal of grease waste shall result in prosecution under state law. Maintenance shall be performed at frequencies as required by subsections (f)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(1)  Outdoor grease interceptor. Maintenance shall be performed at intervals of not less than once every 90 days and as required by the 30-percent rule, as follows: The depth of both bottom solids and oil/grease in a trap shall not equal or be greater than 30 percent of the total operating depth of the trap; the operating depth of a trap is the internal depth from the inlet or outlet water elevation to the bottom of the trap. Any solids interceptor should be emptied and cleaned daily. Outdoor grease interceptors shall have a minimum of 1,500-gallon capacity. 
(2)  Indoor grease trap. Maintenance shall be performed at intervals not less than once every 30 days. A variance is required to operate an indoor grease trap in place of a 1,500-gallon minimum outdoor interceptor. Indoor grease traps shall have a minimum of 100 pound capacity. Any current user connected to the county sewage collection system that currently operates an indoor grease trap, regardless of size, shall prove, to the satisfaction of the director, that they are not discharging illegally or the user shall be required to upgrade to a 1,500-gallon minimum outdoor grease interceptor. Users may not operate indoor grease traps with a capacity less than 100 pounds. A solids interceptor tied to an indoor grease trap should be emptied and cleaned daily. 
(3)  Pumping variance. Variances may be granted if the user can prove, at their expense, to the director's satisfaction, that the discharge from the user's grease trap or interceptor is meeting the county's discharge limit up to 180 consecutive days for outdoor grease interceptors or 120 consecutive days for indoor grease traps. 
(4)  Additives. It is specifically prohibited to use any additive, such as enzymes, chemicals, or bacteria, as a substitute for grease trap maintenance. The direct addition of such additives to a grease trap is also prohibited. 
(5)  Waste removal. The user shall be responsible for the proper removal and legal disposal of the grease trap waste. All waste removed from each grease trap shall be tracked by an approved three-part manifest and the contents shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such waste. In no manner shall any grease trap contents be discharged to the city or the county sewer or stormwater systems. 
(6)  Manifest transmittal. The user shall maintain a legible copy of the completed three-part manifest on site for each service event. Failure to provide all manifests for review by the county grease inspectors may result in a fine at the discretion of the director. 
(g)  Recordkeeping by user. It shall be a violation of this division for a user to allow the removal of their grease trap waste without documentation by an approved three-part manifest. The user shall be responsible for maintaining a copy of these manifests on site for a period of three years and subject to the director's review without prior notification. The manifest shall contain the information listed below: 
(1)  Food service establishment. 
a.  Facility name, address, and telephone number. 
b.  Trap type and size. 
c.  Date and volume removed from the trap. 
d.  Authorized signature (verifying the grease trap was cleaned and in operable condition). 
(2)  Service company information (waste hauler). 
a.  Pumper name, address, and telephone number. 
b.  Pumper permit number. 
c.  Date and volume removed from the trap. 
d.  Disposal method. 
e.  Authorized signature of pumper. 
(3)  Disposal site. 
a.  Facility name, address, and telephone number. 
b.  Facility EPD permit number. 
c.  Date and volume received. 
d.  Authorized signature verifying receipt of waste. 
(h)  Grease trap inspections by DWR. 
(1)  Inspection. Inspection of a grease trap shall be performed according to the "30 percent rule," as defined herein. 
(2)  Failed inspection. If a grease trap fails the initial inspection, the inspector may notify the user that the grease trap shall be cleaned out within seven calendar days. After seven calendar days, the grease trap should be re-inspected. 
(3)  Failed reinspection. If at the first re-inspection, the grease trap is found to still be in non-compliance, a notice of violation may be issued and the user may be told that the grease trap shall be cleaned immediately. After three weekdays, the grease trap may be re-inspected. 
(4)  Mechanical grease traps. Mechanically operated grease traps may not be used by any user tied to the county collection system. 
(i)  Notice of FOG Violation by DWR. 
(1)  Issue FOG NOV. As outlined in this division, whenever the director discovers a violation of any provision of this division, a written NOV may be issued to the user. If satisfactory remedy has occurred within the time frame specified in the NOV, the requirement for a written explanation of the violation and a plan for satisfactory correction and prevention by the user may be waived by the director. 
(2)  Disregard of FOG NOV. If a user served with a NOV fails to initiate/complete corrective action within the time frame specified within the NOV, the director may pursue one or more of the following options: 
a.  Have the grease trap pumped and place the appropriate charge on the user's monthly water and sewer bill. 
b.  Terminate water and sewer service to the establishment. 
c.  File an appropriate action in the courts to compel compliance. 
d.  Any combination of the above enforcement actions. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2012, § 114-106) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
THE 2012 ZONING RESOLUTION OF CITY OF PEACHTREE CORNERS, GEORGIA 
A Resolution of the City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia, regulating the location, height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the density of population; the size of yards and other open spaces; the uses of land, buildings and structures for industry, commerce, agriculture, conservation, recreation, residence, public activities and other purposes; creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the method of administration, amendment and enforcement and for the imposition of penalties for violation; providing for a City of Peachtree Corners Zoning Board of Appeals and defining its powers and duties; and repealing conflicting Resolutions; and other matters. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, adopted Feb. 28, 2016, repealed the former Appendix A, arts; I—III, art. IV, §§ 400—402, art. V, §§ 500-506, art. VI, §§ 600—608, art. VII, §§ 700—705, art. VIII, §§ 800, 801, art. X, §§ 1000—1008, art. XII, §§ 1200, 1201, art. XIII, §§ 1300—1312, 1315—1318, art. XIV, §§ 1400, 1401, 1400A.1—1400A.8, art. XV, §§ 1500—1504, art. XVI, §§ 1600—1610, art XVII, §§ 1700—1710, art. XVIII, §§ 1800—1802, art XIX, §§ 1900—1904.4 and enacted a new Appendix A as set out herein. The former Appendix A pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. The ordinance as been printed as adopted, except that obviously misspelled words and typographical errors have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been added with brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph IV, 1983 Constitution of Georgia and for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or the general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of City of Peachtree Corners; of lessening congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land, avoiding both undue concentration of population and urban sprawl; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; protecting property against blight and depreciation; encouraging the most appropriate use of land, buildings and other structures throughout the City; securing economy in government expenditures; and for other purposes, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the development of the City, originally adopted by the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners and subsequently approved by reference for City of Peachtree Corners do hereby ordain and enact into law the following Articles and Sections of the 2012 Zoning Resolution of City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE 
This Resolution shall be known and may be cited as "The 2012 Zoning Resolution of City of Peachtree Corners." 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this Resolution shall be as defined in the most recent edition of The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence, Section and Article in which they occur. 
For the purpose of this Resolution, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
The word "erected" includes the words "constructed," "moved," "located" or "relocated." 
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
The word "map" or "zoning map" means the Zoning Map of City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia, previously established by the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners. 
The word "person" includes the words "individuals," "firms," "partnerships," "corporations," "associations," "governmental bodies" and all other legal entities. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary. 
The words "used" or occupied include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
Accessory Structure . A structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. 
Accessory Use . A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
Animal Hospital . Facility for the treatment and temporary boarding of domestic animals operated under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. This facility may include the boarding of animals in outside runs or kennels. 
Animal Quarters . Any structure which surrounds or is used to shelter, care for, house, feed, exercise, train, exhibit, display or show any animals, other than fenced pasture land for grazing. 
Attic . The unfinished space between the ceiling joists of the top story and the roof rafters. 
Basement . That portion of any building for which the finished surface of its floor meets any of the following conditions (see figure 1 below): 
A.  More than six feet below grade; 
B.  More than six feet below the finished ground level for more than 50 percent of the total building perimeter; or 
C.  More than 12 feet below the finished ground level at any point. 
_____
Figure 1  
_____
Billboard . See Oversized Signs. 
Boarding or Rooming House . A dwelling in which meals or lodging or both are furnished for compensation to more than two (2), but not more than ten (10), non-transient persons. 
Buffer . Land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance; to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other conditions; to block physical passage to non-similar areas; or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter. 
Buffer, Construction . A type of buffer which is temporary and remains in effect during the construction of a project. 
Building . Any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Buildings, Metal . A structure which has a roof, and which is designed for the shelter, storage, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind and is constructed of exterior metal panels or pieces. This shall not include residential structures intended for occupancy with an exterior finish of aluminum siding where such siding is commonly used for residential structures. 
Cattery . Any place that regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells, or trades any cat. 
Cemetery . An area and use of land set apart for the purpose of burial plots for deceased persons or animals and for the erection of customary markers, monuments and/or mausoleums related thereto; and which may be maintained by a church or other place of worship, or a private corporation. 
Cemetery, Family . The use of property as a burial ground restricted to the members of the family owning the lot on which the cemetery is located. For the purposes of this definition, "family" shall be defined as family within the fourth (4 th ) degree of civil reckoning from the property owner. 
Child Care Institution . See "Group Home." 
City . The City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia municipal boundaries. 
Common Area (MUO Overlay & MUD District) . Land, amenities, accessory structure(s) and improvements within a development, not individually owned and not dedicated for a public use and integral to the development that encourage pedestrian connectivity to adjacent lots or parcels such as arcades, greenways, sidewalks eight (8) feet or greater in width, public spaces that are clearly intended as gathering spaces (including rooftop recreational amenities and gardens in high-rise buildings) or that act as connectors to adjacent buildings, or such land and amenities, that are otherwise designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents, tenants and guests of the development. Lands dedicated for public park land and public spaces within rights-of-way which are beyond the minimum required and are clearly intended as gathering spaces with amenities such as benches, fountains, etc., may be counted as common area. Required common area shall not include 100-year floodplain or wetlands acreage, areas devoted to public or private streets, required buffers or any land that has been, or is to be conveyed to a public agency via a purchase agreement for such uses as schools or other public facilities. 
Community Shelter . A nonprofit, institutional use comprised of a building, institutional in nature, which provides overnight shelter, sleeping accommodations and services, and not otherwise mandated by the State government, for related or non-related individuals for a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) hours every twenty-four (24) hours. 
Composting Facility, Municipal Solid Waste . An establishment converting municipal solid waste to humus through a controlled process of degrading organic matter by microorganisms. 
Composting Facility, Yard Trimmings . An establishment converting yard trimmings to humus through a controlled process of degrading organic matter by microorganisms. This definition does not include composting conducted on a residential lot for home gardening purposes. 
Comprehensive Plan . A comprehensive plan, which may consist of several maps, data, and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the City or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions or additions thereto recommended by the City of Peachtree Corners Planning Commission, indicating the general location for major streets, parks or other similar information. The Comprehensive Plan shall be based upon and include appropriate studies of the location and extent of present and anticipated population, social and economic resources and problems, and other useful data. The term "Comprehensive Plan" includes component or functional plans for the City, including, but not limited to, a plan for land use or a plan for transportation facilities. City of Peachtree Corners shall adopt the Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan by reference on June 31, 2012, as a component of the initiation phase for the new municipality and shall maintain the document as an official Comprehensive Plan for the City, until which time the City has adopted their inaugural Comprehensive Plan, at a date to be determined. 
Conditional Use . A use which is not automatically permitted by right, but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions contained in this Resolution or required by the governing body. 
Conditional Zoning . The granting or adoption of zoning for a property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, project design or timing of development, stipulated by the City Council to mitigate adverse impacts that could be expected without the imposition of such conditions. 
Congregate Personal Care Home . A state-licensed Personal Care Home which offers care to sixteen (16) or more adults aged eighteen (18) or older (See Personal Care Home). 
Conservation Space . Permanently protected land and water, including agricultural and forestry land, that is in its undeveloped, natural state or that has been developed only to the extent consistent, or is restored to be consistent, with one or more or the following goals: 
A.  Water quality protection for rivers, streams and lakes; 
B.  Floor protection; 
C.  Wetlands protection; 
D.  Reduction of erosion through protection of steep slopes, areas with erodible soils and stream banks; 
E.  Protection of riparian buffers and other areas that serve as natural habitat and corridors for native plant and animal species; 
F.  Scenic protection; 
G.  Protection of archaeological and historic resources; 
H.  Provision of recreation in the form of boating, hiking, camping, fishing, running, jogging, biking, walking and similar outdoor activities; and 
I.  Connection of existing or planned areas contributing to the goals set out in this paragraph. 
County . The geographic boundaries of Gwinnett County, Georgia. 
Customary Home Occupation . An occupation customarily carried on within a dwelling unit for gain or support involving the sale of only those articles, products, or services produced on the premises, conducted entirely within the dwelling by members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit with equipment customarily used for household purposes and involving no display of articles or products. 
Day Care Facility . A structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of persons away from their place of residence for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purposes of this resolution the term "day care" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," "pre-school," "Group Day Care Home," and "Family Day Care Home." 
Density . The number of families, individuals, dwelling units or housing structures per unit of land. Gross density includes all the land within the boundaries of the particular area excluding nothing. Net density excludes 50 percent of any land identified as a flood hazard area or within any electricity or gas transmission easement or right-of-way. 
Director . The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his/her designee. 
Distribution Facility . An office/warehouse establishment where individual tenants engage in the receipt, storage, and distribution of their goods, products, cargo, and materials, including transshipment by boat, rail, air, or motor vehicle. 
Duplex . A dwelling containing two (2) and only two (2) dwelling units. 
Dwelling . A building which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family, duplex and multiple family residential buildings, rooming and boarding houses, fraternities, sororities, dormitories, manufactured homes, and industrialized homes but not including hotels and motels. 
Dwelling, Attached . See "Townhouse" and "Dwelling, Multifamily." 
Dwelling, Multifamily . A dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units, including units that are located one over the other. This definition does not include a townhouse. 
Dwelling, One-Family . See "Dwelling, Single Family." 
Dwelling, Residential/Business . A type of attached dwelling in which a commercial business or office may be operated in the basement or first (1 st ) floor/story of the structure. The business need not be operated by the resident of the dwelling. 
Dwelling, Single Family . A dwelling containing one (1) and only one (1) dwelling unit and used as a residence for a single household on an ongoing basis with no short-term rental use. 
Dwelling, Two-Family . See "Duplex." 
Dwelling Unit . One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family maintained household. 
Dwelling Unit . One or more rooms designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided with the dwelling unit for the ongoing, exclusive use of a single family maintained household and not for use as a short-term rental. 
Dwelling Unit, Efficiency . A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one (1) habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities. 
Environmental Site Assessment (Phase One) . A written report that documents the process by which a person or entity determines if a parcel of real property is subject to recognized environmental conditions. The report itemizes and assesses the environmental and historical features to be identified or delineated on an Existing Features Site Analysis Plan. The assessment and report shall be conducted in a methodical manner and in accordance with accepted practice as contained in the American Society for Testing & Materials Standard ASTM 1527. 
Exotic Plant . A plant that does not meet the definition of Native Plant. 
Family . One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship; or not more than three (3) persons not so related who live together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and stability. 
Family Day Care Home . A customary home occupation which provides for no more than six (6) persons who are not residents of the premises, care and supervision by the State of Georgia registered resident adult for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. 
Family Personal Care Home . A state-licensed Personal Care Home that provides a home for individuals in a family-type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care for up to 8 adults, aged 18 years or older (See Personal Care Home). Such facilities shall be served by public water and sewer service, or an on-site sewage management (septic) system approved by the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department. 
Fence . A structural barrier for enclosure, screening or demarcation, presenting a solid face or having openings amongst or between its constituent members; also, a wall separate from or extending from a building. 
Floor Area . The gross heated, finished horizontal area of the several floors of a dwelling unit exclusive of basement, attic, carport, or garage. 
Fur Farm . Any place that regularly breeds and raises rabbits, mink, foxes or other fur or hide-bearing animals for the harvesting of their skins. 
Gas Recovery/Gas Cogeneration Plant . A facility operating as an accessory use to a landfill which extracts and utilizes landfill gases for the production of energy. 
Grade . A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or between the building and a point of six (6) feet from the building, whichever is closer to the building. 
Group Day Care Home . An occupied dwelling in which the owner-occupant is licensed by the State of Georgia to provide care and supervision for more than six (6), but less than nineteen (19), persons who are not residents of the dwelling. Such care shall be provided for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day on a regular basis for compensation. 
Group Home . A state-licensed Child Care Institution (for six [6] or more children) or Child Care Institution for Medically Fragile Children (one [1] through twelve [12] children) either residential or institutional in character that provides full-time group home care for children through 18 years of age outside their own homes. 
Group Personal Care Home . A state-licensed Personal Care Home for individuals in a residence or other type building, non-institutional in character, which provides care and supervision for seven (7) through fifteen (15) adults aged eighteen (18) or older (See Personal Care Home). 
Hard-Surfaced Area or All-Weather Surface . An area which has been packed and covered with gravel and confined by landscaping timbers, railroad cross-ties, brick or rock wall; or an area which has been paved with concrete, asphalt, or similar approved surface. 
Hazardous Waste . Solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludges; and other waste material that may be a hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials as defined by the State of Georgia. 
Height of Building . The vertical distance measured from grade to the highest finished roof surface in the case of flat roofs or to a point at the average height of the highest roof having a pitch. (See figure below.) 
_____

_____
Hobby Breeder . An individual who owns any horse, purebred dog or pedigreed cat, any of which is registered with a national registry for the breed, who may intentionally breed the animal to preserve and further the respective breed with regard to physical and temperamental soundness and in conformance with official breed standards. Hobby Breeding shall be deemed to be a Customary Home Occupation only when the animals and/or their offspring are sold directly to retail purchasers and are not bred or sold for commercial resale, research or other purposes. 
Hotel/Motel . A facility offering lodging accommodations to the general public on a nightly or long-term basis (weekly or monthly) and may provide additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment and recreational facilities. 
Impervious Surface . Any paved, hardened or structural surface, including, but not limited to, buildings, driveways, walkways, parking areas, patios, decks, streets, swimming pools, dams, tennis courts, and other structures. 
Industrialized Home . A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a structure to be used for residential purposes. An industrialized home or modular home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the approval of the State Building Administration Board (SBAB) to meet the same requirements as an on site-built home within the City of Peachtree Corners. 
Invasive Exotic Plant . A plant that is able to proliferate and aggressively alter or displace indigenous biological communities. 
Kennel . Any place that regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells, trades or lets for hire any dog. 
Lakes, Existing and Proposed . An inland body of water fed by springs, creeks and surrounding runoff which has a surface area in excess of two (2) acres of water measured at outflow structure elevation. An existing lake is a body of water, formed by a natural or man-made dam, which is not increased as a result of development by more than 25 percent. A proposed lake is a body of water which is created by a developer or is an existing lake which realizes an increase of 25 percent or more as a result of development. Any body of water which has a surface area of two (2) acres or less measured at outflow structure elevation shall be considered floodplain for the purpose of calculating required open space. 
Landfill . A method a disposing of waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. The term "landfill" shall include Construction and Demolition Debris Landfill, Hazardous Waste Landfill, Industrial Waste Landfill, Inert Waste Landfill, Monofill, Municipal Solid Waste Landfill and Private Industry Landfill. The term "landfill" shall not include approved on-site disposal of inert waste at a building, land disturbing, or development site. 
Landfill, Construction and Demolition Waste . A landfill in which construction/demolition waste is disposed. Construction/demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, asbestos containing waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material and other non-putrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Landfill, Hazardous Waste . A landfill in which hazardous waste is disposed. Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by U.S. EPA pursuant to the federal act codified as 40 CFR 261.3 or by the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act. 
Landfill, Industrial Waste . A commercially-operated landfill for the disposal of solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste regulated by the U.S. EPA or the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes; electric power generation; fertilizer and agricultural chemicals; food and related products and by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals; plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Landfill, Inert Waste . A landfill accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trash, stumps, limbs and leaves. This definition excludes other types of industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed above. 
Landfill, Municipal Solid Waste . A disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges, or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multi-family residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agriculture, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Landfill, Private Industry . A landfill which is operated exclusively by and for a private solid waste generator for the purpose of accepting solid waste generated exclusively by said private solid waste generator. 
Landscape Strip . Land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
Livestock . The term "livestock" as used herein shall mean and include cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine and other hoofed animals; poultry, ducks, geese and other live fowl; and mink, foxes and other fur or hide-bearing animals customarily bred or raised in captivity for the harvesting of their skins; whether owned or kept for pleasure, utility or sale. The term livestock shall not include the purebred Vietnamese pot-bellied pig or rabbits. 
Lobby . A lobby is a public internal waiting area at or near the entrance of a building. A lobby may include a variety of uses, but is limited to contiguous open area and shall not include separated space for public uses such as restrooms or offices. 
Lot . A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Lot, Stormwater Facility . A lot designed for the principal use of containing a stormwater facility; including extended detention ponds, retention ponds, constructed wetlands, sand filters, infiltration trenches and oil/grit separators. 
Lot, Through . A lot having frontage on two (2) streets that are approximately parallel. 
Lot Width . The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at the minimum required front yard (building setback) line. 
Lot Width (Cul-de-sac) . For a lot having the majority of its frontage on a cul-de-sac, the lot width shall be the horizontal distance between the side lines of the lot, measured at the minimum required front yard (building setback) line or at a line parallel to said setback line, which is no more than twice the minimum front yard setback distance from the street. 
Manufactured Home . A dwelling which does not meet the standards of an "industrialized home" but is certified by the State of Georgia as meeting the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards and is transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is at least ten (10) feet wide and which is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and has plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. The term "manufactured home" includes the term "mobile home." 
Manufactured Home Lot . A parcel of land for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single manufactured home. 
Manufactured Home Park . A manufactured home park is a parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes for non-transient use. 
Mobile Home . See "Manufactured Home." 
Modified Single Family Development . A form of development for single family residential subdivisions that permits a reduction in lot area requirements, provided maximum density does not exceed the limits established in Article XIV-A, Section 1400A.2 and the resultant land area is devoted to open space. 
Modular Home . See "Industrialized Home." 
Monofill . A method of solid waste disposal that involves the landfilling of one (1) waste type or wastes having very similar characteristics in a segregated trench or area which is physically separated from dissimilar or incompatible waste. Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
Native Plant . A plant that occurs naturally in a particular region, state, ecosystem, and habitat without direct or indirect human actions (Federal Native Plant Conservation Committee, 1994). 
Non-Conforming Use and Non-Conforming Structure . See Article VIII. 
Office Park . A development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses and open space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis. 
Open Space . A parcel or area of land set aside, designated, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners, occupants and their guests of land adjoining or neighboring such open space. Creditable open space shall not include any portion of an overhead power line easement, stormwater detention pond, which is not part of an existing or proposed permanent lake or recreation area required by the City of Peachtree Corners Development Regulations. 
Out of Store Marketing Device . Any facility or equipment which is located outside of a primary building on a site zoned for nonresidential uses, which is used for the primary purpose of providing a product or service without the owner's or agent's immediate presence, and which is manufactured to include a color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, and/or writing thereon to communicate information regarding the product or service provided to the public. Examples of out-of-store marketing devices include: bank ATM units, movie and other vending machines, newspaper racks, drink machines, ice boxes, and storage lockers. 
Oversized Sign . A ground sign which exceeds 30 feet in sign height and/or 300 square feet of sign surface area. 
Parking Lot . A surface parking lot, not including decked parking garages or underground parking structures. 
Personal Care Home . A state-licensed facility either residential or institutional in character, that provides housing, food service and personal service(s) for two (2) or more adults aged eighteen (18) or older. 
Petroleum Products Recycling Center, Accessory . A facility storing, reclaiming or containing used petroleum products which is accessory to an automotive service establishment, industrial establishment or similar use. 
Pet (Household Pet) . Any animal owned or kept for pleasure rather than sale, which is an animal of a species customarily bred and raised to live in the habitat of humans and is dependent upon them for food and shelter; except that livestock and wild animals shall not be deemed pets. Specifically included in the definition of Pet (Household Pet) are rabbits and purebred Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs. 
Planning Commission . The City of Peachtree Corners Planning Commission. 
Pocket Park or Neighborhood Green . A relatively flat, level and landscaped area, larger than 0.33 acres, and constructed for community gathering or play, or visual enhancement. 
Pod . A defined geographic portion of an overall development (designated on a conceptual site plan) indicated for a specific use or group of related uses. 
Precious Metals Dealer . Any person, partnership, sole proprietorship, corporation, association, or other entity engaged in the business of purchasing, selling, bartering, or acquiring in trade any precious metals (including, but not limited to, in whole or in part, silver, gold, and platinum) from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers for resale in its original form or as changed by melting, reforming, remolding, or for resale as scrap, or in bulk. 
Primary Conservation Areas . Areas of Conservation Space are required to be permanently protected and undeveloped with the exception of road crossings and sanitary sewer lines. Wetland and stream bank mitigation projects are permitted. Stormwater drainage systems are allowed except that they shall not be counted toward the minimum required amount of Conservation Space. Because permanently protecting wetlands, riparian areas and floodplains will provide significant long-term benefits ranging from protection of water quality to wildlife habitat to quality of life for individuals resulting from natural spaces available for passive recreation;, these features must be permanently protected. The inclusion of uplands, undeveloped slopes and forested areas in Conservation Space is encouraged. 
Principal Use . The primary or predominant purpose for which a lot is occupied and/or used. 
Private Deed Restrictions or Covenants . Private deed restrictions or covenants are imposed on land by private land owners. They bind and restrict the land in the hands of present owners and subsequent purchasers. They are enforced only by the land owners involved and not by the City or other public agency. 
Putrescible Wastes . Wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to, kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes and garbage. 
Recovered Materials Processing Facility, Accessory . Any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting household and commercial materials to be recycled including, but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper, and aluminum materials whenever such use is customarily incidental to a shopping center, church, school, multi-family residential development, waste disposal facility or similar use. 
Recovered Materials Processing Facility, Principal . Any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting, sorting, processing, and shipping materials to be recycled including, but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper and aluminum whenever such use is principal to the site. 
Residential Shelter . A nonprofit institutional use comprised of a residential building, which provides two or more beds and other facilities or services, including room and food service facilities and not otherwise mandated by State government for related or non-related individuals. Length of stay of the individuals is presumed to be of a temporary nature. A Shelter must meet the provisions of the Rules for Shelters in City of Peachtree Corners. 
Restaurant. A commercial establishment where food and drink are prepared and served. 
Road Frontage . The distance on which a parcel of land adjoins a public street or public road right-of-way dedicated to and accepted by City of Peachtree Corners for vehicular traffic or over which City of Peachtree Corners may hold a prescriptive easement for public access, and including designated and numbered U.S. and State highways, or a publicly approved private street pursuant to Section 505. 
Salvage Operation and/or Junk Yard . Property used for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, tires, batteries, salvage building wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Scrap Tire Processing Plant . A facility which grinds, shreds, chops or otherwise processes scrap tires for secondary use. 
Screening . A method of shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, or the like. 
Secondary Conservation Areas . Areas that are desirable to be included in Conservation Space, but which may or may not be suitable to be permanently protected. Examples are "pocket Parks", "Neighborhood Greens" and stormwater management facilities that may revert to a relatively natural state. 
Sexually Oriented Business . An "adult bookstore or adult video store," an "adult cabaret," an "adult motion picture theater," a "semi-nude model studio," or a "sexual device shop" as those terms are defined in the Peachtree Corners Sexually Oriented Business Ordinance (Ord. No. O2012-07-57). 
Short-term Rental . The use of (or contracting for use of) a dwelling unit for a period of less than thirty-one (31) days. The rental of property for less than thirty-one (31) days shall constitute a hotel/motel use. 
Sign . See definition as detailed in the City of Peachtree Corners Sign Ordinance. 
Solid Waste . Putrescible and non-putrescible wastes, except water-carried body waste, and shall include garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes, abandoned automobiles, dredging wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in these regulations. 
Solid Waste Transfer Station . Any facility which collects, consolidates, and ships solid waste to a disposal facility or processing operation. 
Special Exception . A "Special Exception" is a use listed in the 2012 Zoning Resolution as permitted, if it meets stated conditions and is approved by the City of Peachtree Corners Zoning Board of Appeals after a Public Hearing. 
Special Use . A "Special Use" is a use listed in the 2012 Zoning Resolution as being permitted, if it meets stated conditions and is approved by the City Council 
Story . That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. A residential attic finished as heated living area shall not constitute a story. 
Stream, Perennial . A watercourse having a source, terminus, banks and channel through which water flows on a continuous basis as depicted on the most recent United States Geological Survey 7.5-minute quadrangle map (scale 1:24,000). 
Street . A thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, Collector . A street shown as such in the City of Peachtree Corners Geographic Information System Map, which is on file in the office of the City of Peachtree Corners Department of Planning and Development. The primary purpose of a Collector Street is to collect and distribute traffic between the Local Streets and the Major and Minor Arterial Streets and to provide access to adjacent properties. 
Street, Local Nonresidential . A surface street intended primarily to provide local access to adjacent, existing, or planned commercial or industrial development and not through traffic. 
Street, Local Residential . A surface street intended primarily to provide local access to adjacent residential development and not for through traffic. 
Street, Major Arterial . A street shown as such in the City of Peachtree Corners Geographic Information Systems Map, which is on file in the office of the City of Peachtree Corners Department of Planning and Development. The primary purpose of a Major Arterial Street is to carry longer trip length segments and larger volumes of traffic to, from and through the City. 
Street, Major Thoroughfare . Any public street, existing or proposed, which is shown in the Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan as an arterial or major collector. 
Street, Minor Arterial . A street shown as such in the City of Peachtree Corners Geographic Information Systems map, which is on file in the office of the City of Peachtree Corners Department of Planning and Development. The primary purpose of a Minor Arterial Street is to carry medium length trip segments and moderate volumes of traffic to, from and through the City. 
Street, Principal Arterial . A street shown as such in the City of Peachtree Corners Geographic Information Systems Map, which is on file in the office of the City of Peachtree Corners Department of Planning and Development. The primary purpose of a Principal Arterial Street is to carry very long trip length segments and very large volumes of traffic to, from and through the City. 
Structure . Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground. 
Surface Treated Area . An area which has been covered with asphalt or concrete. 
Surplus Parking . Parking provided in excess of the maximum allowance for a specific use, and intended to be used on an irregular basis during periods of peak activity. 
Townhouse . A one-(1)-family dwelling in a row of at least three (3) attached units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one (1) or more vertical common fire-resistant walls. A townhouse shall have at least two (2) stories. 
Truck Terminal . An area and building where hauling companies load and unload cargo and freight from multiple origins, and where the cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation. 
Veterinary Clinic . Facility for the treatment of domestic animals, operated under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. The boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the clinic use and does not take place in outside runs or kennels. 
Villa . A one-family dwelling with at least three (3), but no more than four (4), attached units in which each unit has at least two (2) exterior walls and each unit is separated from any other unit by one (1) or more vertical common walls. Villas are exclusively single-story. 
Waste Incineration Facility . Any facility which reduces waste volume by burning at a high temperature for a specified period of time. This term excludes air curtain destructors used for the on-site burning of yard trimmings and wood wastes at a building, land disturbing, or development site. 
Watershed . A drainage area or basin in which all land and water areas drain or flow toward a downstream collection area such as a stream, river, lake or reservoir. 
Wild Animal . Any living member of the animal kingdom, including those born or raised in captivity; but excluding human beings, livestock, dogs and cats, rodents, hybrid animals that are part wild, captive-bred species of common cage birds and aquarium-kept fish, amphibians and reptiles. 
Yard . An open space on a lot situated between the principal building or use on the lot and a lot line, and unoccupied by any structure except as otherwise provided herein. 
Yard, Front . An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected parallel to the street to the side lines of the lot. Corner lots shall be considered to have two front yards. 
Yard, Rear . An open space on the same lot with a principal building or use, unoccupied except by an accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building or use projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, Side . An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, located between the building or use and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-11-82, § 1, 12-20-2016; Ord. No. 2018-08-131, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 400. - Establishment of Zoning Districts. 
For the purposes of this Resolution, the incorporated area of City of Peachtree Corners, Georgia, is divided into Zoning Districts designated as follows: 
RA-200 Agriculture-Residence District. 
R-140 Single Family Residence District. 
R-LL Single Family Residence-Large Lot District. 
R-100 Single Family Residence District. 
R-75 Single Family Residence District. 
R-60 Single Family Residence District. 
R-SR Senior Oriented Residence District. 
R-TH Single Family Residence Townhouse District. 
HRR High-Rise Residential District. 
RM Multi-Family Residence District. 
RM-13 Multi-Family Residence District. 
RM-10 Multi-Family Residence District. 
RM-8 Multi-Family Residence District. 
RM-6 Multi-Family Residence District. 
RMD Multi-Family Residence District (Duplexes). 
RL Lakeside Residence District. 
R-ZT Single Family Residence District. 
MH Mobile Home Park District. 
MHS Manufactured Housing Subdivision District. 
HS Hospital Service District. 
NS Neighborhood Shopping District. 
C-1 Neighborhood Business District. 
C-2 General Business District. 
C-3 Highway Business District. 
O-I Office-Institutional District. 
OBP Office-Business Park District. 
M-1 Light Industry District. 
M-2 Heavy Industry District. 
MUD Mixed-Use Development District. 
INACTIVE ZONING DISTRICTS - SEE ARTICLE XIX. 
R-TH Single-Family Residence Townhouse District. 
(Prior to January 2005). 
R-ZT Single-Family Residence Zero Lot Line/Townhouse District. 
(Prior to January 2005). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 401. - Location and Boundaries of Zoning Districts. 
The location and boundaries of the Zoning Districts are hereby established as shown on the set of maps entitled "Gwinnett County Zoning Maps" which are hereby made a part of this Resolution and referenced hereto as the official "City of Peachtree Corners Zoning Map," which shall be kept in the office of the City of Peachtree Corners Department of Planning and Development, where it shall be available for public inspection. Amendments to the City of Peachtree Corners Zoning Map shall be separately adopted at the time of any zoning action and said amended maps shall be kept in the Department of Planning and Development of Peachtree Corners. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 402. - Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of the boundaries of any Zoning District in Peachtree Corner, Georgia, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Where a Zoning District boundary line is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a militia district line, a land lot line, a lot line or the centerline of a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway or a railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the Zoning District boundary lines. If uncertainty exists, any point on a railroad Right-of-Way shall be considered to be in a Zoning District closest to said point. 
2.  Where a Zoning District boundary line is shown as being set back from a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway or a railroad right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such Zoning District boundary line shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of the street, county road, state highway, interstate highway or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto. If uncertainty exists, any point on a railroad Right-of-Way shall be considered to be in a Zoning District closest to said point. 
3.  Where a Zoning District boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the parcel lot lines. In this situation, the requirements of the Zoning District in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall apply to the balance of the lot, except that such extension shall not include any part of a lot that lies more than fifty (50) feet beyond the Zoning District boundary line. 
4.  In the case of a through lot fronting on two approximately parallel streets, that is divided by a Zoning District boundary line paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the Zoning District in which each frontage of the through lot lies shall apply to that portion of the through lot. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE V. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 500. - Use, Occupancy and Erection. 
No building or structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 501. - Height and Density. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered to: 
1.  Exceed the height limits. 
2.  House a greater number of families per acre or occupy a smaller lot area per family than are herein required. 
3.  Have narrower or smaller front, rear or side yards than are herein required. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 502. - Reduction in Lot Size. 
No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, size of yards, lot area per family or any other requirement of this Resolution is not maintained. This limitation shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose or for unbuildable lots used exclusively for subdivision identification signage or subdivision entrance landscape features or stormwater facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 503. - Yards and Other Spaces. 
No part of a yard or the off-street parking or loading spaces that are required in connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this Resolution shall be included as part of the yard or off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building, except as specifically provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 504. - Only One Principal Building or Use on a Lot. 
Only one principal building or structure or use and its customary accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted on any lot. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 505. - Street Frontage Requirement. 
No lot shall be created that does not abut for at least forty (40) feet, except as provided in Section 1302B, upon an open street which shall be either a public street, a publicly approved street or a publicly maintained street, and except for stormwater facility lots which shall abut for a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 506. - Classification of Streets. 
For the purpose of this Resolution, all of the streets, roads and highways in City of Peachtree Corners are classified as local streets, minor or major collector streets, minor, major, residential or principal arterial streets and freeways. These same streets and roads will also be known as interstate routes, U.S. or State routes, county roads, and local streets or roads. 
The classification of each street in City of Peachtree Corners is shown in the Geographic Information Systems Map, which is on file in the office of the City of Peachtree Corners Department of Planning and Development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 600. - Accessory Uses or Structures. 
Accessory structures shall be permitted only in rear yards, except as otherwise provided in this Resolution. In an R (residence) district, accessory uses customarily located within front or side yards of residences may include but shall not be limited to the following: walls and fences as permitted in Section 700, mailboxes, driveways, walkways, lamp posts, landscaping, vegetable gardens provided they do not exceed 30 percent of the front yard, signs meeting the standards of the City Sign Ordinance and basketball goals adjacent to driveways. No accessory uses or structures, except driveways, mailboxes or landscaping shall be located within a public right-of-way. 
Accessory uses customarily located within rear yards of residences may include but shall not be limited to the following: storage buildings, patios, swimming pools, dog runs, dog pens and houses, detached garages, tennis courts, playground equipment, fences and walls as permitted in Section 700. Any accessory use or structure, except walls, fences, driveways and landscaping, shall comply with the following: 
1.  Properties on which the primary structure is one story shall be permitted an accessory structure in accordance with the following: 
a.  The accessory structure shall not exceed 50% of the habitable square footage of the primary structure or 800 square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  The accessory structure shall not exceed one story and/or 16 feet in height, whichever is less. 
c.  The accessory structure shall be set back at least five feet from any property line, except as otherwise provided within the R-TH and R-ZT zoning districts, and except for permitted encroachments as authorized in Section 705. 
2.  Properties on which the primary structure is two or more stories shall be permitted an accessory structure in accordance with the following: 
a.  The accessory structure ground floor area shall not exceed 50% of the habitable square footage of the primary structure or 800 square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  The accessory structure shall not exceed two stories and/or 30 feet in height, whichever is less. 
c.  One-story accessory structures, not exceeding 16 feet in height, shall be set back at least five feet from any property line, except as otherwise provided within the R-TH and R-ZT zoning districts, and except for permitted encroachments as authorized in Section 705. 
d.  Two-story accessory structures shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from any property line, except as otherwise provided within the R-TH and R-ZT zoning districts, and except for permitted encroachments as authorized in Section 705. 
No accessory structure shall be erected on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory a) on the same lot, or b) on an adjoining lot in joint or common ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-10-100, § 1, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 600A. - Out-of-Store Marketing Device. 
(a)  Out-of-store marketing devices shall be allowed in nonresidential zoning districts. 
(b)  The marketing device shall not exceed ten feet in height or width and shall not be illuminated except for illumination intrinsic to the device. 
(c)  A maximum of two out-of-store marketing devices that are visible from the street shall be allowed. 
(d)  Out-of-store marketing devices shall be located adjacent to the primary building on the property unless an alternate location is approved by the Community Development Director. 
(e)  Signage on Out-of-store marketing devices shall be limited to one sign located directly on the front of the device that is no greater in area than one (1) foot high × the length of the device. 
(Ord. No. 2016-11-82, § 1, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 601. - Vision Clearance at Intersections. 
In all Zoning Districts, no fence, wall, structure, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three (3) feet and fifteen (15) feet, except utility poles, light or street sign standards or tree trunks shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets, roads, highways or railroads. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 602. - Approvals for Business and Industrial Developments on State Highways. 
For all business and industrial developments fronting on a State Highway, no building permit shall be issued until the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation has been obtained by the applicant on entrances and exits, curb radii, drainage and other matters that are the appropriate concern of the City of Peachtree Corners Department of Planning and Development and Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 603. - City Approvals That are Required. 
All City approvals that are required for the use of the land and structures and for the location and operation of businesses and industries shall be obtained by the applicant and transmitted by him/her with his/her request for a development permit, building permit, or an occupancy certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
_____
Sec. 604. - Minimum Floor Area Requirements. 
All dwelling units shall have a minimum heated finished living area, excluding a basement, attic, carport, or garage, as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
_____
Sec. 605. - Area, Yard and Height Requirements. 
When developing under any Zoning Classification the requirements of Article XIV, Sections 1400 and 1401, must be met. 
In all districts, except Single-Family Resident (R-LL, R-100, R-75, R-60 and R-ZT Detached) and Agriculture-Residence (RA-200) districts, the height requirements of Article XIV, Section 1401 must be met unless the applicant is granted a Special Use Permit by the City of Peachtree Corners City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and the Planning Commission and after a Public Hearing. 
In all Single-Family Residence and Agriculture-Residence districts, the height requirements of Article XIV, Section 1401 must be met unless the applicant is granted a Variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals, after a public hearing. 
An increase in height of ten (10) feet or less for any structure other than a sign or fence may be requested under the provisions of Article XVI, Section 1610 as an Administrative Variance, however, when no increase is involved in the number of stories which would otherwise be permitted under the applicable zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 606. - Buffer Between Dissimilar Districts. 
Sec. 606.1 A buffer shall be required for the following: 
1.  All property zoned for commercial, neighborhood shopping, office-institutional, office business parks or industrial uses shall have a buffer along any rear and side property lines abutting a residential district. 
2.  All property zoned for R-TH, RMD, R-ZT and all RM uses shall have a buffer along any rear and side property lines abutting a lower density residential use. 
3.  All property zoned for manufactured homes shall have a buffer along any rear and side property lines abutting any other residential district. 
Sec. 606.2 All buffer areas and screening shall be established in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Buffers shall be established and maintained along required property lot lines in accordance with the landscaping policies and standards of the Buffer, Landscape and Tree Ordinance and any additional specifications that may be established by the Planning and Development Department and approved by the City Council. In the event the buffer includes a utility or pipeline easement, a minimum buffer of no less than 20 feet in width will be required outside the easement. In no case will the buffer be less than 20 feet except as may be permitted in Section 606.4. 
2.  Buffers shall meet the minimum width requirements for dissimilar districts as shown in the "Minimum Buffer Strip Requirements" table (Section 606.7). 
3.  Screening shall be established within any buffer along the entire length of the side and rear lot lines. However, this screening requirement may be adjusted in order to observe the sight distance required in the Development Regulations or as a condition of zoning, special use, or variance approval or as approved by the Director. 
4.  Screening shall be required where a non-residential use abuts a public street across from a residential district. However, this screening requirement may be adjusted in order to observe the sight distance required in the Development Regulations or as a condition of zoning, special use, or variance approval or as approved by the Director of Planning and Development. 
Sec. 606.3 Screening and/or buffers shall be required for purposes of obscuring features such as dumpsters, rear entrances, utility and maintenance structures, and loading facilities. 
Sec. 606.4 The width of buffers as required in Section 606.8 may be reduced by no more than 50 percent, as appropriate, by the Director of Planning and Development, if and only if: 
1.  It is clearly demonstrated that existing topography and/or vegetation within the reduced area achieve the purpose and intent of this Article; or 
2.  It is clearly demonstrated that for topographic reasons, a fence, wall and/or other screening device required herein could not possibly screen activities conducted on ground-level from view from the normal-level of a first (1 st ) story window on any lot in a residential district abutting the use. 
Sec. 606.5 All buffer shall be designated on the appropriate permit application(s) and indicated on the required site plan or final subdivision plat. 
Sec. 606.6 Structures, including driveways, parking facilities, or retaining walls will be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any buffer. 
_____
MINIMUM BUFFER REQUIREMENTS ABUTTING DISTRICT(S) 

 
For buffer width other than standard height structures the board of commissioners may increase the minimum buffer required as a condition for allowing additional height of development. The [mayor and city council] may also establish or increase the minimum buffer as a condition of rezoning or as a condition to a special use permit. 
The zoning board of appeals may increase the minimum buffer required as a condition to granting a variance request. 
Modifications in buffer width may be granted by the board of commissioners after receiving recommendation s from the planning and development director and planning commission and after a public hearing. 
See section 606.6 - No structure shall be located less than five feet from any buffer. 
** Buffers in M-1 zoning shall increase from 50 to 75 feet when located adjacent to truck docks or outdoor storage areas. However, any development with an approved development plan, final plat or concept plan on file with the department of planning and development prior to June 1, 2001, which depicts a different buffer width shall be considered grandfathered. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
_____
Sec. 607. - Requirements for Customary Home Occupations. 
In addition to the limitations imposed on "Customary Home Occupation" under "Article III, Definitions," the following requirements shall be met: 
1.  The home occupation shall be carried on only by a member or members of the family residing in the residence. 
2.  To the extent that there is any sale of any item or service related to the home occupation, no sale of that item or service may occur on or adjacent to the premises unless this use has been granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and following a public hearing. 
3.  The home occupation shall not involve group instruction or group assembly of people on the premises. 
4.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the conduct of a home occupation except that a sign not exceeding two square feet in size and made of durable material may be placed on the exterior wall of the home as close as practical to the front door. 
5.  The conduct of the home occupation shall neither increase the normal flow of traffic nor shall it increase either on-street or off-street parking. 
6.  No equipment may be utilized or stored in the conduct of the home occupation except that which is normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. Said items may only be those produced on the premises or incidental supplies necessary for and consumed in the conduct of the home occupation. Samples, however, may be kept on the premises but neither sold nor distributed from the residence. 
7.  No more than 25 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for conducting the home occupation. 
8.  One business vehicle used exclusively by the resident is permissible. This vehicle must be parked in a carport, garage, side yard, or rear yard. This vehicle shall be no larger in size than a pick-up truck, panel truck, or van not having a carrying capacity of more than one (1) and one-half (½) tons. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-03-119, § II, 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 608. - Method of Density Calculation. 
For any property for which an application for rezoning is received after June 31, 2012, permitted development shall be calculated on the basis of net density (see definition of "Density"). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE VII. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 700. - Walls and Fences. 
Walls or fences shall be permitted in any zoning district and are not subject to setback requirements of this Resolution, except that in a Residential Zoning District: 
1.  No wall or fence shall exceed eight (8) feet in height within a side yard or rear yard. 
2.  Any wall or fence which extends into the front yard shall not exceed four (4) feet in height, except fences enclosing stormwater facilities which may not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
3.  Fences enclosing tennis courts may not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
4.  No wall or fence constructed of woven wire or metal fabric (chain link, hog wire or barbed wire) shall extend into a front yard, except fences enclosing stormwater facilities, which may be vinyl coated chain link. Woven wire or metal fabric fences may extend into a front yard when the property contains a minimum of three (3) acres and any wall or fence shall not be constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, junk or other discarded materials. 
5.  Any wall or fence which extends into the required front yard on property less than three (3) acres shall be ornamental or decorative and constructed of brick, stone, wood, stucco, wrought iron, split rail, and shall not be constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, junk or other discarded materials. 
6.  Any subdivision entrance, wall or fence shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height and shall be subject to approval of the Director of Planning and Development after the submission to Development Review of a landscape plan, site plan and architectural elevations. 
7.  Electric and barb wire fences shall be prohibited in residential districts except on lots which meet or exceed the minimum requirements for the raising and keeping of livestock (3 acres). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 701. - Structures Excluded from Height Limitations. 
The height limitations of this Resolution shall not apply to spires on religious facilities, belfries, flag poles, monuments, cupolas, domes, ornamental towers, nor to observation towers not intended for human occupancy, sanctuaries of religious facilities (permitted up to 65 feet in height when located at least 100' from abutting residential property) water towers, transmission towers, radio or television towers or aerials, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, derricks, nor to necessary mechanical roof appurtenances nor to barns and silos when located on a farm. 
The above exclusions from height limits shall not apply in the vicinity of airports. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-12-108, § 1, 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 702. - Substandard Lots of Record. 
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Resolution, that has an area or width that is less than is required by this Resolution, may be used, subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
1.  Adjoining Lots . When two (2) or more adjoining lots of record with continuous frontage are in one (1) ownership at any time after the adoption or amendment of this Resolution and such lots, individually, have an area or width that is less than is required by this Resolution, then such contiguous lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of the minimum width and area required in the Zoning District in which they are located. 
2.  Individual Lot Not Meeting Minimum Lot Size Requirements . Except as set forth in Subsection 1 of this Section, in any Zoning District in which one-(1)-family dwellings are permitted, any lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this Resolution which has an area, width or depth less than that required by this Resolution may be used as a building site for a one-(1)-family dwelling. 
In the case of such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width one-(1)-family dwelling, the City of Peachtree Corners Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby authorized to grant a variance reducing the side-yard requirements for such lot the minimum amount necessary for a reasonable dwelling, but in no case shall each of the side yards be less than five (5) feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 703. - Exceptions to Front-yard Requirements. 
The front yard requirements of this Resolution shall not apply on any lot where the average depth of the front yards of existing buildings on adjoining lots located wholly or in part within one hundred (100) feet on each side of such lot within the same block and Zoning District and fronting on the same side of the street is either greater or less than the minimum required front-yard depth. 
If the average depth of the front yards is greater than the required minimum front-yard depth, the depth of the front yard of such lot shall be the average of the front yards of the above-mentioned buildings but need not be greater than 150 percent of the required front-yard depth. 
If the average depth of the front yards is less than the required minimum front-yard depth, the depth of the front yard of such lot may be less than the required front-yard depth but shall not be less than the average of the front yards of the aforementioned buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 704. - Temporary Buildings. 
A temporary building or buildings for use in connection with a construction project or land subdivision development shall be permitted on the land of the project during the construction period. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 705. - Permitted Encroachments upon Required Setbacks. 
Cornices, eaves, chimneys, landings, porches, bay windows, or other similar architectural features may extend into the required front, side, and rear yard provided such extensions do not exceed three (3) feet. Decks and patios may extend into the side or rear yard but no closer than five (5) feet from any property line. Steps and landings may extend into the required setbacks provided such extensions do not exceed ten (10) feet for the front yard and three (3) feet for side yards. Steps and landings may extend into the rear yard, but no closer than five (5) feet from the property line. Canopies, covered entrances or walkways for non-residential day care facilities, churches, or other similar uses may extend into the required side or rear yard provided such extension does not exceed three (3) feet and may extend into the required front yard provided such extensions do not extend to a point any closer than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line or future right-of-way line as designated by the Gwinnett County Long-Range Road Classification Map, whichever is greater. However, canopies over pump islands or over sidewalks may extend up to the street right-of-way line or future right-of-way line as designated by the Gwinnett County Long-Range Road Classification Map, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE VIII. - NON-CONFORMING USES 

Sec. 800. - Continuance of Non-Conforming Uses. 
The lawful use of any building or structure or land existing at the time of the enactment or amendment of this Resolution may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this Resolution, except that the non-conforming use shall not be: 
1.  Extended to occupy a greater area of land. 
2.  Extended to occupy a greater area of a building or structure unless such additional area of the building or structure existed at the time of the passage or amendment of this Resolution and was clearly designed to house the same use as the non-conforming use occupying the other portion of the building or structure. 
3.  Reestablished after discontinuance for twelve (12) months. 
4.  Changed to another non-conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 801. - Continuance of a Non-Conforming Building. 
A non-conforming building existing at the time of the enactment or amendment of this Resolution may be retained except as follows: 
1.  No building other than a single-family detached dwelling may be enlarged, or altered except in conformance with this Resolution but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe and sanitary condition. 
2.  No building other than a single-family detached dwelling shall be rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of the replacement cost of the above-ground structure at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this Resolution, provided that such damage occurred as a result of fire, flood, wind, earthquake, or other natural disaster. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE X. - OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACES 

Sec. 1000. - Off-Street Vehicle Parking. 
Off-street vehicle parking shall be provided and maintained, as specified in this Resolution. 
Any building or use that is subsequently enlarged shall meet the off-street parking space requirements of this Resolution for the addition made. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1001. - Plan and Design Standards for Off-Street Parking. 
The following are required plan and design standards for off-street parking. 
1.  Required area for each parking space . 
a.  Each automobile space shall be 9 feet wide and 18 feet deep as measured from face-of-curb, or 9.5 feet wide and 18.5 feet deep as measured from back-of-curb. 
b.  Up to 15 percent of the overall parking spaces provided for a non-residential development may be in the form of compact spaces. Compact parking spaces shall be 8 feet in width and 16 feet in depth, as measured from face of curb, or 8.5 feet wide and 16.5 feet deep as measured from back-of-curb, and shall be clearly marked as compact spaces. 
2.  Interior driveways . 
a.  Interior driveways shall connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
b.  Inter-parcel driveway connection or provision of a future inter-parcel driveway stub (with appropriate cross-access easements) shall be required between adjacent non-residential properties. This requirement may be waived by the Director of Planning and Development, only if it is demonstrated that an inter-parcel connection is not feasible, due to traffic safety or topographic concerns. 
c.  Interior driveways with no parking shall be 10 to 12 feet for on-way traffic, and 20 to 22 feet for two-way traffic. One-way driveways that are determined to be essential access for fire safety shall be increased to 14 feet. 
Interior driveways shall be at least 22 to 24 feet in wide when used with 90-degree angle parking. Interior driveways shall be 10 to 12 feet wide (one-way), and 20 to 22 feet wide (two-way) when used with 60-degree angle parking. 
d.  Interior driveways providing primary access to loading/unloading zones or loading docks for truck traffic may be increased to 14 feet in width per travel lane. Adjustments to geometry may be granted, if it can be shown with turn-radius templates that modifications to the standards are required. 
e.  Interior driveways surrounding gasoline pump canopies may be increased to 40 feet in total width (as measured from the base of the gasoline pump islands). 
f.  A separate driveway and stacking lane (accommodating at least 2 vehicles per lane) is required for any drive-up window, bank drive-through or pick-up station. These stacking lanes shall be separate and distinct from the required through-lane providing circulation around the building. 
3.  Improvement of Off-Street Parking Lots . All off-street parking lots shall meet the following standards: 
a.  They shall be graded to ensure proper drainage, installed on a minimum 4-inch gravel aggregate base with a minimum 2-inch asphalt topping or other approved surface of, concrete, porous concrete, or porous asphalt. An approved porous concrete, porous asphalt or grassed paving system shall be used for surplus parking. Grassed paving spaces shall be located on the perimeter edge of a parking lot. 
b.  Each parking space, except for grassed paving systems, shall be clearly marked by a painted stripe no less than three (3) inches wide running the length of each of the longer sides of the space or by curbing or by other acceptable method which clearly marks and delineates the parking space within the parking lot. 
c.  Non-residential parking lots containing 200 spaces or more shall incorporate pedestrian access corridors into their design. 
i)  Pedestrian corridors shall include 4-foot wide sidewalks with 2-foot grassed strips along at least one (1) side of primary driveways. The pedestrian corridors shall connect parking areas directly with buildings and adjacent public streets. These corridors shall not apply to auto sales lots. 
ii)  Where pedestrian corridors cross a driveway, they may be constructed as a raised, flat hump with a height of 4 inches and a 6-foot wide top with 4-foot wide ramps and marked as a crosswalk; or may be constructed with an approved contrasting paver and marked as a crosswalk. 
iii)  Parking spaces shall not be located more than 200 feet from any pedestrian corridor. 
4.  Maintenance and Appearance of Parking Lots . Parking lots shall be maintained in good condition, free of potholes, weeds, dust, trash and debris. Porous paving and grass paving systems shall be maintained to function as designed. 
5.  Location and Surface of Parking Areas . 
a.  In any non-residential district, the parking of any vehicle on other than a paved surface (or approved porous or grassed paving system) is prohibited. 
b.  In any residential district, the parking of any motor vehicle except on a hard-surfaced driveway or in a carport or garage is prohibited. Any recreational vehicle or any non-motor vehicle may only be parked in a carport, enclosed structure, or in the rear yard on a paved surface (or approved porous or grassed paving system). Any vehicles parked in the rear yard not in a carport or an enclosed structure must be parked at least fifteen (15) feet from the property line. Vehicles or equipment used for agricultural purposes on RA-200 or R-100 zoned property with 5 or more acres are exempt from hard surface parking requirements if parked outside the required front yard setback. 
Maximum allowable paved parking or hard surface area in front yards. (Excluding walkways and required sidewalks.) 
A.  R-ZT District - Not more than 45 percent. 
B.  All other residential districts, excluding R-TH district - Not more than 35 percent. 
C.  In the R-TH zoning district, driveways for adjoining units shall be separated by at least a 4-foot wide grassed strip, unless the units are villa-type with connecting driveways. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
_____
Sec. 1002. - Number of off-street parking spaces required. 
The following are the minimum and maximum number of off-street parking spaces required. For use not specifically listed, the off-street parking requirements shall be those of the most similar use. Where spaces are calculated based upon square footage, the gross square footage of the building shall be utilized. 
Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be as required by Georgia State Law, and shall be included in the calculation of overall parking provided. 

 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
_____
Sec. 1003. - Plan and Design Standards for Off-Street Loading and Unloading Spaces. 
If provided, the following are plan and design standards for off-street loading and unloading spaces. 
1.  Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall have access from an internal driveway or alley. Such spaces shall not be accessed directly from a public street. 
2.  The off-street loading and unloading space shall be so located that it does not cause interference with the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk, or through-alley. 
Restriping or existing, unused portions of loading/unloading areas for vehicle parking shall be permitted. These parking spaces shall not be counted in the calculation of minimum/maximum off-street parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1004. - Administrative Variance. 
In instances where an applicant shows specific and valid reasons why the requirements of Section 1002 cannot reasonably be met, and where a reduction or increase of not more than 30 percent in such requirements will not adversely affect the spirit or intent of this article, the Director of Planning and Development may administratively grant such a reduction or increase. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1005. - Provision of Surplus Parking. 
The maximum parking space allowance may be exceeded by 25 percent if constructed in the form of an approved porous concrete/asphalt or grassed paving system. The maximum parking space allowance may be exceeded in any amount when contained in a parking deck and/or underground parking structure. Parking decks shall have exterior architectural treatments matching the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1006. - Parking Decks Required. 
Non-residential, mixed-use and/or multi-family residential developments exceeding 1,500 overall parking spaces shall be required to provide at least 25 percent of their overall parking total within a decked or underground parking structure. A building height increase of 10 vertical feet is permitted for each 10 vertical feet of parking placed under a building. Single-family residential or townhouse component(s) of mixed-use developments shall not be subject to this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1007. - Commercial Vehicle Parking. 
A.  In any commercial or office zoning district, delivery/service vehicles and vehicles displaying advertising must be parked within the side or rear yard and may not be parked within the front yard, except vehicles parked temporarily while making a delivery, providing a service, or purchasing goods or services. 
B.  In all residential zoning districts the parking of the following commercial vehicles are prohibited: limousines, flat-bed trucks, dump trucks, tow trucks, transport wreckers, tandem axle trucks, cab-on-chassis trucks, tractor trailers, wheeled attachments or trailers, buses, earth-moving machinery, semi-trailers, and any vehicle over 20 feet in length, or 7 feet in height, or 7 feet in width. Vehicles or equipment used for agricultural purposes on RA-200 or R-100 zoned property with 5 or more acres are permitted, if parked outside the required front yard setback. 
In all residential zoning districts, the parking of the following commercial vehicles is permitted: 
1.  An automobile, pick-up truck, van, or SUV used to provide daily transportation to and from work. 
2.  A commercial vehicle that is parked temporarily in conjunction with a commercial service, sale, or delivery. 
3.  School buses used for the primary purpose of transporting children to and from state licensed or accredited elementary, middle or high schools; provided such vehicle is parked off any public thoroughfare, on a hard-surfaced area, and in the side or rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1008. - Parking Lot Lighting Standards. 
Within non-residential and multifamily developments, except properties subject to Section 1315, Activity Center/Corridor Overlay District, the following lighting standards shall apply: 
1.  All lighting fixtures designed or placed so as to illuminate any portion of a site shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  All lighting fixtures (luminaries) shall be cut-off luminaries, whose source is completely concealed with an opaque housing. Fixtures shall be recessed in the opaque housing. Drop Dish Refractors are prohibited. The wattage shall not exceed 420 watts/480V per light fixture. This provision includes lights on mounted poles as well as architectural display and decorative lighting visible from a street or highway. Wall pack lighting shall be cut-off down directional a maximum of 250 watts. Canopy lighting shall be recessed, with a maximum lamp wattage of 400 watts. 
b.  Only incandescent, fluorescent, metal halide, mercury vapor, natural gas, or color corrected high-pressure sodium (CRI of 60 or better) light source (lamp) may be used. 
c.  Fixtures must be mounted in such a manner that the cone of the light is not directed at any property line of site. The minimum mounting height for a pole is 12 feet. The maximum mounting height for a pole is 25 feet excluding a 3-foot base. 
d.  All site lighting shall be designed so that the minimum and maximum levels of illumination as measured in foot-candles (f-c) at any one (1) point meets the following standards: 
1)  Average level of illumination is not to exceed the calculated value, and is derived using only the area of the site included to receive illumination. 
2)  Points of measure shall not include the area of the building or areas which do not lend themselves to pedestrian traffic. 
ILLUMINATION LEVELS  (IN FOOT-CANDLES) 

 
2.  Exceptions to site lighting standards. 
a.  Lighting activated by motion sensor. 
b.  Construction or emergency lighting provided it is temporary and is discontinued immediately upon construction completion or emergency cessation. 
3.  Site Lighting Plan Requirements. 
a.  Site lighting plans shall include: 
1)  Location and mounting information for each light; 
2)  Illumination calculations showing light levels in foot candles at points located on a 10 foot center grid, including an illustration of the areas masked out per the requirements above regarding points of measurements; 
3)  A schedule listing the fixture design, type of lamp, distribution and wattage of each fixture, and number of lumens after using 85 percent depreciation for both metal halide and high pressure sodium of initial output; 
4)  Manufacturer's photometric data for each type of light fixture, including initial lumens and mean depreciation values; and 
5)  An illumination summary, including the minimum average and maximum foot-candle calculations ("array values") and the total number of array points (points used on the ten-foot grid calculations). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE XII. - LANDFILLS 

Sec. 1200. - Zoning Districts in Which Landfills Are Permitted. 
A landfill may be permitted in any Zoning District of City of Peachtree Corners by Special Use Permit, after a Public Hearing, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  A minimum 200-foot natural, undisturbed buffer shall be provided between all active waste burial areas and exterior property lines except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 
2.  A minimum 75-foot natural, undisturbed buffer shall be provided between non-waste disposal operations and exterior property lines except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 
3.  The limits of any 100-year floodplain or a stream buffer of 200 feet, whichever is greater, shall be preserved as natural, undisturbed area except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 
4.  The entire site shall be fenced with a minimum six-(6)-foot high chain link security fence. 
5.  The landfill shall be located on or have direct private access to a road designated on the Gwinnett County Long Range Road Classification Map as a major collector, minor arterial, major arterial or principal arterial. 
6.  The applicant shall include with the Special Use Permit application a report detailing the phasing of the landfill and plans for closure and reclamation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1201. - Uses Permitted Accessory to Landfills. 
The following waste disposal/recycling facilities shall be permitted as accessory uses to landfills meeting the standards of Section 1200: 
1.  Composting, Municipal Solid Waste. 
2.  Composting, Yard Trimmings. 
3.  Gas Recovery/Gas Congestion Plant. 
4.  Recovered Materials Processing Facility. 
5.  Solid Waste Transfer Stations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE XIII. - USE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1300. - RA-200 Agriculture-Residence District. 
This district is comprised of land having a predominantly rural character. It is the intent of the regulations of this zoning district to discourage the subdivision of land for urban development requiring such urban services as a public water supply, sanitary sewers and fire protection. 
Within the RA-200 Agriculture-Residence District, the following uses are permitted: 
1.  Single Family Dwellings. 
2.  Customary Accessory Buildings and Uses. 
3.  Customary Home Occupations. 
4.  Customary Agricultural Uses including forestry, commercial greenhouses, plant nurseries and the raising and keeping of livestock, provided that no animal quarters are located closer than 100 feet to any property line. 
5.  Customary Agricultural Buildings and Uses including farm ponds and fishing lakes and one and two-family tenant houses, subject to all of the yard requirements of the zoning district. 
6.  Parks and other similar public and semi-public buildings and land uses. 
7.  Kennel - provided than no animal quarters are located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
Fur Farm - provided that no animal quarters are located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
Cattery - provided that no animal quarters are located closer than 100 feet to any property line. 
8.  Livestock sales pavilions or auction facilities, show rings or other arenas for the display, exhibition, training or sale of livestock, provided that no animal quarters are located closer than 100 feet to any property line. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for livestock trailers, recreation vehicles, etc., associated with the proposed use in addition to the minimum requirements of the 2012 Zoning Resolution 
If the above uses meet any of the following criteria, a Special Use Permit would be required and all provisions for approval would be established as part of the granting of the Special Use Permit: 
a.  The event is held more than three (3) days per month. 
b.  Operation of the use beyond 6:00 p.m. 
c.  A public address system is provided. 
d.  Permanent concession facilities are provided. 
e.  Portable restroom facilities are provided. 
f.  Seating facilities for more than 100 people are provided. 
g.  Parking facilities for more than 50 vehicles are provided. 
h.  Admission fee is charged. 
9.  Public, semi-public and private golf and country clubs, golf driving ranges and fishing clubs. 
10.  Public utilities. 
11.  Riding stables and academies, including any place that regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells, trades or lets for hire any horse, donkey, burro or mule, provided that no animal quarters are located closer than 100 feet to any property line. 
12.  Farmers' Markets for the sale of products and commodities produced on the premises provided that any structure for such sales shall be located no closer than 35 feet to any property line. 
13.  Temporary or portable saw mills provided no machine operation is located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
14.  The raising and keeping of household pets. 
15.  The raising and keeping of wild animals, provided that the owner or custodian of such wild animals has received an appropriate permit and meets all the requirements of the State of Georgia, and further provided that no animal quarters are located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
16.  Facilities for use in the conduct of religious services and ceremonies provided: 
a.  They are located on a Principal Arterial, Major Arterial, Minor Arterial, Major Collector Street or State Highway on a site of not less than five (5) acres with 250 feet of road frontage. 
b.  The buildings are located not less than 50 feet from any street and not less than 30 feet from any side or rear property line. 
c.  Parking is not provided in the front yard setback area. 
d.  If adjacent to residentially-zoned property, a buffer of at least 50 feet wide shall be provided along the property lines adjacent to said zoning, provided, however, that this buffer may be reduced to no less than 20 feet in width adjacent to the sanctuary building or "Sunday School" educational building and parking related to these buildings. 
e.  Facilities for use in the conduct of religious services and ceremonies located in a manufactured building may be erected on the property for a period not to exceed three (3) years. 
Within the RA-200 Agriculture-Residence District, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a public hearing: 
1.  Private Schools 
2.  A cemetery, or family cemetery, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The cemetery may front only on a street classified as a Collector or Arterial roadway or along a State Highway, and the entrance and exits to the cemetery shall only be from the classified street on which it fronts. 
b.  The cemetery shall be bordered by a ten-(10)-foot wide buffer strip and a minimum six (6) foot high decorative fence along all of its exterior property lines not bordering the frontage street and not extending into the required front yard. The buffer strip shall be planted with evergreen trees or shrubs that grow at least eight (8) feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
c.  Prior to the approval of a request to use property as a cemetery, a site plan and a covenant for perpetual care shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Development. The covenant for perpetual care shall include measures to be undertaken to preserve, protect, and provide for ongoing maintenance including the fencing, landscaping, and gravesites. 
d.  The covenant for perpetual care and a plat of survey delineating the limits of the cemetery shall be recorded in the Gwinnett County Clerk of Superior Court (Deeds and Records). 
3.  Manufactured Homes. 
4.  Group Day Care Homes. 
5.  Veterinary Clinic or Hospital provided that no portion of a building, structure, outdoor run or pen used to house or exercise animals is located closer than 200 feet to any property line. 
6.  Facilities for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies not meeting the minimum requirements for a permitted facility for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies. 
7.  Residential or community shelters as an accessory use to a facility for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies meeting the minimum requirements for a permitted facility for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies. All shelters must meet the provisions of Rules for Shelters in City of Peachtree Corners. 
8.  Funeral homes as an accessory use to a new or existing cemetery. 
9.  Group Homes. 
10.  Family Personal Care Home (minimum one-(1)-acre lot size). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1300A. - R-140 Single Family Residence District. 
This zoning district is intended primarily for one (1) family residences on large lots in areas where topography does not lend the land for small-lot development. 
A.  Within the R-140 Single Family Residence District, the following uses are permitted: 
1.  All uses permitted in the R-100 Single Family Residence District, including Special Uses. 
B.  Minimum specifications for development of the R-140 Single Family Residence District. 
1.  A maximum of 25 percent of the net acreage exclusive of roads may be used for lots of 1.0 to 1.5 acres. 
2.  A maximum of 25 percent of the net acreage exclusive of roads may be used for lots of 1.5 to 2.0 acres. 
3.  The remainder of the property shall consist of lots exceeding 2.0 acres. 
4.  Upon approval of the Final Plan, a note shall be placed on the plat stating "No lot shall be subdivided, nor shall more than one (1) house be erected on any one (1) lot." 
5.  Subdivision development shall be considered only on tracts of fifteen (15) acres or more. 
C.  Within the R-140 Single Family Residence District, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a public hearing: 
1.  The subdivision of land with frontage on private roads with a common easement. 
2.  Group Homes. 
3.  Family Personal Care Home (minimum one-(1)-acre lot size). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1300B. - R-LL Single Family Residence-Large Lot District. 
This zoning district is intended primarily for one (1) family residences and related uses on large lots. 
Within the R-LL District, the following uses are permitted: 
1.  Single Family Dwellings, except Manufactured Homes. 
2.  Customary accessory buildings and uses. 
3.  Customary Home Occupations. 
4.  Existing Cemeteries. 
5.  Public buildings and land uses. 
6.  Electric substations or gas regulator stations, if essential for service to this zoning district, as provided in the R-100 zoning district. 
7.  The raising and keeping of horses for personal pleasure or utility on a lot which contains the dwelling of the owner, provided the lot is at least three (3) acres in area and that no animal quarters are located closer than 100 feet to any property line. 
8.  The raising and keeping of household pets. A purebred Vietnamese pot-bellied pig is allowed provided that there is no hobby breeding, and only one (1) pig shall be allowed per lot. The raising and keeping of rabbits shall be allowed provided that the number of rabbits does not exceed eight (8) and any animal quarters are located in the rear yard and set back at least 30 feet from all property lines. 
9.  Public, semi-public, and private golf and country clubs. 
[Within the R-LL Single Family Residence - Large Lot District, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a Public Hearing:] 
1.  Family Personal Care Home (minimum one-(1)-acre lot size). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1301. - R-100 Single Family Residence District. 
This zoning district is intended primarily for one (1) family residences and related uses. 
Within the R-100 Single Family Residence District, the following uses are permitted: 
1.  Single Family Dwellings, except Manufactured Homes. 
2.  Customary accessory buildings and uses. 
3.  Customary Home Occupations. 
4.  Existing Cemeteries. 
5.  Public buildings and land uses. 
6.  Electric substations or gas regulator stations, if essential for service to this zoning district, provided: 
a.  The structures are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  The structures are enclosed by a woven wire fence at least eight (8) feet high. 
c.  The lot is suitably landscaped, including a buffer strip at least 25 feet wide along the side and rear property lines but not extending into the required front yard, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight (8) feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
d.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
7.  The raising and keeping of livestock for personal pleasure or utility on a lot which contains the dwelling of the owner of the livestock, provided that the lot is at least three (3) acres in area and that no animal quarters are located closer than 100 feet to any property line. 
8.  Lots located on culs-de-sac or half culs-de-sac shall have a minimum of eighty-five (85) feet at the building line. 
9.  The raising and keeping of household pets. A purebred Vietnamese pot-bellied pig is allowed provided that the lot is at least one-half (½) acre in size, no hobby breeding, and only one (1) pig shall be allowed per lot. The raising and keeping of rabbits shall be allowed provided that the number of rabbits does not exceed eight (8) and any animal quarters are located in the rear yard and set back at least 30 feet from all property lines. 
10.  Facilities for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies provided: 
a.  They are located on a Principal Arterial, Major Arterial, Minor Arterial, Major Collector Street, or State Highway on a site of not less than five acres with 250 feet of road frontage. 
b.  The buildings are located not less than 50 feet from any street and not less than 30 feet from any side or rear property line. 
c.  Parking is not provided in the front yard setback area. 
d.  If adjacent to residentially-zoned property, a buffer of at least 50 feet wide shall be provided along the property lines adjacent to said zoning; provided, however, that this buffer may be reduced to no less than 20 feet in width adjacent to the sanctuary building or "Sunday School" educational building and parking related to these buildings. 
e.  A facility for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies located in a manufactured building may be erected on the property for a period not to exceed three (3) years. 
Within the R-100 Single Family Residence District, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a Public Hearing: 
1.  Facilities for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies not meeting the minimum requirements for a permitted facility for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies within the district 
2.  Private schools offering general education courses. 
3.  A beauty parlor or barber shop in a one (1) family residence. 
4.  Single family dwellings with a floor area of 1,000 square feet or greater but less than 1,400 square feet. 
5.  Group day care homes. 
6.  Day care facilities located in a church. 
7.  Private not-for-profit recreation facilities; provided, however, that a Special Use Permit shall not be required for such facilities if they are to be located on an area reserved or dedicated for such use on a final recorded subdivision plat. 
8.  The development of equestrian-oriented subdivisions on tracts of 15 acres or more, provided that no lot is less than one (1) acre and that all provisions for community and/or individual lot animal quarters shall be established as part of the approval of granting a Special Use Permit. Such provisions as approved and a restriction prohibiting the further subdivision of any lots shall be recorded as Protective Covenants for the subdivision. 
9.  Metal buildings in excess of 550 square feet in size. 
10.  Group Homes. 
11.  Family Personal Care Home (minimum one-acre lot size). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1302. - R-75 Single Family Residence District. 
This zoning district is intended primarily for moderate-cost, one family residences and related uses on land served by a central sewerage system. The development of lots in this district is permitted with septic tanks, provided lot sizes correspond to the area in square feet in the R-100 district. All septic tank installations are subject to the approval of the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department. 
Within the R-75 Single Family Residence District, the following uses are permitted: 
1.  All uses permitted in the R-100 Single Family Residence District, including special uses, provided, however, that only those single family dwellings with a floor area of 1,000 square feet or greater but less than 1,200 square feet shall be required to have obtained a Special Use Permit prior to being permitted. Single family dwellings with less than 1,000 square feet in floor area shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1302A. - R-60 Single Family Residence District. 
This zoning district is intended primarily for single family detached residences and accessory uses on land served by a central sewerage system. 
A.  Within the R-60 Single Family Detached Residence District, the following uses are permitted: 
1.  All uses permitted in the R-75 Single Family Residence District, including special uses, except Group Day Care Homes, Family Group or Congregate Personal Care Homes. 
2.  Subdivision development provided the following guidelines are met: 
a.  Maximum density shall not exceed four (4) units per acre. 
b.  The subdivision development shall have a minimum land area of at least five (5) contiguous acres. 
c.  Dwellings shall include double-car garages and where garages are front entry, driveways shall be sixteen (16) feet in width. On cul-de-sac lots driveways may taper from 16 feet at the right-of-way line to the street pavement, but a minimum 16' × 35' paved parking pad must be provided. 
d.  Provide sidewalks adjacent to interior streets, excluding cul-de-sac turnarounds. 
e.  Provide a minimum 40-foot building setback adjacent to exterior streets. The setback may be reduced to 30 feet if a berm, landscaping, fence, or wall is provided adjacent to the exterior street(s). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1302B. - R-TH Single Family Residence Townhouse District. 
This zoning district is intended exclusively for townhouse dwelling units, villas, residential dormitories, customary accessory uses and structures for development after January 2005. For developments prior to January 2005, refer to Article XIX: Appendix of Inactive Zoning Districts. 
A.  Requirements . Within the R-TH Single Family Residence Townhouse District, the following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Maximum density: Eight (8) units per acre; Residential dormitories shall be limited to a maximum of 90 beds per acre. 
2.  Lot Area: No Minimum for townhomes or villas; Minimum 3 acres for residential dormitories. 
3.  Lot Width: No Minimum for townhomes or villas; Minimum 100 feet for residential dormitories. 
4.  Internal Road Frontage: No Minimum. 
5.  External Road Frontage For Overall Development: 50-feet. 
6.  Minimum unit width: Twenty-two (22) feet for double-car garage townhomes. Eighteen (18) feet for single-car garage townhomes. Forty (40) feet for villas. 
7.  Maximum height: 35 feet for townhomes or villas; Four (4) stories for residential dormitories. 
8.  Internal yard requirements: A 20-foot grassed or landscaped strip shall be provided between all buildings and interior driveways/streets. 
9.  External yard requirements: Front yard: 50-Feet. Side yard: 40-Feet. Rear yard: 40-Feet 
10.  Provide three (3) or more off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit for townhomes and villas. At least 80 percent of required parking areas for overall development must be located directly in the front or rear of the dwelling units. The balance of the parking spaces may be located in a parking facility separated from the units. All townhome and villas units shall require at least single-car garages. 
Residential Dormitories shall have a minimum of one (1) parking space per bed and a maximum of 1.5 parking spaces per bed. Parking decks shall be allowed for residential dormitories. The maximum parking space allowance may be exceeded in any amount when a parking deck and/or underground parking structure is constructed to accommodate at least 50 percent of the maximum parking allowance. Excess parking may be shared with the adjacent school facilities. 
11.  All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
12.  Provide sidewalks adjacent to both sides of interior streets or private driveways. Design shall be per Development Regulations. 
13.  A minimum of three (3) and maximum of eight (8) dwelling units shall be allowed in each row of townhouses. Villas shall have a minimum of three (3) units and a maximum of four (4) units per building. 
14.  A minimum of a two-(2)-hour rated firewall shall be required between each attached dwelling unit. A four-(4)-hour rated firewall shall be required between every fourth (4 th ) attached dwelling unit. The four-(4)-hour firewall may be reduced to a two-(2)-hour firewall, if approved residential sprinkler systems, or similar fire prevention measures as approved by the Fire Marshal, are installed in each unit. Firewalls shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building codes of City of Peachtree Corners. 
15.  All utilities shall be placed under-ground. 
16.  A 50-foot wide landscaped setback shall be provided along all exterior street frontages. The landscaped setback may incorporate natural vegetation and shall include a decorative fence/wall and entrance monument. The fence may be constructed as a solid brick or stacked stone wall, or as a wrought iron-style fence with brick or stacked stone columns (maximum 30-feet on-center). 
B.  Concept Plan Review . The purpose of the concept plan review is to encourage logic, imagination, innovation, and variety in the design process and ensure the soundness of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area. The Director of Planning and Development shall review plans for compliance with concept plan review criteria. The recommendations of both the Director of Planning and Development and the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council. Through the rezoning process, the City Council may condition approval of an R-TH request to a specific concept plan, or require a future site plan review by the Planning Commission. 
The following exhibits shall be prepared by design professionals, such as planners, engineers, architects, or landscape architects, and submitted to the Department of Planning and Development. No application for an R-TH district shall be accepted for processing without these required exhibits. 
1.  A location map indicating existing zoning on the site and the adjacent areas. 
2.  A concept plan drawn no smaller than one (1) inch equals 100 feet, including the following information: 
a.  Lot lines and setbacks; 
b.  Topography with contour intervals no greater than 20 feet; 
c.  Lakes, ponds and floodplains and the sources of floodplain data; 
d.  Stormwater detention areas; 
e.  Recreation facilities (if applicable); 
f.  Location of typical off-street parking. 
3.  Color elevations of front, sides and rear of all typical units, including proposed building material, and any other structures such as recreation buildings. 
4.  Information indicating the following: 
a.  Gross and net acreage (see definition of net density); 
b.  Lot sizes (typical dimensions and square footage); 
c.  Amount of common open space in square feet (if applicable). 
5.  Such other architectural and engineering data as may be required to evaluate the project. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1302C. - R-ZT Single Family Residence District. 
This district is intended for single-family detached residences and accessory uses of a medium density on land served by a sanitary sewerage system. 
A.  Within the R-ZT Single Family Residence District, the following uses are permitted: 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
2.  Customary Home Occupations (provided the building lot is a minimum of 60 feet in width and 7,200 square feet in area). 
B.  Within the R-ZT Single Family Residence District, the following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Maximum density shall not exceed six (6) units per acre. 
2.  Minimum lot area shall be 4,000 square feet. 
3.  Minimum lot width - 40-feet. 
4.  Minimum front yard depth shall be 20 feet. 
5.  Minimum side yard - five (5) foot side yard on each side. 
6.  Minimum rear yard depth - When abutting an R-75 or less intense district, the rear yard shall be equal to the required buffer plus an additional five (5) feet. However, the rear yard setback shall not be less than 25 feet. 
7.  Provide a minimum 40-foot landscaped building setback adjacent to exterior streets. The landscaped setback may incorporate natural vegetation and may be reduced to 30 feet if a berm and landscaping, fence or wall is provided adjacent to the exterior street(s). 
Sec. 1302C.1. - Concept Plan Review. 
The purpose of the concept plan review is to encourage logic, imagination, innovation, and variety in the design process and ensure the soundness of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area. The Director of Planning and Development shall review plans for compliance with concept plan review criteria. The recommendations of both the Director of Planning and Development and the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council. Through the rezoning process, the City Council may condition approval of an R-ZT request to a specific concept plan, or require a future site plan review by the Planning Commission. 
A.  Required Exhibits . The following exhibits shall be prepared by design professionals, such as planners, engineers, architects or landscape architects, and submitted to the Department of Planning and Development. No application for an R-ZT district shall be accepted for processing without these required exhibits. 
1.  A location map indicating existing zoning on the site and the adjacent areas. 
2.  A concept plan drawn no smaller than one (1) inch equals 100 feet, including the following information: 
a.  Lot lines and setbacks; 
b.  Topography with contour intervals no greater than 20 feet; 
c.  Lakes, ponds and floodplains and the sources of floodplain data; 
d.  Stormwater detention areas; 
e.  Recreation facilities (if applicable); 
f.  Location of typical off-street parking. 
3.  Elevations of all typical units and any other structures such as recreation buildings. 
4.  Information indicating the following: 
a.  Gross and net acreage (see definition of net density); 
b.  Lot sizes (typical dimensions and square footage); 
c.  Amount of common open space in square feet (if applicable); 
d.  Such other architectural and engineering data as may be required to evaluate the project. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1302D. - R-SR Senior Oriented Residence District. 
This district is intended for single-family detached and/or villas-style attached residence and accessory uses of a medium density on land served by a sanitary sewerage system. The R-SR district is designed to serve the housing needs of senior residents. It is recommended that this district be located in areas that facilitate pedestrian access to nearby commercial goods and services, and/or amenities/cultural facilities such as public parks or libraries. The R-SR zoning shall not serve as a precedent for medium density zoning in an otherwise low density residential area. 
R-SR developments shall be intended and operated for occupancy by persons 55 years of age and older. At least 80 percent of the occupied units shall be occupied by at least one (1) person who is 55 or older. 
Permitted Uses: 
1.  Detached single-family homes. 
2.  Villas attached residences. 
Building Design Standards: 
A.  Architectural treatments shall be primarily of brick, or stone, with minor treatments of low or no-maintenance siding materials. 
B.  All dwellings shall have a minimum 1,600 square feet for two bedroom homes, and 1,800 square feet for three (3) or more bedroom homes. 
C.  All dwellings shall be limited to single-story, however, bonus rooms over garages shall be allowed. 
D.  All dwellings shall contain double-car garages. 
E.  All dwellings shall incorporate accessibility standards which shall include the following: 
1)  Easy access step free feature at entrances to the unit. 
2)  Easy passage feature requiring 32-inch wide, clear passage doorways throughout the unit. 
3)  Easy use feature requiring wheelchair accessible bedroom(s), kitchen, entertainment area and bathroom(s), via step-free entrance. 
F.  Attached villas shall generally have a minimum of three (3) units and a maximum of four (4) units per building. A minimum number of two (2) unit villas may be approved by the Director to address specific topographic issues. 
G.  Attached villas shall include a minimum two-(2)-hour rated firewall between each attached dwelling unit. Firewalls shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building codes of Gwinnett County. 
Site Design Standards for R-SR detached homes. 
Within the R-SR Senior Oriented Residence District, the following requirements shall be met: 
A.  Maximum density: Four (4) units per acre. 
B.  Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
C.  Average lot width: 50 feet. 
D.  Minimum front yard: 20 feet. 
E.  Minimum side yard: Five (5) feet. 
F.  Minimum rear yard: 15 feet. 
G.  Provide sidewalks adjacent to both sides of interior street. 
Site Design Standards for R-SR attached villas: 
Within the R-SR Senior Oriented Residence District, the following requirements shall be met: 
A.  Maximum density: Six (6) units per acre. 
B.  Lot Area: No Minimum. 
C.  Lot Width: No Minimum. 
D.  Internal Road Frontage: No Minimum. 
E.  External Road Frontage For Overall Development: 50 feet. 
F.  Minimum unit width: Forty (40) feet. 
G.  Internal yard requirements: A 20-foot grassed or landscaped strip shall be provided between all buildings; and a 10-foot grassed or landscaped strip shall be provided between all buildings and interior driveways/streets. 
H.  External yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard: 50-Feet. 
b.  Side yard: 20-Feet. 
c.  Rear yard: 20-Feet. 
I.  Provide sidewalks adjacent to both sides of interior streets or private driveways. Design shall be per Development Regulations. 
Landscape Requirements: 
A.  A minimum of 50-foot landscaped building setback shall be provided adjacent to abutting exterior streets. The landscaped setback may incorporate natural vegetation and shall be supplemented with either a landscaped berm, wrought-iron style fence with brick or stone columns (30 feet on-center), or a decorative brick wall. Alternate decorative fence materials may be utilized, subject to review and approval of the Director. 
B.  At least one (1) 3-inch caliper street tree shall be planted at least every 35-feet along both sides of internal street(s). 
C.  All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
Mandatory Homeowner's Association Required. 
A mandatory homeowners association shall be incorporated which provides for building and grounds maintenance and repair, insurance and working capital. Said association shall publish and adhere to policies and procedures that demonstrate that the community is intended to provide housing for persons 55 and over including maintaining surveys or affidavits verifying compliance with 55 and older occupancy requirements as permitted by 42 U.S.C. Section 3607, (b)(2)(c) of the Federal Fair Housing Act. Said association shall also include declarations and bylaws including rules and regulations, which shall at a minimum regulate and control the following: 
A.  Restriction on homes being occupied, with at least 80 percent of the occupied units occupied by at least one resident who is age 55 or older. 
B.  Restrictions on single-family residential use only and leasing of units. No more than ten percent of the total units may be leased by individual owners at any one time. 
C.  Exterior items such as fences, lawn ornaments and restrictions on removal of landscaped areas and buffers. 
D.  Exterior fence maintenance shall include a requirement that any graffiti shall be repaired and/or repainted within 72 hours. 
E.  Except for a central amenity package, prohibit playground equipment, swing sets, trampolines or like fixtures. 
F.  Maintenance of detention ponds, common areas and entrance features. 
Concept Plan Review Required. 
The purpose of the concept plan review is to ensure that soundness of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area. The Department of Planning and Development shall review plans for compliance with concept plan review criteria. The recommendations of both the Department of Planning and Development and the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council. Through the rezoning process, the City Council may condition approval of an R-SR request to a specific concept plan, or require a future site plan review by the Department of Planning and Development or Planning Commission. 
A.  Required Exhibits. 
The following exhibits shall be prepared by design professionals, such as planners, engineers, architects or landscape architects, and submitted to the Department of Planning and Development. No application for an R-SR district shall be accepted for processing without these required exhibits. 
1.  A location map indicating existing zoning on the site and the adjacent areas. 
2.  A concept plan drawn no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, which includes the following information: 
a.  Lot lines and setbacks; 
b.  Topography with contour intervals no greater than 20 feet; 
c.  Lakes, ponds and floodplains and the source of floodplain data; 
d.  Stormwater detention areas; 
e.  Recreation facilities (if applicable); 
f.  Location of typical off-street parking. 
3.  Color elevations of front, sides and rear of all typical units, including proposed building materials, and any other structures such as recreation buildings. 
4.  Information indicating the following: 
a.  Gross and net acreage (see definition of net density); 
b.  Lot sizes (typical dimensions and square footage); 
c.  Amount of common/open space in square feet (if applicable); 
d.  Such other architectural and engineering data as may be required to evaluate the project. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1303. - RM Multi-Family Residence District. 
The following districts are intended for duplex and multi-family dwellings. These zoning districts are to be located where public water supply and sewerage facilities are available or can be obtained and where there is convenient access to collector streets, major thoroughfares or state or interstate highways. The purpose of the following zoning districts is to promote better utilization of land and freedom of architectural and engineering design without maximizing density. On any tract of land zoned for RMD, RM-6, RM-8, RM-10, RM-13 or RM the entire tract must be developed as the same type of use. No combinations of allowed uses are permitted on any one (1) tract of land. Townhomes are not permitted in these districts. 
RMD Multi-Family Residence District (Duplexes). 
This zoning district is intended primarily for duplexes provided only one duplex is constructed on each lot of record. Within the RMD Multi-Family Residence District (Duplexes), the following uses are permitted: 
1.  All uses permitted in the R-75 Single Family Residence District, including special uses, except single family dwellings, group day care homes, personal care homes, group homes, and the raising and keeping of livestock, and pot-bellied pigs. 
2.  Duplexes. 
RM-6 Multi-Family Residence District (Maximum Density Six (6) Units Per Acre). 
This zoning district is intended primarily for multi-family dwellings with a maximum density of six (6) units per acre. Within the RM-6 Multi-Family Residence District (maximum density six (6) units per acre) the following uses are permitted: 
1.  All uses permitted in the RMD Multi-Family Residence District (Duplexes). 
2.  Multi-family dwellings. 
3.  A quadraplex apartment development on individual subdivision lots (four [4] units per lot) provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Served by a wastewater treatment facility. 
b.  The minimum side yard setback shall be 15 feet on each side; all other setbacks shall apply as required in Article XIV. 
Within the RM-6 Multi-Family Residence District, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a public hearing: 
1.  Residential or Community Shelters, subject to the provisions of Rules for Shelters in City of Peachtree Corners. 
RM-8 Multi-Family Residence District (Maximum Density Eight (8) Units Per Acre). 
This zoning district is intended primarily for two-(2)-family and multi-family dwellings. 
[Within the RM-8 Multi-Family Residence District, the following uses are permitted:] 
1.  All uses permitted in the RM-6 Multi-Family Residence District, including special uses. 
RM-10 Multi-Family Residence District (Maximum Density Ten (10) Units Per Acre). 
This zoning district is intended primarily for two-(2)-family and multi-family dwellings. 
Within the RM-10 Multi-Family Residence District (maximum density ten (10) units per acre), the following uses are permitted: 
1.  All uses permitted within the RM-8 Multi-Family Residence District, including special uses. 
2.  Residential and community shelters subject to the provisions of Rules for Shelters in City of Peachtree Corners. If previously developed as a single-family residence detached development, a Special Use Permit shall be required. 
RM-13 Multi-Family Residence District (Maximum Density 13 Units Per Acre). 
This zoning district is intended primarily for two-(2)-family and multi-family dwellings. 
This zoning district includes all old RM districts which have no density designated. Within the RM-13 Multi-Family Residence District (maximum density 13 units per acre), the following uses are permitted: 
1.  All uses permitted within the RM-10 Multi-Family Residence District. 
2.  Boarding and rooming houses. 
3.  Fraternal organizations and clubs not operated for profit. 
4.  Retirement communities, which may include a nursing home, cafeteria and care facilities and accessory uses. 
5.  Residential and community shelters subject to the provisions of Rules for Shelters in City of Peachtree Corners. If previously developed as a single-family residence detached development, a Special Use Permit shall be required. 
Within the RM-13 Multi-Family Residence District, the following uses may be permitted provided that the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and the Planning Commission and after a Public Hearing: 
1.  Day Care Facilities 
HRR - High-Rise Residential District. 
This district may only be permitted within a Major Activity Center as designated in the Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan, on tracts of land or assemblages of land located adjacent to or having immediate access to major thoroughfares where infrastructure is available to support the intensity of such a use, and with immediate access to major shopping, office or transit connections. 
Applications for rezoning not located within a Major Activity Center shall not be accepted for processing by the Department of Planning and Development. 
This zoning district is intended to allow for high-rise residential development and associated uses in a mixed-use environment. Therefore, within an approved HRR district, non-residential uses as defined in use category #2 are permitted in up to forty (40) percent of the gross square footage of a high-rise residential structure exclusive of any building area devoted to parking. 
1.  High-rise residential uses: 
a)  Maximum project density: none. 
b)  Minimum building height: 5 stories. 
c)  Maximum building height: 25 stories, not to exceed 300 feet. 
The City Council shall establish maximum project density on a case-by-case basis at the time of rezoning. The City Council may increase building height on a case-by-case basis by Special Use Permit. 
2.  Accessory office, retail and service uses (as permitted within the C-2 zoning district) may occupy up to forty (40) percent of the gross square footage of the high-rise structure exclusive of any building area devoted to parking garage. Such uses shall exclude: 
a.  Automotive car wash. 
b.  Automotive parts stores. 
c.  Billboards or Oversized Signs, as provided in the Sign Ordinance of City of Peachtree Corners. 
d.  Building, electrical or plumbing contractors. 
e.  Drive-in restaurants. 
f.  Emission Inspection Stations. 
g.  Funeral homes or mausoleums. 
h.  Equipment rental. 
i.  Garden supply centers. 
j.  Hardware stores. 
k.  Pest control businesses. 
l.  Recovered Materials Processing Facilities. 
m.  Taxidermist. 
n.  Yard Trimmings Composting Facility. 
Required Exhibits. 
1.  A concept plan drawn no smaller than one (1) inch equals 100 feet, including the following information: 
a.  Lot lines and setbacks; 
b.  Topography with contour intervals no greater than 20 feet; 
c.  Lakes, ponds and floodplains and the sources of floodplain data; 
d.  Stormwater detention areas; 
e.  Recreation facilities (if applicable); 
f.  Location of off-street parking. 
2.  Scaled architectural elevations of the proposed high-rise structure and any proposed accessory structure (i.e., parking garage, recreation buildings, etc.). 
3.  Information indicating the following: 
a.  Gross and net acreage (see definition of net density); 
b.  Amount of common open space in square feet (if provided); 
c.  Such other architectural and engineering data as may be required to evaluate the project. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1304. - RL Lakeside Residence District. 
The purpose of the RL Lakeside Residence District, which borders on Lake Lanier or Norris Lake, is to permit one-(1)-family dwellings and recreation cottages on medium-sized lots, and, as a special use, water related recreation areas and facilities. 
Within the RL Lakeside Residence District the following uses are permitted: 
1.  Single family dwellings and recreation cottages, but not including manufactured homes. 
2.  Customary accessory buildings and uses. 
3.  Customary home occupations. 
4.  Public parks. 
5.  Public utilities. 
Within the RL Lakeside Residence District, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a Public Hearing: 
1.  Facilities for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies. 
2.  Public and private schools offering general education courses. 
3.  Water-related recreation areas and facilities including commercial and non-commercial boat docks and piers, picnic facilities, convenience goods stores, restaurants and the like. 
4.  Multi-family rental vacation dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1305. - MH Mobile Home Park District. 
This zoning district is intended exclusively for the placement of mobile homes in an environment that will provide pleasant and otherwise satisfactory living conditions and, at the same time, will not produce adverse effects upon neighboring properties. 
Within this district are permitted Mobile Home Parks in which lots are leased. 
A Mobile Home District development shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Location . A Mobile Home District development shall front for a sufficient distance to provide safe access upon a State Highway, a Major Thoroughfare, a Collector Street or a local access road paralleling an expressway and shall have access and egress only on such road. 
2.  Street Access Requirements . The entrance road to a Mobile Home District development shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet with a minimum pavement width of 28 feet. The entrance road shall have a turning radius from the highway of at least 30 feet and the entrance road shall extend at least 100 feet into the Mobile Home District development. 
3.  Size . A Mobile Home District development shall have a minimum buildable area of at least 15 contiguous acres. 
4.  Density . A Mobile Home District development shall have a density of not more than six (6) mobile home lots per buildable acre. 
5.  Mobile Home Lots . Each mobile home shall be located on a separate mobile home lot in accordance with the Mobile Home Subdivision Regulations of Gwinnett County. 
6.  Recreation and Other Community Facilities . Not less than eight (8) percent of the gross area of the Mobile Home District development shall be devoted to recreation and other community use facilities. Each recreation space shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet. 
7.  HUD Mobile Home Court Development Guide . The Mobile Home District development shall meet the standards of the "Mobile Home Court Development Guide," as set forth in the above-titled pamphlet, FHA G4200.7, published January, 1970, which is hereby made a part of this Resolution, as well as the requirements of the City of Peachtree Corners Zoning Resolution and the Standard Building Code. If there are any differences in the above two (2) sets of requirements, the most stringent shall apply. 
8.  No Site Construction Until Preliminary Subdivision Plat Approved . No site construction shall be undertaken and no permits shall be issued until a Preliminary Subdivision Plat that meets the requirements of the Development Regulations of City of Peachtree Corners and the requirements of this Zoning Resolution has been given tentative approval. 
9.  Certificates of Occupancy . No Certificate of Occupancy for the placing of a mobile home in a Mobile Home District development shall be issued until at least 50 mobile home lots have been developed in accordance with an officially approved and recorded Final Subdivision Plat and are ready for occupancy. 
10.  Skirting or Underpinning . All mobile homes shall be skirted or similar measures must be provided for on the mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1305A. - MHS Manufactured Housing Subdivision District. 
This zoning district is intended primarily for the placement of manufactured homes on residential lots for one-(1)-family residences and related uses. 
Within the MHS Manufactured Housing Subdivision District, the following uses are permitted: 
1.  One (1)-family dwellings including mobile homes provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Subdivision . The subdivision shall be designed to only allow lot frontage on minor interior streets and shall meet the requirements of a single family subdivision as specified in the Development Regulations of City of Peachtree Corners. All other City regulations regarding the construction of a subdivision shall be followed. 
b.  Size . The subdivision development shall have a minimum area of at least 20 contiguous acres. 
c.  Minimum area, yard and height requirements . Each lot shall meet the minimum requirements of the R-100 Single Family Residence District. 
d.  Enclosure of space beneath the home . The space underneath each manufactured home shall be fully enclosed to protect this space from the elements and to create an aesthetic appearance for each unit. Materials used for this purpose shall be rigidly mounted and shall be acceptable for exterior use. 
e.  Tie-downs . Acceptable provisions for tie-downs for each home shall be made in accordance with Appendix H of the Standard Building Code adopted by Gwinnett County. 
f.  Foundations . All piers shall be placed on footings of solid concrete not less than the following: 
1.  Single-wide - 20 inches by 20 inches by eight (8) inches. 
2.  Double-wide - 24 inches by 24 inches by eight (8) inches. 
3.  Industrialized homes or site-built homes shall meet foundation requirements of the Standard Building Code adopted by Gwinnett County. 
All other placement or construction criteria shall meet the building codes adopted by City of Peachtree Corners. 
g.  Protective Covenants . All manufactured home subdivisions shall have protective covenants as provided for and approved within the City of Peachtree Corners Development Regulations and the requirements of this section. 
h.  Completion of site preparation . The developer shall be responsible for final site preparation with the exception of those items included in the approved covenants of the subdivision as the homeowners' responsibility. 
1)  Items which shall be required of the developer include, but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Paving of driveways and parking from the curb line of streets to the actual home location site behind the setback line. 
(b)  Lawns shall be landscaped and seeded by the developer within a reasonable period of time (not to exceed sixty (60) days) after the installation of the manufactured home taking into consideration weather changes and conditions. 
(c)  All trees shall remain on lots except as their removal is required for installation of driveways and the location of the home on each lot with a reasonable yard area. 
(d)  Only multi-sectional (double-wide) manufactured homes, industrialized homes or on site-built homes shall be allowed on any exterior lot of the subdivision, except where adjoining the MHS or MH zoning district. 
2)  Items which shall be required of the developer or lot owner include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  A home location plan shall be submitted for approval by the Department of Planning and Development for each lot showing the exact location of the home, driveways, etc., in relation to the parcel lot lines prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of a home. 
(b)  Installation of the manufactured home, including tie-downs, skirting or similar enclosure, connection of utilities and other requirements concerning the installation of a home set-forth in this section and specified in the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(c)  Entrances and service walkways. 
(d)  Exterior steps and porches. 
The above listed items shall be set-forth within the Protective Covenants approved and recorded with the Final Plat of the subdivision which has been developed. 
i.  Certificate of Occupancy . A Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued prior to the occupancy of any home allowed within this section. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any home until the required improvements of Paragraph h. above, have been completed. 
j.  Eligibility . Only the following types of housing may be placed within an approved manufactured home subdivision: 
(1)  New manufactured homes (mobile homes) certified to comply with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards. 
(2)  Industrialized homes and new site-built homes provided the home meets the minimum floor area requirements of the R-100 District, Section 604 of this resolution. 
k.  Buffers . A minimum of a twenty-five (25) foot buffer shall be required adjacent to exterior property lines of the development to protect the subdivision from adverse visual, noise or other impact caused by surrounding land usages and to provide a buffer to any residential property immediately adjoining the site. 
2.  Customary accessory buildings and uses. 
3.  Customary home occupations. 
4.  Existing cemeteries. 
5.  Public buildings and land uses. 
6.  Electric substations or gas regulator stations, if essential for service to this zoning district, provided: 
a.  The structures are placed not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
b.  The structures are enclosed by a woven wire fence at least eight (8) feet high. 
c.  The lot is suitably landscaped, including a buffer strip at least ten (10) feet wide along the side and rear property lines, but not extending into the required front yard, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight (8) feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
d.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
Within the MHS Manufactured Home Subdivision District, the following uses may be permitted as a Special Use provided the applicant for such use is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a Public Hearing. 
1)  A beauty parlor or barber shop in a one-(1)-family residence. 
2)  Group day care homes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1306. - HS Hospital Service District. 
The purpose of the HS Hospital Service District is to provide a location for a hospital and related facilities that serve the hospital or benefit from a location in close proximity to it. 
Within the HS Hospital Service District the following uses are permitted. 
1.  All uses permitted in an R-100 Single Family Residence District, including Special Uses, except Single-Family Dwellings. 
2.  Hospitals, medical clinics, and doctor's offices. 
3.  Nursing homes. 
4.  Dormitories for nurses and interns. 
5.  Beauty parlors and barber shops. 
6.  Drug stores. 
7.  Florist shops. 
8.  Hotels and Motels provided the minimum standards are met as specified in the C-2 zoning district, Section 1308. 
9.  Restaurants. 
10.  Other similar hospital-related uses. 
11.  Family personal care homes. 
Within the HS Hospital Service District, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission after a Public Hearing: 
1.  Group Homes. 
2.  Group or congregate personal care homes. 
3.  Residential and community shelters. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1306A. - NS Neighborhood Shopping District. 
The NS Neighborhood Shopping District provides a location for convenience goods and services with limited hours of operation for people in nearby residential neighborhoods. Hours of commercial operation in this district shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. All sales shall be indoors. 
Within the NS Neighborhood Shopping District, the following uses are permitted provided that they do not exceed 3,000 square feet of retail selling space per individual store or 30,000 square feet in a planned center: 
1.  Professional offices. 
2.  Drug stores and pharmacies. 
3.  Flower and gift shops. 
4.  Food stores. 
5.  Beauty parlors and barber shops. 
6.  Other similar retail businesses selling convenience goods and services which serve the local neighborhood, but not including drive-in or drive-through service windows; fuel pumps; or coin or token-operated services. 
Within the NS Neighborhood Shopping District, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a Public Hearing: 
1.  Restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1307. - C-1 Neighborhood Business District. 
Purposes . The C-1 Neighborhood Business District is intended to provide for commercial uses of a convenience nature for nearby residential neighborhoods. These uses are intended to be facilities serving the everyday needs of these nearby neighborhoods rather than the larger community. The residential character of the area surrounding this district shall be of primary consideration when Special Use Permits or Variances to these regulations are reviewed. 
Permitted Uses . Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in the C-1 Neighborhood Business District and no structures shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged for any use other than a use permitted hereunder with the exception of a) uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of this amendment; b) special uses as listed hereunder; c) accessory uses as defined in Article III, Definitions; d) other uses which are clearly similar to and consistent with the purpose of this district. 
A.  Retail and Service Uses. 
1.  Antique Shops. 
2.  Art and school supply stores. 
3.  Art Galleries. 
4.  Bakeries. 
5.  Banks or financial institutions, and automatic teller machines. 
6.  Barber and beauty shops. 
7.  Book or stationery stores. 
8.  Convenience food stores with or without fuel pumps. 
9.  Custom dressmaking and sewing shops. 
10.  Dance studios. 
11.  Day care centers, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  At least 100 square feet of outdoor recreation area per child, and the outdoor play area is enclosed with a six-(6)-foot high fence. 
b.  Comply with all State of Georgia Day Care requirements. 
c.  Comply with all Gwinnett County and State of Georgia Health Regulations. 
12.  Drug Stores. 
13.  Dry cleaning establishments including dry cleaning pick-up and delivery stations, not to exceed 2,500 square feet of total floor area. 
14.  Florists. 
15.  Garden supply centers and greenhouses. 
16.  Gift shops. 
17.  Group and congregate personal care homes. 
18.  Hardware stores. 
19.  Hobby shops. 
20.  Ice cream shops. 
21.  Interior decorating shops. 
22.  Jewelry stores. 
23.  Museums. 
24.  Music studios. 
25.  Photography shops and studios. 
26.  Radio and television repair shops. 
27.  Shoe stores and shoe repair shops. 
28.  Small appliance repair shops. 
29.  Tailor shops. 
30.  Toy stores. 
31.  Travel agencies. 
32.  Watch and clock repair shops. 
33.  Weaving apparel shops. 
B.  Office Uses . 
1.  Accounting offices. 
2.  Architecture of engineering offices. 
3.  Doctor, dentist or chiropractor offices. 
4.  Insurance offices. 
5.  Law offices. 
6.  Other public or professional offices. 
7.  Real estate offices. 
C.  Public and Semi-Public Uses . 
1.  Facilities for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies. 
2.  Public or semi-public buildings and land uses, parks, playgrounds or community centers. 
3.  Utility offices. 
D.  Special Uses . Within the C-1 Neighborhood Business District, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a Public Hearing: 
1.  Automated car wash as accessory to convenience stores with fuel pumps. 
2.  Bicycle shops. 
3.  Camera/photographic supply stores. 
4.  Clothing sales or apparel shops. 
5.  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and meeting halls. 
6.  Electronic equipment sales (TV, VCR, stereo equipment). 
7.  Food stores/grocery stores. 
8.  Group Homes. 
9.  Music stores. 
10.  Pet shops. 
11.  Photocopying/reproduction services. 
12.  Precious Metals Dealers. 
13.  Record/video sales and rental stores. 
14.  Residential or community shelter, subject to the provisions of Rules for Shelters in City of Peachtree Corners. 
15.  Restaurants. 
16.  Sporting goods stores. 
17.  Veterinary clinics. 
18.  Animal hospitals provided they are located not less than 300 feet from any residential zoning district or use as measured from property line to property line. 
Other Provisions . 
1.  Within the C-1 Neighborhood Business District, automobile parking is permitted within the front yard setback provided a minimum ten-(10)-foot landscaped strip and curb is provided adjacent to the right-of-way so that no automobile can back into the bordering street. 
2.  Within the C-1 Business District, fuel pumps are permitted within the front yard setback provided they are located: 
a.  Not closer than 15 feet to the road right-of-way; and 
b.  Not closer than the existing setback of any residential structure on abutting lots on either the frontage or a side street. 
3.  No outdoor storage is permitted within the C-1 Neighborhood Business District. 
4.  Indoor storage shall not exceed 25 percent of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1308. - C-2 General Business District. 
Purposes . The C-2 General Business District is intended to provide adequate space in appropriate locations along major streets, thoroughfares and at intersections for various types of business use. These uses should include the retailing of major goods and services, general office facilities and public functions that would serve a community area of several neighborhoods. Development of uses in the district characteristically occupies a larger area than in the C-1 Neighborhood Business District, because it is intended to serve a greater population and to offer a wider range of services. Orientation and expansion of this district should occur as an increase in depth at major intersections rather than as a strip-like extension along the street or thoroughfare. 
Permitted Uses . Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in the C-2 General Business District and no structure shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged for any use other than a use permitted herein with the exception of a) uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of the amendment; b) special uses as permitted herein; or c) accessory uses defined in Article III, Definitions; or [d)] other uses which are clearly similar to and consistent with the purpose of this District. 
A.  Retail and Service Uses. 
1.  Antique shops. 
2.  Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics. 
3.  Art and school supply stores. 
4.  Art galleries. 
5.  Automotive car wash (accessory only). 
6.  Automotive parts stores (no on-premises installation). 
7.  Bakeries. 
8.  Banks or financial institutions. Automatic tellers as accessory or free-standing use. 
9.  Barber and beauty shops. 
10.  Bicycle shops. 
11.  Billboards or Oversized Signs, as provided in the Sign Ordinance of City of Peachtree Corners. 
12.  Blueprinting establishments. 
13.  Book or stationary stores. 
14.  Building, electrical or plumbing contractors (provided no equipment or materials are stored outside). 
15.  Business college or business schools operated as a business enterprise. 
16.  Clothing sales or rental stores. 
17.  Convenience food stores with or without fuel pumps. 
18.  Custom dressmaking and sewing shops. 
19.  Dance studios. 
20.  Day Care centers, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  At least 100 square feet of outdoor recreation area per child, and the outdoor play area is enclosed with a six-foot high fence. 
b.  Comply with all Gwinnett County and State of Georgia Day Care Center requirements. 
c.  Comply with all Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department and State of Georgia Health Department regulations. 
21.  Department stores. 
22.  Drive-In restaurants. 
23.  Drug stores. 
24.  Dry Cleaning pick-up and delivery stations. 
25.  Electronic sales and service establishments. 
26.  Emission Inspection Stations, provided the following design standards are met: 
a.  The facility shall be located in a permanent non-combustible structure. 
b.  The structure shall include a designated indoor public waiting area (minimum six (6) fixed seats) with restrooms; or as an alternative, shall provide the required designated indoor waiting area and restrooms upon the same lot, within 500 feet of the testing facility. 
c.  The facility shall provide a minimum of four (4) paved parking spaces. Drive-through facilities shall also provide a paved stacking lane for a minimum of four (4) vehicles. Parking spaces and stacking lane shall be striped. 
d.  If constructed in an existing parking lot, the facility and stacking lane(s) shall not occupy any required on-site parking space or encroach into any minimum required driveway width. 
27.  Fireworks—Retail sales of consumer fireworks within a permanent building shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Building must meet overlay design standards, be free-standing, and be at least 2,500 sq. ft. in size, but no greater than 10,000 sq. ft. in size. 
b.  Must meet Gwinnett County Fire Dept. regulations, be built to ICC H3 building code requirements, and have two functioning fire extinguishers within proximity of where fireworks are stored. 
c.  Must be located at least 300 feet from a facility that sells, stores, or processes gasoline. 
d.  No Smoking signs shall be displayed at building entrance. 
e.  All product storage shall be contained within the building. 
28.  Florists. 
29.  Food Catering establishments. 
30.  Food stores or grocery stores. 
31.  Funeral homes and mausoleums. 
32.  Furniture rental or sales establishments. 
33.  Equipment rental (excluding heavy equipment, bull-dozers, backhoes, forklifts, cranes, etc., and provided there is no outside storage associated with the use). 
34.  Garden supply centers and greenhouses (including accessory outdoor storage). 
35.  Gift shops. 
36.  Group Homes. 
37.  Group and congregate personal care homes. 
38.  Hardware stores. 
39.  Health clubs or spas. 
40.  Hobby shops. 
41.  Hotels and Motels provided the following minimum standards are met: 
a.  Guest rooms shall be accessed internally to the building with no direct room access to the outside. The lobby shall be a minimum of 700 square feet in size. 
b.  Each hotel/motel site shall be a minimum of two (2) acres. 
c.  Each hotel/motel must provide management on-duty twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
d.  Each guest room shall have a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet and shall be accessed with a magnetic keycard entry-locking device. 
e.  For buildings three (3) stories or less or containing no more than 130 rooms, each motel/hotel building shall have a minimum roof pitch of four (4) in twelve (12). 
f.  Outside storage of commercial equipment is prohibited. 
g.  No business license shall be issued for any business operating from any guestroom of the facility. 
h.  Provide a 75-foot natural buffer, enhanced with an additional 25-foot landscaped buffer (total 100 feet) adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
42.  Ice cream shops. 
43.  Instruction of fine arts. 
44.  Interior decorating shops. 
45.  Jewelry stores. 
46.  Laundries and dry cleaning establishments, including self-service laundries. 
46a.  Liquor Store, subject to the following: 
a.  Liquor stores must be located at least 300 ft. from churches and 600 ft. from schools. This distance shall be measured from the front door of the liquor store to the front door of the church or front door of the nearest school building as measured along pedestrian walkways. 
b.  Liquor stores must be located at least 300 ft. from parks. This distance shall be measured from the front door of the liquor store to the nearest portion of the park property. 
c.  Liquor stores must operate as sole tenants in free standing buildings of at least 5,000 sq.ft. in size and no greater than 10,000 sq. ft. in size. 
d.  Liquor stores must be located on property that is a minimum of one-half acre in size with a minimum of 100 ft. of frontage on a state highway or major street. 
e.  A liquor store shall not be located closer than 3000 ft. to another liquor store, regardless of jurisdiction. 
f.  Liquor store buildings shall comply with Overlay Design regulations. 
g.  Liquor store deliveries shall be made at the rear of the store building and all loading areas, dumpsters, recycling bins, and compactors shall be screened from ground view. 
h.  Liquor store properties shall have no outdoor storage including the storage of shopping carts. 
i.  Liquor stores shall not sell lottery tickets, magazines, or tobacco products (except quality cigars.) 
47.  Locksmith shops. 
47a.  Micro-brewery and Micro-distillery (pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A 3-4-24.2 and 3-5-24.1) 
48.  Mobile Buildings (temporary, while any of the permitted or special uses are under construction, but not to exceed six (6) months). 
49.  Museums and libraries. 
50.  Music stores or studios. 
51.  Office/showroom facilities. 
52.  Parking lots and garages. 
53.  Pest control businesses. 
54.  Pet shops or grooming establishments. 
55.  Photocopying and reproduction services. 
56.  Photography shops and studios. 
57.  Plant nursery sales facilities. 
58.  Plumbing, electrical, pool and home building supply showrooms and sales centers (provided there is no outdoor storage associated with the use). 
59.  Precious metals dealers. 
60.  Radio, recording or television studios and broadcasting stations. 
61.  Radio and television repair shops. 
62.  Record/video sales and rental stores. 
63.  Recreation facilities (indoor, such as bowling alleys, skating rinks, shooting ranges and movie theaters). 
64.  Recovered Materials Processing Facility, Principal provided the following standards are met: 
a.  Activities shall be limited to collection, sorting, compaction and shipping. 
b.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), provide a three-(3)-foot high landscaped earthen berm with a maximum slope of 3 to 1 and/or a minimum six-(6)-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
c.  The facility shall not be located adjacent to or across the street from any property used for or zoned for single family residential use. 
d.  Lighting for such facilities shall be placed in such a fashion as to be directed away from any nearby residential areas. 
e.  Materials collected shall not be visible and deposited in a bin or bunker. All sorting and collection bins shall either be enclosed and have chutes available to the public or be located inside a fully-enclosed building. 
f.  No outdoor storage of uncontainerized materials shall be allowed. 
65.  Restaurants and lounges. 
66.  Shoe stores and shoe repair shops. 
67.  Small appliance repair shops. 
68.  Sporting goods stores. 
69.  Tailor shops. 
70.  Taxidermist. 
71.  Toy stores. 
72.  Travel agencies. 
73.  Watch and clock repair shops. 
74.  Weaving apparel shops. 
75.  Yard Trimmings Composting Facility provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, branches, leaves, and grass clippings or similar putrescent vegetative materials, not including animal products, inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics, metals, or similar materials. 
b.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), and along the side and rear property lines, provide a three-foot high landscape earthen berm with a maximum slope of three (3) to one (1) and/or a minimum six-(6)-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscape strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
B.  Office Uses . 
1.  Accounting offices. 
2.  Architecture or engineering offices. 
3.  Doctor, dentist or chiropractor offices. 
4.  Insurance offices. 
5.  Law offices. 
6.  Medical clinics. 
7.  Other public or professional offices. 
8.  Real estate offices. 
C.  Public and Semi-Public Uses. 
1.  Facilities for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies. 
2.  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and meeting halls. 
3.  Government offices. 
4.  Post offices. 
5.  Public or semi-public buildings and land uses, parks, playgrounds or community centers. 
6.  Utility offices. 
D.  Residential . 
1.  Caretaker or watchman quarters as an accessory use. 
E.  Special Uses . Within the C-2 General Business District, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a Public Hearing: 
1.  Auto body repair shops. 
2.  Automotive car wash (full service or self service). 
3.  Auto repair shops or tire stores including lubrication or tune-up centers (full service and self service). 
4.  Automotive sales lots new or used and associated service facilities. (Minimum lot size 1.5 acres for used.) 
5.  Automotive service stations, with or without fuel pumps. 
6.  Building materials sales with outdoor storage. 
7.  Contractor's offices or the outside storage of equipment or materials. 
8.  Crematories, as an accessory to a funeral home. 
9.  Heavy equipment and farm equipment sales and service, and truck rental. 
10.  Lawn mower repair shops. 
11.  Liquor stores. 
12.  Machine or welding shops. 
13.  Mini-warehouse storage facilities. 
14.  Mobile home or mobile building leasing or sales lots (new or used). 
15.  Pawn shops, title loan and check cashing facilities. 
16.  Pool halls or billiard halls (three or more tables). 
17.  Recreation facilities (commercial outdoor, such as miniature golf courses, driving ranges, water slides or drive-in theaters). 
18.  Residential or community shelters, subject to the provisions of the Rules for Shelters in City of Peachtree Corners. 
19.  Tattoo and body piercing parlors. 
20.  Taxi cab or limousine services. 
21.  Vehicle rental establishments. 
F.  Other Provisions . 
1.  No outdoor sales and/or storage except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-10-102, § 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 3, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 1308A. - C-3 Highway Business District 
Purpose . The purpose of the C-3 Highway Business District is intended for business uses which require a location accessible to major highways and arterials that serve significant portions of the community. It is also the intent of this district to provide areas for businesses which, because of their intensity, outside storage area or hours of operations, would have significant negative impacts on adjoining properties. Due to the nature of the businesses permitted within the C-3 District, the zoning district should be limited to property fronting on principal arterials, major arterials or minor arterials, not indicated as residential arterials, as shown on the Gwinnett County Long Range Road Classification Map. 
Permitted Uses . Only the following uses shall be permitted in the C-3 Highway Business District and no structure shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged for any use other than a use permitted herein with the exception of a) uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of this amendment; b) special uses as permitted herein; or c) accessory uses as defined in Article III, Definitions; or d) other uses which are clearly similar to and consistent with the purpose of this district. 
A.  Retail and Service Uses. 
1.  Antique shops. 
2.  Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics. 
3.  Art and school supply stores. 
4.  Art galleries. 
5.  Automotive body repair shops. 
6.  Automotive car wash (full service or self service). 
7.  Automotive parts stores. 
8.  Auto repair shops or tire stores including lubrication or tune-up centers (full service and self service). 
9.  Automotive sales lots (new or used) and associated service facilities. (Minimum lot size 1.5 acres for used.) 
10.  Automotive service stations, with or without fuel pumps. 
11.  Bakeries. 
12.  Banks or financial institutions. Automatic teller as accessory or free-standing use. 
13.  Barber and beauty shops. 
14.  Bicycle shops. 
15.  Billboards or Oversized Signs, as provided in the Sign Ordinance of City of Peachtree Corners. 
16.  Blueprinting establishments. 
17.  Boat sales establishments (new or used). 
18.  Book or stationery stores. 
19.  Building supply centers with outdoor lumber yards or storage areas, provided these areas are screened with a six-foot high, 100 percent opaque fence. 
20.  Business colleges or business schools operated as a business enterprise. 
21.  Clothing sales or rental stores. 
22.  Contractor's offices with outdoor storage of equipment or materials, provided the storage or equipment areas are screened with a six-foot high, 100 percent opaque fence. 
23.  Convenience food stores with or without fuel pumps. 
24.  Custom dressmaking and sewing shops. 
25.  Dance studios. 
26.  Day care centers, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  At least 100 square feet of outdoor recreation area per child, and the outdoor play area is enclosed with a six-foot high fence. 
b.  Comply with all State of Georgia Day Care Facility requirements. 
c.  Comply with all State of Georgia and Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department regulations. 
27.  Department stores. 
28.  Drive-in restaurants. 
29.  Drug stores. 
30.  Dry Cleaning pick-up and delivery stations. 
31.  Electronic sales and service establishments. 
32.  Emission Inspection Stations, provided the following design standards are met: 
a.  The facility shall be located in a permanent non-combustible structure. 
b.  The structure shall include a designated indoor public waiting area (minimum six (6) fixed seats) with restrooms; or as an alternative, shall provide the required designated indoor waiting area and restrooms upon the same lot, within 500 feet of the testing facility. 
c.  The facility shall provide a minimum of four (4) paved parking spaces. Drive-through facilities shall also provide a paved stacking lane for a minimum of four (4) vehicles. Parking spaces and stacking lane shall be striped. 
d.  If constructed in an existing parking lot, the facility and stacking lane(s) shall not occupy any required on-site parking space or encroach into any minimum required driveway width. 
33.  Florists. 
34.  Food catering establishments. 
35.  Food stores or grocery stores. 
36.  Funeral homes and mausoleums. 
37.  Furniture rental, sales or service establishments. 
38.  Equipment rental, sales or service (including heavy equipment, farm equipment, bulldozers, backhoes, forklifts, cranes, etc.). 
39.  Garden supply centers and greenhouses (including accessory outdoor storage). 
40.  Gift shops. 
41.  Group Homes. 
42.  Group or congregate personal care homes. 
43.  Hardware stores. 
44.  Health clubs or spas. 
45.  Hobby shops. 
46.  Hotels or Motels provided the minimum standards are met as specified in the C-2 Zoning District, Section 1308. 
47.  Ice cream shops. 
48.  Instruction of fine arts. 
49.  Interior decorating shops. 
50.  Jewelry stores. 
51.  Laundries and dry cleaning establishments including self-service laundries. 
52.  Lawnmower repair shops. 
53.  Liquor stores. 
54.  Locksmith shops. 
55.  Log splitting and storage lots, provided splitting and storage areas are screened with a six-(6)-foot high, 100 percent opaque fence. 
56.  Machine, welding, radiator or muffler repair shops. 
56a.  Micro-brewery and Micro-distillery (pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A 3-4-24.2 and 3-5-24.1). 
57.  Mini-warehouse storage facilities. 
58.  Mobile buildings (temporary, while any of the permitted or special uses are under construction, but not to exceed six (6) months). 
59.  Mobile home or mobile building leasing or sales lots (new or used). 
60.  Museums and libraries. 
61.  Music stores or studios. 
62.  Office/showroom facilities. 
63.  Parking lots and garages. 
64.  Pest control businesses. 
65.  Pet shops or grooming establishments. 
66.  Photocopying and reproduction services. 
67.  Photography shops and studios. 
68.  Plant nursery sales facilities. 
69.  Plumbing, electrical, pool and home building supply showrooms and sales centers. 
70.  Precious metals dealers. 
71.  Radio, recording or television studios and broadcasting stations. 
72.  Radio and television repair shops. 
73.  Record/video sales and rental stores. 
74.  Recreation facilities (indoor, such as bowling alleys, skating rinks, and movie theaters and commercial outdoor, such as miniature golf courses, driving ranges, water slides or drive-in theaters). 
75.  Recovered Materials Processing Facility, Principal provided the following standards are met: 
a.  Activities shall be limited to collection, sorting, compaction, and shipping. 
b.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), provide a three-(3)-foot high landscape earthen berm with a maximum slope of three (3) to one (1) and/or a minimum six-(6)-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
c.  No such facility shall be located adjacent to or across the street from any property used for or zoned for residential use. 
d.  Lighting for such facilities shall be placed in such a fashion as to be directed away from any nearby residential areas. 
e.  All materials collected shall not be visible once deposited in a bin or bunker. All sorting and collection bins shall either be enclosed and have chutes available to the public or be located inside a fully-enclosed building. 
f.  Any outside storage areas shall be screened by a minimum six-(6)-foot high, opaque fence. 
76.  Restaurants and lounges. 
77.  Shoe stores and shoe repair shops. 
78.  Small appliance repair shops. 
79.  Sporting goods stores. 
80.  Tailor shops. 
81.  Taxidermists. 
82.  Taxi cab or limousine services. 
83.  Toy shops. 
84.  Travel agencies. 
85.  Vehicle rental establishments. 
86.  Watch and clock repair shops. 
87.  Weaving apparel shops. 
88.  Yard Trimmings Composting Facility provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, branches, leaves, and grass clippings or similar putrescent vegetative materials, not including animal products, inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics, metals, or similar materials. 
b.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), and along the side and rear property lines, provide a three-(3)-foot high landscape earthen berm with a maximum slope of three (3) to one (1) and/or a minimum six-(6)-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscape strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
B.  Office Uses. 
1.  Accounting offices. 
2.  Architecture or engineering offices. 
3.  Doctor, dentist or chiropractor offices. 
4.  Insurance offices. 
5.  Law offices. 
6.  Medical clinics. 
7.  Other public or professional offices. 
8.  Real estate offices. 
C.  Public and Semi-Public Uses. 
1.  Facilities for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies. 
2.  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and meeting halls. 
3.  Government offices. 
4.  Post offices. 
5.  Public or semi-public buildings and land uses, parks, playgrounds or community centers. 
6.  Utility offices. 
D.  Residential. 
[1.]  Caretaker or watchman quarters as an accessory use. 
E.  Special Uses. Within the C-3 Highway Business District, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a Public Hearing: 
1.  Any retail or service establishment not specifically permitted herein, but which is similar to the listed uses, compatible with uses on adjoining property and which meets the intent and purpose of the district. 
2.  Crematories, as an accessory to a funeral home. 
3.  Residential or community shelters, subject to the provisions of Rules for Shelters in City of Peachtree Corners. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 3, 5-22-2018) 
Sec. 1309. - O-I Office-Institutional District. 
This zoning district is established to provide a location for offices, institutions and limited related retail business and service activities in buildings of high character in attractive surroundings. 
1.  Permitted Uses. A building or land may be used for the following purposes: 
a.  Accessory parking garages and parking lots. 
b.  Accessory uses such as retail business and service establishments. In addition to the limitations on "accessory use" imposed under "Article III, Definitions," such permitted accessory uses specifically exclude retail business and service establishments that could be construed as principal uses and include only those uses that are primarily intended for and used by patrons or occupants of the principal use to which said establishment is accessory. 
c.  Cultural facilities. 
d.  Financial services/institutions without drive-in or drive-through facilities. 
e.  Professional and business offices. 
f.  Public offices. 
g.  Semi-public institutions such as facilities for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies and clubs. 
2.  Limit on Distributive Functions . Distributive functions such as loading, unloading, storage, packaging and unpackaging shall be limited to ten (10) percent of the total building area and five (5) percent of the total lot area. 
Within the O-I Office-Institutional District, the following uses may be permitted provided that the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a public hearing: 
1.  Animal hospitals provided they are located not less than 300 feet from any residential zoning district or use as measured from property line to property line. 
2.  Day care facilities. 
3.  Financial services/institutions with drive-in or drive-through facilities. 
4.  Group Homes. 
5.  Group or congregate personal care homes. Personal care homes shall be licensed by the State of Georgia. 
6.  Hotels and Motels provided the minimum standards are met as specified in the C-2 Zoning District, Section 1308. 
7.  Residential or community shelters. These shelters must meet the provisions of Rules for Shelters in City of Peachtree Corners. 
8.  Restaurants, provided the following minimum standards are met: 
a.  The proposed site shall be located within a recorded concept plan or subdivision plat for a business or office park which: 
1.  Has an overall area of not less than 50 acres. Office/business park. 
2.  Has existing principal use structures already developed within the office/business park. 
3.  Has controls in place through protective covenants which will ensure building appearance and landscaping compatible with the remainder of the business or office park and which will ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. 
b.  No more than 10 percent of the acreage within the recorded concept plan or subdivision plat for the business or office park may be occupied by uses requiring a Special Use Permit. 
c.  The proposed restaurant: 
1.  Shall have a minimum of 2,000 square feet of seating area excluding kitchen facilities. 
2.  Shall have sit-down waiter or waitress service. 
3.  Shall not have drive-thru or pick-up windows. 
4  Shall not be adjacent to or across a public street from residentially zoned property. 
d.  Restaurant appearance shall blend with campus-type office/warehouse development. Application must include landscape plan, building elevations, and signage plans. 
9.  Retirement communities. 
10.  Veterinary clinics. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1309A. - OBP Office-Business Park District. 
This district is established to provide a location or offices, institutions, limited related business and service activities and limited industrial operations and processes in buildings of high character in attractive surroundings. 
Within the OBP Office-Business Park Zoning District, a building or land may be used for the following purposes: 
1.  Professional and Business Offices. 
2.  Public Offices. 
3.  Cultural Facilities. 
4.  Clinics, Cafeterias and Employee credit unions for Employees Only. 
5.  Education and Training Facilities. 
6.  Electronic Equipment Manufacturing and Assembly Plants that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards and that do not require any outdoor storage. 
7.  Printing, Publishing and Reproduction Services establishments that do not require any outdoor storage. 
8.  Research, Testing and Laboratory Facilities including the Production of Prototype Products provided they are not objectionable by reason of emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards and that do not require any outdoor storage. 
9.  Wholesaling and Warehousing with Offices, provided that they do not require any outdoor storage, and provided that at least 40 percent of the use be office space. 
10.  Similar Industries and Uses that meet the standards of this 2012 Zoning Resolution. 
11.  Accessory Uses Such as Retail Business and Service Establishments. In addition to the limitations on "accessory use" imposed under "Article III, Definitions," such permitted accessory uses specifically exclude retail business and service establishments that could be construed as principal uses and include only those uses that are primarily intended for and used by patrons or occupants of the principal use to which said establishment is accessory. 
12.  Accessory Parking Garages and Parking Lots. Within the OBP Office-Business Park District, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and the Planning Commission and after a public hearing: 
1.  Day Care Facilities. 
2.  Wholesaling and Warehousing with less than 40 percent of the floor area in offices, provided that no outdoor storage is required. 
3.  Hotels and Motels provided the minimum standards are met as specified in the C-2 Zoning District, Section 1308. 
4.  Financial Services/Institutions. 
5.  Restaurants, provided the following minimum standards are met: 
a.  The proposed site shall be located within a recorded concept plan or subdivision plat for a business or office park which: 
(1)  Has an overall area of not less than 50 acres. 
(2)  Has existing principal use structures already developed within the office/business park. 
(3)  Has controls in place through protective covenants which will ensure building appearance and landscaping compatible with the remainder of the business or office park and which will ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. 
b.  No more than 10 percent of the acreage within the recorded concept plan or subdivision plat for the business or office park may be occupied by uses requiring a Special Use Permit. 
c.  The proposed restaurant: 
(1)  Shall have a minimum of 2,000 square feet of seating area excluding kitchen facilities. 
(2)  Shall have sit-down waiter or waitress service. 
(3)  Shall not have drive-thru or pick-up windows. 
(4)  Shall not be adjacent to or across a public street from residentially zoned property. 
d.  Restaurant appearance shall blend with campus-type office/warehouse development. Application must include landscape plan, building elevations, and signage plans. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1309A.1. - All OBP Amendments to be Conditional Zoning Amendments. 
All OBP Office-Business Park District Amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be conditional amendments. In addition to any other conditions that may be imposed by the City Council pursuant to the provision for conditional zoning in this 2012 Zoning Resolution, a concept plan showing the approximate location of all buildings, walls, fences, property lines, landscaping, parking areas, land uses and any other features deemed appropriate by the City Council as a result of the above Concept Plan Review and Public Hearing shall be included as part of the amendment, and the use of the property for its zoned purposes shall be conditioned to said concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1309A.2. - Concept Plan Review. 
The purpose of the site plan review is to encourage logic, imagination, innovation, and variety in the design process and ensure the soundness of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area. The Director of Planning and Development shall review plans for compliance with the zoning regulations and for compliance with Concept Plan Review criteria. The recommendations of both the Director of Planning and Development and the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council. 
Concept Plan. 
1.  The concept plan shall be prepared by design professionals such as planners, engineers, architects or landscape architects and shall be drawn in accordance with the following basic criteria: 
a.  Scale: Generally, one (1) inch equals 100 feet; 
b.  Sheet Size: Generally 24 inches by 36 inches with appropriate match lines provided if more than one (1) sheet is necessary; 
c.  Vicinity Map: Drawn at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals 2,000 feet and showing adjoining roads, subdivisions and other landmarks; 
d.  Existing Topography: Shown with a maximum contour interval of 20 feet; 
e.  Boundary Survey: Shown and described by metes and bounds; 
f.  Adjacent Properties: Names of adjacent property owners to be indicated on plan; 
g.  Title Block: Indicating the name of the development, the owner, the developer, and the person or firm preparing the plan. 
2.  The Concept Plan shall include the following information: 
a.  A proposed land use plan for the site and including the acreage to be devoted to each land use category; 
b.  The proposed location of streets, bikeways, pedestrian ways, parking area, drainage and stormwater detention facilities, utilities, public facilities, parks, recreation areas, tree areas to be retained or added and other open spaces, and including notations as to existing or proposed dimensions, capacities and/or volumes; 
c.  Representative architectural sketches or renderings of typical proposed structures, signs, landscaping, screening and/or fencing; 
d.  Statistical or technical data as necessary to accurately describe the proposed development including, but not limited to, the following: 
i)  Total land area; 
ii)  Amount of land to be used for public or semi-public uses; 
iii)  Amount of land to be used for recreational or open space purposes; 
iv)  Amount of land to be occupied by streets and parking areas; 
v)  Amount of any submerged land within the project boundary; 
vi)  The total ground coverage and floor area of all buildings; 
vii)  A breakdown of the number and kinds of proposed buildings, including square footage, and the number and range of lot sizes and proposed setback and yard dimensions for typical lots and/or building types. 
e.  As an attachment, a report setting forth the proposed development schedule, indicating the sequence of development of the various sections thereof, and the approximate time period required for completion of each phase; 
f.  As an attachment, an outline of the proposed methods for controlling and maintaining any common open space or community facilities; 
g.  Such other submissions/plans as may be required to evaluate the project. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1310. - M-1 Light Industry District. 
Purpose. The M-1 Light Industry District is comprised of lands that are located on or have ready access to a Major Street or State Highway and are well adapted to industrial development but whose proximity to residential or commercial districts makes it desirable to limit the intensity of industrial operations and processes. This district limits industrial, manufacturing and warehousing uses to those which are wholly conducted indoors, with the exception of outdoor storage which is screened and situated in a side or rear yard. 
Permitted Uses. Only the following uses shall be permitted within the M-1 Light Industry District and no structure shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged for any use other than as permitted herein with the exception of a) uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of this amendment, b) special uses as permitted herein, c) accessory uses as defined in Article III, Definitions, d) other uses which are clearly similar to and consistent with the purpose of this district, or e) uses (listed at the end of this section) for property located within the Central Business District (see CBD boundary map). 
Uses within the Central Business District (see CBD boundary map). 
a)  The following uses shall be prohibited on M-1 zoned property in the Central Business District: 
Automobile Body Repair Shop. 
Automobile Repair Shop. 
Baking Plant. 
Cold Storage Plant. 
Funeral Homes and Crematories. 
Ice Manufacturing/Packing Plant. 
Laundry / Dry Cleaning Plant (does not apply to retail pick-up facility). 
Maintenance Shop (automobile fleet vehicles). 
Mini-Warehouse or Self-Storage facility. 
Outdoor Storage. 
Plastics Extrusion Plant. 
Recovered Materials Processing Facility. 
Sexually Oriented Businesses. 
Soft Drink Bottling/ Distribution Plant. 
Truck Rental or Leasing. 
Truck Fleet Maintenance Shop. 
b)  Businesses with an active business license that operate a use listed in a) shall be considered a legal, non-conforming use and may continue to operate for as long as the business license stays active and the business is not discontinued for six months or longer. 
c)  Uses listed in a) that were authorized by zoning hearing, building permit, land disturbance permit or other similar approval, shall be void if the use did not become operational as evidenced by the issuance of a business license by 2/16/16. 
d)  In addition to all otherwise permitted M-1 uses, the following additional use shall also be permitted on M-1 zoned property in the Central Business District: 
Restaurants, without drive-throughs, when integrated into a building housing other permitted uses and when such restaurant comprises no more than 25% of the overall floor area of the building. 
Accessory Uses Such as Retail Business and Service Establishments . In addition to the limitations on "accessory use" imposed under "Article III, Definitions," such permitted accessory uses specifically exclude retail business, office, and service establishments that could be construed as principal uses except as provided herein, and include only those uses that are primarily intended for and used by patrons or occupants of the principal use to which said establishment is accessory. 
Animal Hospital or Veterinary Clinic. 
Appliance Repair Shop. 
Automatic Teller Machine. 
Automobile Rental. 
Baking Plant. 
Bank/Financial Services Institution. 
Building Material Sales (wholesale). 
Cabinet Shop. 
Cafeteria (employee/accessory only). 
Catering Service (no retail sales). 
Clothing and Apparel Manufacturing. 
Cold Storage Plant. 
Contractor's Office, with accessory vehicle maintenance. (Subject to screening requirements for Outdoor Storage.) 
Convention Facility. 
Depot/Passenger Terminal (bus, rail). 
Distribution Facility. 
Food Processing/Packaging/Canning Plant (other than poultry/meat processing). 
Fraternal Club or Lodge. 
Funeral Home. 
Hospital or Medical Clinic. 
Hotel or Motel provided the minimum standards are met as specified in the C-2 Zoning District, Section 1308. 
HVAC Equipment Dealer/Contractor. 
Ice Manufacturing/Packing Plant. 
Laboratory. 
Laundry/Dry Cleaning Plant. 
Lawn Treatment Service. 
Machine Shop (not including on-site automotive/truck repair). 
Maintenance Shop (automobile fleet vehicles). 
Manufacturing or Assembly Plant, Light (electronic equipment, furniture, small appliances, consumer products, etc.). 
Medical/Dental Laboratory. 
Micro-brewery and Micro-distillery (pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A 3-4-24.2 and 3-5-24.1). 
Mini-Warehouse or Self-Service Storage Facility. 
Movie Studio. 
Museum. 
Office Park. 
Offices, professional/business. 
Outdoor Storage, other than Junk/Salvage Yards, meeting the following requirements: 
a.  It shall not be located within a required front yard. 
b.  It shall be screened by a solid wood fence, masonry wall or slatted chain-link fence at least eight (8) feet high. 
c.  Materials stored outdoors shall not be placed or stacked at a height exceeding that of the screening fence. 
Parking Garage. 
Pest Control/Extermination Business. 
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Plant. 
Photo Processing Plant. 
Plant Nursery (wholesale). 
Plastics Extrusion Plant. 
Plumbing Equipment Dealer/Contractor. 
Printing/Bookbinding/Publishing Plant. 
Radio/Television Station. 
Recording/Rehearsal Studio. 
Recovered Materials Processing Facility, Wood Chipping and Shredding, Yard Trimmings Composting Facility, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Recovered materials processing activities shall be limited to collection, sorting, compaction, and shipping. Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, branches, leaves, and grass clippings or similar putrescent vegetative materials, not including animal products, inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics, metals, or similar materials. 
b.  During the preceding 90 days of operation, the amount of material that is recycled, sold, used, or reused shall equal at least sixty percent (60%) by weight or volume of the material received during that 90 day period and sixty percent (60%) by weight or volume of all material previously received and not recycled, sold, used, or reused and carried forward into that 90 day period. 
c.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), and along the side and rear property lines, provide a three-(3)-foot high landscaped earthen berm with a maximum slope of three (3) to one (1) and/or a minimum eight (8) foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip or buffer. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
d.  No such facility shall be located adjacent to or across the street from any property used for or zoned for residential use. 
e.  Lighting for such facilities shall be placed in such a fashion as to be directed away from any nearby residential areas. 
f.  Materials collected shall not be visible once deposited in a bin. All sorting and collection bins shall either be enclosed and have chutes available to the public or be located inside a fully-enclosed building. 
g.  Any outside storage areas shall be screened by a minimum eight (8) foot high, solid wood fence, masonry wall or slatted chain-link fence. Materials stored outdoors shall not be placed or stacked at a height exceeding that of the screening fence. 
Recreation Facility/Training Center, Indoor (gymnastics schools, baseball academies, etc.). 
Research and Testing Facility. 
Sexually Oriented Businesses, subject to the terms of the Peachtree Corners Sexually Oriented Business Ordinance (Ord. No. O2012-07-57). 
Soft Drink Bottling/Distribution Plant. 
Textile/Carpeting Factory. 
Trade/Vocational School. 
Upholstery Shop. 
Wholesaling and Warehousing (accessory retail sales are permitted, not to exceed 15 percent of gross floor area). 
Public and Semi-Public Uses. 
Electrical, Telephone or other Public or Semi-public Utility Station. 
Residential Uses. 
Caretaker or Watchman Quarters as an accessory use. 
Special Uses. Within the M-1 Light Industry District, the following uses may be permitted as a Special Use, subject to the approval of the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a public hearing, if the conditions, including a site plan, and such other appropriate stipulated conditions that the City Council may require are met: 
Aircraft Hanger/Maintenance. 
Aircraft Landing Field. 
Automobile body repair shops. 
Automobile service/repair shops and tire stores (including lubrication and tune-up centers) 
Billboards or Oversized Signs, as provided in the Sign Ordinance of City of Peachtree Corners. 
Facilities for the conduct of religious services and ceremonies. 
Crematories, as an accessory to a funeral home. 
Day Care Facility. 
Group Homes. 
Health Club or Fitness Center. 
Nursing Home, Personal Care Home or Assisted Living Facility. 
Private School. 
Residential or Community Shelter, subject to the provisions of Rules for Shelters in [the] City of Peachtree Corners. 
Restaurant, provided the following minimum standards are met: 
a.  The proposed site shall be located within a recorded concept plan or subdivision plat for a business or office park which: 
(1)  Has an overall area of not less than 50 acres. 
(2)  Has existing principal use structures already developed within the office/business park. 
(3)  Has controls in place through protective covenants which will ensure building appearance and landscaping compatible with the remainder of the business or office park and which will ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. 
b.  No more than 10 percent of the acreage within the recorded concept plan or subdivision plat for the business or office park may be occupied by uses requiring a Special Use Permit. 
c.  The proposed restaurant: 
(1)  Shall have a minimum of 2,000 square feet of seating area excluding kitchen facilities. 
(2)  Shall have sit-down waiter or waitress service. 
(3)  Shall not have drive-thru or pick-up windows. 
(4)  Shall not be adjacent to or across a public street from residentially zoned property. 
d.  Restaurant appearance shall blend with campus-type office/warehouse development. Application must include landscape plan, building elevations, and signage plans. 
Self-Service Ice Manufacturing/Vending Machines (metal buildings shall be prohibited). 
Stadium/Concert Hall/Amphitheater. 
Taxi/Limousine Service. 
Truck Rental or Leasing 
Truck Fleet Maintenance Shop, principal use. 
Wholesale Membership Club. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-04-122, § 3, 5-22-2018; Ord. No. 2018-08-131, § 1, 9-25-2018) 
Sec. 1311. - M-2 Heavy Industry District. 
Purpose. The M-2 Heavy Industry District provides a location for industrial operations and processes conducted both indoors and outdoors, and which due to their intensity of use, should be located on or have ready access to a major thoroughfare or State Highway. 
Permitted Uses. Only the following uses shall be permitted within the M-2 Heavy Industry District and no structure shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged for any use other than a use permitted herein with the exception of a) uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of this amendment; b) special uses as permitted herein; c) accessory uses as defined in Article III, Definitions; or d) other uses which are clearly similar to and consistent with the purpose of this district. 
1.  Accessory Uses Such as Retail Business and Service Establishments . In addition to the limitations on "accessory use" imposed under "Article III, Definitions," such permitted accessory uses specifically exclude retail business, office, and service establishments that could be construed as principal uses except as provided herein, and include only those uses that are primarily intended for and used by patrons or occupants of the principal use to which said establishment is accessory. 
Aircraft Factory. 
Aircraft Hanger/Maintenance. 
Aircraft Landing Field. 
Alcoholic Beverage Plant/Distillery. 
Animal Hospital or Veterinary Clinic. 
Appliance Repair Shop. 
Automatic Teller Machine. 
Automobile or Truck Storage Lot, excluding junk or wrecked vehicles (subject to screening requirements for outdoor storage). 
Automobile Rental. 
Baking Plant. 
Bank/Financial Services Institution. 
Billboards or Oversized Signs, as provided in the Sign Ordinance of Gwinnett County. 
Building Material Sales (wholesale). 
Cabinet Shop. 
Cafeteria (employee/accessory only). 
Catering Service (no retail sales). 
Cement, Concrete, Masonry Plant. 
Clothing and Apparel Manufacturing. 
Cold Storage Plant. 
Contractor's Office, with accessory vehicle maintenance. (Subject to screening requirements for Outdoor Storage.) 
Convention Facility. 
Crematory. 
Depot/Passenger Terminal (bus, rail). 
Distribution Facility. 
Dye Casting Works. 
Food Processing/Packaging/Canning Plant (other than poultry/meat processing). 
Fraternal Club or Lodge. 
Funeral Home and/or Crematory. 
Heavy Equipment and Farm Equipment Rental or Sales and Service. 
Hospital or Medical Clinic. 
Hotel or Motel provided the minimum standards are met as specified in the C-2 Zoning District, Section 1308. 
HVAC Equipment Dealer/Contractor. 
Ice Manufacturing/Packing Plant. 
Laboratory. 
Laundry/Dry Cleaning Plant. 
Lawn Treatment Service. 
Liquid Wastes Treatment/Recycling (paint, oil, grease, etc.). 
Machine Shop (not including on-site automotive repair). 
Maintenance Shop (automobile or truck fleet vehicles). 
Manufacturing or Assembly Plant, General (including outdoor activities subject to screening requirements). 
Medical/Dental Laboratory. 
Mini-Warehouses or Self-Service Storage Facility. 
Movie Studio. 
Museum. 
Office Park. 
Offices, professional/business. 
Outdoor Storage, other than Junk/Salvage Yards, meeting the following requirements: 
a.  It shall not be located within a required front yard. 
b.  It shall be screened by a solid wood fence, masonry wall or slatted chain-link fence at least eight (8) feet high. 
c.  Materials stored outdoors shall not be placed or stacked at a height exceeding that of the screening fence. 
Parking Garage. 
Pest Control/Extermination Business. 
Pharmaceutical manufacturing plant. 
Photo Processing Plant. 
Plant Nursery (wholesale). 
Plastics Extrusion Plant. 
Plumbing Equipment Dealer/Contractor. 
Printing/Bookbinding/Publishing Plant. 
Radio/Television Station. 
Railroad Repair/Storage Yard. 
Recording/Rehearsal Studio. 
Recovered Materials Processing Facility, Wood Chipping and Shredding, Yard Trimmings Composting Facility, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Recovered materials processing activities shall be limited to collection, sorting, compaction, and shipping. Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, branches, leaves, and grass clippings or similar putrescent vegetative materials, not including animal products, inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics, metals, or similar materials. 
b.  During the preceding 90 days of operation, the amount of material that is recycled, sold, used, or reused shall equal at least sixty percent (60%) by weight or volume of the material received during that 90 day period and sixty percent (60%) by weight or volume of all material previously received and not recycled, sold, used, or reused and carried forward into that 90 day period. 
c.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), and along the side and rear property lines, provide a three-(3)-foot high landscaped earthen berm with a maximum slope of three (3) to one (1) and/or a minimum eight (8) foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip or buffer. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
d.  No such facility shall be located adjacent to or across the street from any property used for or zoned for residential use. 
e.  Lighting for such facilities shall be placed in such a fashion as to be directed away from any nearby residential areas. 
f.  Materials collected shall not be visible once deposited in a bin. All sorting and collection bins shall either be enclosed and have chutes available to the public or be located inside a fully-enclosed building. 
g.  Any outside storage areas shall be screened by a minimum eight (8) foot high, solid wood fence, masonry wall or slatted chain-link fence. Materials stored outdoors shall not be placed or stacked at a height exceeding that of the screening fence. 
Recreation Facility/Training Center, Indoor (gymnastics schools, baseball academies, etc.). 
Research and Testing Facility. 
Sexually Oriented Businesses, subject to the terms of the Peachtree Corners Sexually Oriented Business Ordinance (Ord. No. 2012-07-57). 
Soft Drink Bottling/Distribution Plant. 
Stadium/Concert Hall/Amphitheater. 
Taxi/Limousine Service. 
Textile/Carpeting Factory. 
Trade/Vocational School. 
Truck Rental or Leasing. 
Truck Fleet Maintenance Shop, principal use. 
Truck Terminal. 
Upholstery Shop. 
Welding Shop. 
Wholesaling and Warehousing (accessory retail sales are permitted, not to exceed 15 percent of gross floor area). 
Wholesale Membership Club. 
[2.]  Public and Semi-Public Uses . 
Electrical, Telephone or other Public or Semi-public Utility Station. 
[3.]  Residential Uses . 
Caretaker or Watchman Quarters as an accessory use. 
[4.]  Special Uses . Within the M-2 Heavy Industry District the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a Public Hearing: 
Asphalt Plant. 
Bulk Storage Tanks including natural gas, chemical and petroleum and excluding accessory fuel dispensing/storage tanks or stations. No above ground storage facilities may be located closer than 500 feet to a Residential District. All storage is to be subject to approval of the Gwinnett County Fire and Emergency Services Department. 
Chemical Plant. 
Composting Facility, Municipal Solid Waste. 
Day Care Facility. 
Explosives Plant/Storage. 
Fat and Bone Rendering Plant. 
Feed Processing Facility. 
Fertilizer Plant. 
Group Homes. 
Health Club or Fitness Center. 
Metal Smelting/Forging Works. 
Nursing Home, Personal Care Home or Assisted Living Facility. 
Paper/Pulp Mill. 
Petroleum Refinery/Processing Plant. 
Poultry/Meat Processing Plant. 
Private School. 
Quarry for the removal of minerals and other natural materials, together with the necessary accessory asphalt plant, buildings, machinery, and appurtenances thereto, provided that: 
a.  Quarry areas being excavated shall be entirely enclosed within a fence located at least ten (10) feet back from the edge of any excavation and of such construction and height as to be demonstrably able to exclude children and animals from the quarry area. 
b.  The operators and owners of the quarry present to the City of Peachtree Corners Planning Commission and to the City of Peachtree Corners City Council an acceptable comprehensive plan for the re-use of the property at the cessation of the quarry operation. 
c.  In case of an existing quarry, any extension of the quarrying operations beyond the areas being quarried or approved for quarrying at the effective date of this amendment to the Resolution, shall be permitted and shall not be considered a new operation nor require the approval of the City Council as a Special Use Permit, provided that said extension does not extend to within three hundred (300) feet of a residential district boundary line. 
Residential or Community Shelter, subject to the provisions of Rules for Shelters in [the] City of Peachtree Corners. 
Restaurant, provided the following minimum standards are met: 
a.  The proposed site shall be located within a recorded concept plan or subdivision plat for a business or office park which: 
(1)  Has an overall area of not less than 50 acres. 
(2)  Has existing principal use structures already developed within the office/business park. 
(3)  Has controls in place through protective covenants which will ensure building appearance and landscaping compatible with the remainder of the business or office park and which will ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. 
b.  No more than 10 percent of the acreage within the recorded concept plan or subdivision plat for the business or office park may be occupied by uses requiring a Special Use Permit. 
c.  The proposed restaurant: 
(1)  Shall have a minimum of 2,000 square feet of seating area excluding kitchen facilities. 
(2)  Shall have sit-down waiter or waitress service. 
(3)  Shall not have drive-thru or pick-up windows. 
(4)  Shall not be adjacent to or across a public street from residentially zoned property. 
d.  Restaurant appearance shall blend with campus-type office/warehouse development. Application must include landscape plan, building elevations, and signage plans. 
Rubber/Tire/Retreading Plant. 
Salvage Operation, Junk Yard, Impound Lot (subject to screening requirements for outdoor storage). 
Scrap Tire Processing Plant. 
Self-Service Ice Manufacturing/Vending Machines (metal buildings shall be prohibited). 
Slaughter House. 
Solid Waste Transfer Station. 
Sugar Refinery. 
Tannery/Leather Processing. 
Towing/Wrecker Service. 
Waste Incineration Facility. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1312. - Floodplain General Provisions. 
These regulations pertain only to the use of lands contained within a floodplain as defined by the City of Peachtree Corners Floodplain Management Ordinance. For the purposes of this Section, all terms shall be as defined in Ch. 26, Art. II of the Floodplain Management Ordinance, and as may be defined in the Development Regulations of City of Peachtree Corners, whichever definition is more restrictive. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1312.1. - Use Provisions. 
The intent of the regulations within this Section is to limit the use of land contained within a floodplain. Notwithstanding the uses permitted for any applicable zoning district which apply to the property, no building or structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied other than as herein provided, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered except in conformity with the requirements of this regulation when such lands fall within, or are affected by, a floodplain. 
1.  Uses permitted in the floodplain. Within a floodplain, the following uses may be permitted subject to the requirements of the Floodplain Management Ordinance and the requirements of the Development Regulations: 
a.  Agriculture, including forestry and livestock raising, requiring no structure within the flood way except structures for temporary shelter or accessory buildings not exceeding 550 square feet and including agriculture and forestry access roads. 
b.  Dams, provided they are designed and constructed in accordance with specifications of the State of Georgia Safe Dam Act (latest revision) and the City of Peachtree Corners Development Regulations. 
c.  Public parks and recreation areas and facilities requiring no structures within the floodplain, except structures for temporary shelter, including, but not limited to, boat ramps, docks, parking areas, and recreation facilities; private and commercial recreation developments and campgrounds. 
d.  Bridges, culverts and the roadway fill related to these structures. 
e.  Parking areas. All required parking area shall be located at an elevation higher than the calculated five-(5)-year storm, and shall not be located within any floodway. 
f.  Outdoor storage; and/or accessory buildings not exceeding 550 square feet. 
g.  Fences having sufficient open area to permit the free flow of water and debris. 
h.  Public utility poles, towers, pipelines, sewer, and other similar public and semi-public utilities and facilities. 
i.  Signs and sign structures, provided they permit the free flow of water and debris. 
j.  Swimming pools and tennis courts, provided that fences around such structures have sufficient open area to permit the free flow of water and debris. 
2.  Lot Area Restrictions. All concept plans, site plans, preliminary plats, and final subdivision plats with all or portions of the land area contained within the floodplain, or contiguous to the floodplain, shall comply with the following requirements, as applicable: 
a.  In all residential zoning districts, up to 50 percent of the area located at or below the base flood elevation may be used in computations for meeting the density requirements in accordance with the provisions of this Resolution. 
b.  In the RA-200, R-140, R-100 and R-75 zoning districts, no lot shall contain less than 8,000 square feet of land area above the base flood elevation. In the R-60 zoning district, no lot shall contain less than 7,000 square feet of land area above the base flood elevation. Subdivisions zoned R-ZT shall comply with all the requirements of this Resolution; however, each lot within this zoning classification shall have a minimum of 4,000 square feet above the base flood elevation. 
c.  No subdivision lot shall be approved which, has less than 50 percent of the minimum lot area required by the applicable zoning district located above the base flood elevation. 
d.  Each plat or site plan submitted for rezoning, Special Use Permit or Moved-In-House Permit shall contain a readily identifiable line indicating the limits of the Base Flood Elevation, if any portion of the property lies within the floodplain. This line shall be clearly labeled and the Base Flood Elevation above Mean Sea Level stated. The plat or site plan shall indicate where the Base Flood Elevation has been established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or where the Base Flood Elevation has been calculated by a registered professional engineer using the best available information. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1313. - Reserved for future use. 
[Sec. 1314. - Reserved for future use.] 
_____
Sec. 1315. - Activity Center/Corridor Overlay District Requirements. 
Sec. 1315.1.1. Findings and Purposes. 
The Activity Center/Corridor Overlay District is intended to enhance the viability and livability of the area surrounding major activity centers in City of Peachtree Corners as designated by the City Council. The purpose of the Overlay District is to achieve and maintain a unified and pleasing aesthetic/visual quality in landscaping, architecture and signage; and to promote alternative modes of transportation within the district through the provision of pedestrian and local public transit. 
Sec. 1315.1.2. Applicability. 
The requirements of the Overlay District shall apply to all non-residential and attached residential properties within the geographic areas shown on the Peachtree Corners Overlay District Map. 
Whenever the requirements of the Overlay District impose a more or less restrictive standard than the provisions of any other statute or covenant, the requirements of the Overlay District shall govern. 
Sec. 1315.2. Design Requirements. 
1.  Transportation/Infrastructure . 
1.A.  Provide inter-parcel vehicle access points between all contiguous commercial, office, industrial or attached residential tracts. This requirement may be waived by the Director of Planning and Development only if it is demonstrated that an inter-parcel connection is not feasible due to traffic safety or topographic concerns. 
1.B.  All new utility lines shall be located underground. 
1.C.  Sidewalks shall be required adjacent to all public rights-of-way and into and throughout attached residential developments. The location of sidewalks shall be reviewed and approved by the Gwinnett County or Georgia Department of Transportation. It is encouraged that a minimum three-(3)-foot wide sidewalk connection be provided from public rights-of-way to the entrance(s) of buildings. 
1.D.  Sidewalks shall be constructed with an additional 2-foot by 8-foot pad approximately every 300 linear feet to accommodate future pedestrian amenities such as benches, planters, and trash containers. All such required amenities shall be decorative, commercial-quality fixtures. Sidewalk design and placement of any of these amenities shall be reviewed and approved by the Gwinnett County or Georgia Department of Transportation. 
1.E.  Provide streetlights along all public rights-of-way utilizing decorative light poles/fixtures. Light source shall be high-pressure sodium. Streets lights shall be staggered, 150 feet on-center, along both sides of the roadway. All street lighting shall be subject to review and approval of the Gwinnett County Department of Transportation. Where applicable, streetlights shall be placed adjacent to required pedestrian amenity sidewalk pads. 
Peachtree Corners Overlay District shall utilize Cobrahead light fixture heads. Pole type design is Fluted Black and the maximum pole height is 40'. 
Light fixtures which are utilized shall be as follows: 

 
1.F.  Provide lighting throughout all parking areas utilizing decorative light poles/fixtures. Light source shall be metal halide, not exceeding an average of 4.5 foot-candles of light output throughout the parking area. Other than pedestrian light fixtures which will be less than 14 feet tall, light fixtures shall be hooded. All lighting will be metal halide. Lighting shall be directed to avoid intrusion on adjacent properties and away from adjacent thoroughfares. 
Light fixtures which are utilized shall be as follows: 

 
2.  Landscaping Requirements . 
2.A.  Provide, at a minimum, 20 Tree Density Units per acre for all non-residential development. Type and size of plantings shall be in compliance with City of Peachtree Corners Buffer, Landscape and Tree Ordinance. At least 50 percent of plantings shall consist of trees 3-inches in caliper (dbh) or greater. 
2.B.  Provide landscaped islands throughout all surface parking areas as required by the City of Peachtree Corners Buffer, Landscape and Tree Ordinance. 
2.C.  Provide a minimum ten-foot wide landscaped strip between all road rights-of-way and the back-of-curb of abutting off-street paved parking lots. Landscaped strips between road rights-of-way and the edge of abutting off-street grassed parking areas shall be five-feet in width. At a minimum, landscaped strips shall be planted in accordance with the City of Peachtree Corners Buffer, Landscape and Tree Ordinance. 
2.D.  Provide non-ornamental shade trees spaced 50-feet on-center or grouped at 120-feet on-center along the right of way on the following roads: 
[1.]  Peachtree Corners Overlay. 
a.  Peachtree Industrial Boulevard. 
b.  Peachtree Parkway. 
c.  Peachtree Corners Circle. 
d.  Holcomb Bridge Road. 
e.  Jimmy Carter Boulevard. 
All street trees shall be a minimum 4-inch caliper (dbh) at the time of planting. Street trees shall be planted six-(6)-feet from back-of-curb subject to review and approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation or Gwinnett County Department of Transportation. 
Street trees shall be of one (1) or a combination of the following species: 
1.  Willow Oak. 
2.  Overcup Oak. 
3.  Nuttal Oak. 
4.  Pin Oak. 
5.  Shumard Oak. 
6.  Lacebark. 
7.  Japanese Zelkova. 
2.E.  Dumpsters which may be seen from adjacent properties or public parking lots shall be screened from view on all four (4) sides. Screening shall consist of three (3) solid walls of brick, stucco or split-face block construction, at least six (6) feet in height, with 100 percent solid metal or wooden gates. Dumpsters shall be placed in the rear yard and may be located 0 feet from the property line, if the adjoining property is zoned non-residential and 0 feet from all applicable buffers, if the adjoining property is zoned residential. 
2.F.  Natural vegetation shall remain on the property until issuance of a development permit. 
3.  Parking/Yard, Height & Setback . 
3.A.  For retail developments exceeding 125,000 square feet of gross floor area, at least ten percent of all required parking spaces shall be provided in parking areas of porous paving or grass paving systems, such as "Grasscrete" or "Grasspave," not to exceed 1,000 parking spaces or as approved by the Director of Planning and Development. 
3.B.  Up to 25 percent of the required parking spaces for any development may be reduced in total area, width or depth for designated small vehicle parking. Each small vehicle parking space shall not be less than eight (8) feet in width and 17 feet in depth. 
3.C.  Freestanding buildings or shopping center developments containing 7,500 gross square feet of space or less shall provide no more than 20 percent of parking areas in the front of building(s) and be limited to no more than one double row of parking. No more than 20 percent of off-street parking areas may be located to the sides of building(s), with the balance of parking located to the rear the building(s). 
3.D.  For developments exceeding 7,500 square feet, building placement is encouraged to be close to, and oriented towards, the public right-of-way with the majority of parking to the sides and rear, where possible. 
3.E.  Decorative, commercial-quality, bicycle racks, benches and trash receptacles shall be required for all retail and office developments. 
4.  Signage; Temporary Uses; Peddling . 
4.A.  Except as contained herein, sizes and amount of signage shall not exceed the requirements of the Sign Ordinance. 
4.B.  Oversized Signs or Billboards shall not be permitted. 
4.C.  Ground signs shall be limited to monument-type signs. Base and sign structure shall be constructed of materials such as brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the building. 
4.D.  Blinking, exposed neon, portable, inflatable and temporary signage shall be prohibited. 
4.E.  Peddlers shall be prohibited. 
4.F.  Flexible tube lighting or any form of strip lighting around commercial windows, store fronts, or commercial signage shall be prohibited. Usage of existing tube/strip lighting shall be discontinued (and such lighting shall be removed) by 12/31/16. 
5.  Architectural Design . 
5.A.  Architectural design of all non-residential buildings should comply with the following performance guidelines: 
(1)  Building facades shall be of architectural treatments of glass and/or brick, stone or stucco. Tilt-up or pre-cast concrete or alternate material may be used for industrial, multi-story office (3-stories or greater) or hotel development subject to review and approval of the Director of Planning and Development. 
(2)  Contrasting accent colors of any wall, awning or other feature (other than dark green or brick red) shall be limited to no more than 15 percent of the total area for any single facade. 
(3)  Metal sided or portable buildings shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Buildings shall incorporate live plant material growing immediately in front of or on the building. 
(5)  Buildings of less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be designed with pitched roofs, minimum pitch of 4 in 12. 
(6)  Roofing materials for pitched or mansard roofs shall be limited to the following: 
Metal standing seam of red, green or silver in color. 
Tile, slate or stone. 
Wood shake. 
Shingles with a slate, tile or metal appearance. 
(7)  All mechanical, HVAC and like systems shall be screened from street level view (within 300 feet) on all sides by an opaque wall or fence of brick, stucco, split-faced block or wood. 
(8)  Any accessories provided such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and/or bicycle racks shall complement the building design and style. 
5.B.  Architectural design of all commercial/retail buildings should comply with the following additional performance guidelines: 
(1)  To lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy, facades of multi-tenant buildings shall be varied in depth or parapet height. 
(2)  Within Planned Shopping Centers, distinct architectural entry identity for individual tenants' entrances shall be provided for suites exceeding 10,000 square feet of leasable area. 
(3)  Walls visible from roadways or parking areas shall incorporate changes in building material/color or varying edifice detail such as trellises, false windows or recessed panels reminiscent of window, door or colonnade openings, landscaping or storefront every 150 linear feet. 
(4)  Roof parapets shall be articulated to provide visual diversity. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at least every 100 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or features shall be one (1) foot, and may be provided in height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. 
(5)  Building design shall include minimum one (1) foot deep cornices, extending along the entire front of buildings and the sides of buildings at least (10) ten feet. 
(6)  Building design shall include a minimum one (1) foot high contrasting base, extending along the entire front of buildings and the sides of buildings at least ten (10) feet. 
5.C.  Architectural design of all attached residential buildings shall comply with the following performance guidelines: 
(1)  Architectural treatments of each building elevation shall be a minimum 50 percent brick, stone or stucco. The balance of each building elevation may be wood, wood shake or fiber cement-type siding. 
Building plans shall be subject to review and approval of the Director of Planning and Development, or his/her designee, prior to the issuance of a Building Permit. Designs which are inconsistent with these performance guidelines may be denied. Alternate designs which have been denied by the Director, may be submitted for review and approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
_____
Sec. 1316. - CSO Conservation Subdivision Overlay District. 
1.  Purposes . The purposes of this overlay district are as follows: 
a.  To encourage the development of residential communities, that are density neutral based upon the Comprehensive Plan, designed to preserve and protect environmental resources, scenic vistas, and natural and cultivated landscapes. 
b.  To enhance land, water, air and tree resources by minimizing the area of land disturbance, reducing impervious surface, optimizing stream buffers, preserving tree cover and encouraging retention and protection of Conservation Space. 
c.  To reduce infrastructure maintenance costs as a result of efficient community design. 
d.  To provide conservation space and pedestrian linkages and wildlife corridors among residential communities and to encourage recreation opportunities. 
e.  To preserve significant historical and archeological features. 
f.  To preserve and protect contiguous undeveloped areas within the development. 
2.  Applicability . This overlay district may be overlaid only upon the R-100 and R-75 districts utilizing the public sanitary sewer system. The overlay district shall require approval of a Special Use Permit at a public hearing as of the effective date of the adoption of this overlay district. Any conditions of zoning or special use approval of the underlying district shall also be observed (exception: lot area, width or quantity). For properties which are submitted for rezoning to R-100 or R-75, the applicant shall declare the intent to utilize this Overlay District at the time of application and the application shall be accompanied by an Existing Features Site Analysis Plan, and Environmental Site Assessment (Phase One) report, and a Concept Plan meeting the requirements of this section. The Overlay District shall not be used on property that has been timber harvested within 24 months prior to adoption of a zoning change or approval of a Concept Plan. 
3.  Permitted Uses . Those uses permitted in the underlying district are permitted. 
4.  Existing Features Site Analysis Plan . At time of development, or if a zoning action is proposed, and prior to preparing the Concept Plan, an Existing Features Site Analysis Plan, sealed by a registered engineer or landscape architect, and an Environmental Site Assessment (Phase One) report, shall be prepared and submitted by the applicant or developer. 
a.  The purposes of the Site Analysis Plan are to: 
(1)  Delineation areas that have been identified as worthy of permanent protection in Conservation Space because of their environmental values. This delineation shall include, but shall not be limited to, the information and steps listed in Paragraph 4. 
(2)  Set forth the particulars of the site, including boundary, topographic data (minimum 4-foot contour intervals), existing structures and utility easements. 
(3)  Together with the Environmental Site Assessment (Phase One) report, provide the starting point for design of the Conservation Subdivision with built areas being designed as separate from the areas delineated as worthy of permanent protection. 
b.  The Existing Features Site Analysis Plan shall include at least the following information: 
(1)  Perennial and intermittent streams, FEMA designed 100-Year Flood Hazard Zones and Wetlands. The source of this information shall also be indicated. 
(2)  Identification of tree lines, native woodlands, open fields or meadows, peaks or rock outcroppings, and prime agricultural land. 
(3)  Delineation of tree resource areas by type such as hardwoods, pines or mixed; and old or new growth. 
(4)  Delineation of steep slope areas (25 percent or greater). The designer shall endeavor to preserve slopes greater than 40 percent. 
(5)  Identification of historical, archeological or other significant features identified in the Environmental Site Assessment (Phase One) report. 
(6)  Identification of scenic vistas as listed in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(7)  Identification of Conservation Space, Open Space or common areas adjacent to the project. 
(8)  Identification of protected plant species as listed by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, to be certified by a registered landscape architect, forester, arborist, biologist, botanist or horticulturist. 
(9)  The plan also shall include certification that Timber Harvesting activity has not occurred on the property in the previous 24 months prior to the approval of a rezoning application or the approval of a Concept Plan. 
5.  Concept plan . At time of development, a concept plan shall be submitted by the developer for review and approval in accordance with the requirements and procedures of the development regulations. If a zoning action or special use permit is requested, the rezoning sit plan shall include the following information: 
a.  Delineation and specifications of Conservation Space including calculations and exclusions (see section 1316.6.c.); and any "Pocket Parks," "Neighborhood Greens," play areas, or trail system to be constructed. 
b.  A typical detail on the plan indicating dwelling size, lot width, building setback lines, off-street parking, street trees, sidewalks, and street pavement and right-of-way width. 
c.  Lot width average, area and percent of floodplain specifications in tabular form; and density calculations (gross and net). 
6.  Conservation Space Requirements . In order to qualify for this overlay district, Conservation Space shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Delineation . Priority shall be given in delineating Conservation Space areas as those areas of significance identified in the Existing Features Site Analysis Plan, around which the built areas are designed. 
B.  Undeveloped and Natural . Conservation Space shall remain undeveloped and natural except for the provision of non-motorized passive recreation opportunities such as running, walking, biking, and similar outdoor activities. Wetland and stream bank mitigation projects also are permitted. 
Primary Conservation Areas are required to be included in the Conservation Space. These areas shall be covered by a provision for permanent protection and shall include 100-Year floodplains, stream buffer zones, slopes greater than 40 percent, consisting of a contiguous area of at least 5,000 square feet, wetlands, endangered or threatened species or their habitat, archeological sites, cemeteries or burial grounds. 
Secondary Conservation Areas are features and areas recommended and desirable for Conservation Space designation and may be covered by the provisions for permanent protection. These include important historic sites, existing healthy, native forests of at least one contiguous acre, scenic viewsheds, peaks and rock outcroppings, prime agriculture lands consisting of at least 5 contiguous acres, and existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. Also considered Secondary Conversation Areas are "Pocket Parks," "Neighborhood Greens" and stormwater management facilities and practices and may be constructed and maintained in Conservation space. However, "Pocket Parks" and "Neighborhood Greens" shall not exceed 20 percent of the total required Conservation Space. 
C.  Exclusions . Excluded from meeting the minimum amount of Conservation Space are the following (also, see the definition of Primary Conservation Areas): 
(1)  Residential yards . 
(2)  Proposed Permanent Lakes that may be used for wet detention . No more than 50 percent of land area located within a proposed Permanent Lake may be credited. 
(3)  Recreation Area Improvements . Impervious surfaces in recreation areas shall not be credited. 
(4)  Easements . Land area within power, gas pipeline easements, sewer line easements or pump stations shall not be credited. 
(5)  Other . Land area devoted to public or private streets or any land that has been, or is to be, conveyed to a public agency via a purchase agreement for such uses as parks, schools, or other public facilities shall not be credited. 
D.  Ownership . Conservation space shall be owned in fee-simple by a mandatory property owner's association; or other entity approved in advance by the City Council during their normal course of business. The developer shall record the deed to the Conservation Space prior to, or concurrent with, the recording of the first final subdivision plat. An access easement following the alignment of future public streets is acceptable. However, "Pocket Parks" or "Neighborhood Greens" may be deeded concurrent with the unit or phase of the Final Subdivision Plat of which it is a part. 
E.  Property Owner's Association . The property owner's association bylaws or covenants, at a minimum, shall contain the following provisions: 
(1)  Governance of the association by the Georgia Property Owner's Association Act (O.C.G.A. Section 44-3-220 et seq.) or a successor to that Act that grants lien rights to the association for maintenance expenses and tax obligations. 
(2)  Responsibility for maintenance of the open space. 
(3)  Responsibility for insurance and taxes. 
(4)  Automatic compulsory membership of all lot purchasers and their successors; and compulsory assessments. 
(5)  Conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the developer to the lot owners. 
(6)  Guarantee that the association will not be dissolved without the advance approval of the City Council. 
F.  Maintenance . The property owner's association, or other entity approved in advance by the City Council, shall be responsible for the continuous maintenance of buffers, Conservation Space and recreation areas. 
G.  Conservation Surety . Conservation Space delineated on the Final Plat and required to be in a Primary Conservation Area shall be permanently protected by either one (1) or both of the following options: 
(1)  Option 1 . Conveyance to the Public and Subdivision Lot Owners. 
A deed conveying ownership of the Conservation Space to the mandatory property owner's association shall be recorded and delivered prior to, or concurrent with, the approval of the Final Plat for the first phase of the subdivision. Both the deed and the Final Plat shall contain, at a minimum, the following covenant: 
"The Conservation Space conveyed by deed and shown on the Final Plat shall remain permanently protected and shall not be disturbed, cleared or developed except in accordance with Section 1316.6.b. of the 2012 Zoning Resolution of City of Peachtree Corners and with Georgia Law O.C.G.A. 36-22-1 et seq., having the following Greenspace goals: protection of streams, floodplains and wetlands; steep slopes; woodlands, open fields and meadows; historical and archeological features; significant wildlife habitats; scenic vistas; passive recreation and connectivity with nearby open spaces. The following uses may be allowed: passive recreational amenities, such as pervious-surface paths and minimal parking spaces; picnic and restroom facilities (constructed facilities shall not exceed 15 percent of the Conservation Space). This covenant is intended to benefit said area to the public and the use of same to the subdivision lot owners and residents, and it shall run in perpetuity as provided by Georgia Law O.C.G.A. 44-5-60(c)." 
(2)  Option 2 . Conveyance to Other Qualified Organizations or Entities. 
Except for "pocket Parks" or "Neighborhood Greens," developed recreation areas or Secondary Conservation Areas not desired for permanent protection, Conservation Space shall be permanently protected by the (i) recording of a covenant or conveyance of an easement which runs in perpetuity under Georgia Law O.C.G.A. 44-5-60 in favor of any corporation, trust, or other organization holding land for the use of the public or certain governmental entities; or (ii) conveyance of a conservation easement running in perpetuity to a third party "qualified organization" recognized by Federal Treasury Regulation Section 1.170A-14(c)(1). Qualified organizations recognized by this Treasury Regulation include, but may not be limited to, governmental entities, certain publicly supported charities, local and national land trusts, or other conservation groups that are organized or operated primarily or substantially for one of the conversation purposes specified in the Internal Revenue Code. Governmental entities that qualify to be named in covenants under Georgia Law O.C.G.A. 44-5-60 or to receive conservation easements under the Treasury Regulation referred to above for purposes of this section shall include the Federal government, the State of Georgia, Gwinnett County, or authorities of the State of Georgia or Gwinnett County. If a covenant is recorded or an easement conveyed in favor of a governmental entity, formal acceptance by the governmental entity or qualified conservation organization shall be obtained prior to the recording of the covenant or conveyance of the easement. The developer shall record the necessary legal instrument to accomplish protection of the Conversation Space prior to, or concurrent with, the recording of the Final Plat. The legal instrument shall contain, at a minimum, the same language required to be placed on a deed as stated in Option 1 of this Section. 
Secondary Conservation Areas may also be covered by the same permanent protection options. 
7.  Density . The Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan establishes recommended residential density not to exceed 3 units per acre in many areas of the City. Consequently, subdivisions in the Overlay District shall not exceed a maximum net density in the underlying district, and shall provide at least the percent of Conservation Space as stated below: 
a.  R-100: 2.3 units per acre with 40 percent Conservation Space; or units per acre with 50 percent Conservation Space. 
b.  R-75: 3.0 units per acre with 40 percent Conservation Space. 
8.  Development Requirements . Subdivisions in this Overlay District shall meet the following requirements unless a Special Use Permit is submitted and approved by the City Council: 
A.  Minimum Subdivision Size: 10 contiguous acres. 
B.  Lot Area: No minimum. 
C.  Average Lot Width: The average width of all building lots shall be at least 60 feet. Exception: Any lot located less than 50 feet from adjacent property lines zoned RA-200, R-140, R-100 and R-75 (except modified and cluster subdivisions) shall meet the lot width (for the entire depth of the lot) and the rear setback of the underlying zoning district. 
D.  Minimum Road Frontage per Lot: 40 feet. Exception: Road frontage may be reduced to 20 feet for lots with frontage upon cul-de-sac or "eyebrow cul-de-sac" turnarounds. 
E.  Minimum Yard Areas (Setbacks): 
Front: 20 feet. Exception: The front yard setback may be reduced to 5 feet, if dwellings are provided side or rear entry garages. To qualify for the reduced setback on a corner lot, side entry garages must be located to the side adjacent to an abutting lot. 
Rear: 20 feet. 
Side: 5 feet. 
F.  Street Frontage Buffer: 50 feet in width (not part of any building lot). The street frontage buffer shall remain undisturbed and natural, except for entrance features, necessary street construction activities, right-of-way crossings and corner right-of-way miters or radii. If the required street frontage buffer is void of vegetation, it shall be replanted to provide an effective visual screen, which may include landscaped berms and decorative fences. The street frontage buffer may be counted towards Conservation Space calculations. 
G.  Maximum Height: 35 feet. 
H.  Minimum Floor Area: Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum heated finished living area, excluding a basement, attic, carport or garage, as follows: 
One Story: 1,600 square feet. 
Two Story: 1,800 square feet. 
I.  [Siding] Homes shall be constructed of brick, stacked stone, cedar shake, stucco, or fiber cement siding on four sides. Soffits may be constructed of vinyl. 
J.  Sodded Yards: All grassed areas on dwelling lots shall be sodded. 
K.  Garages: Dwellings shall have two-(2)-car garages. 
L.  Street Trees: Street trees, in accordance with the requirements of the Buffer, Landscape and Tree Ordinance, shall be provided. 
M.  Underground Utilities: Utilities shall be located underground. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1317. - Mixed-Use Overlay (MUO) District. 
1.  Purpose . The purpose of the Mixed-Use Overlay District is to promote new mixed-use developments, or the redevelopment of existing properties in a manner that integrates commercial and/or office with residential land uses, promotes pedestrian accessibility among uses, reduces automobile trips, provides a livable environment for project residents, and enhances the value and aesthetics of the surrounding community. MUOs utilize connective streetscapes to promote an environment conducive to human activity through the provision of landscaping, street/shade trees, street furniture and sidewalks to unify and interconnect varying uses. 
2.  Applicability . The Mixed-Use Overlay District may only be implemented within specific geographic areas or developed corridors within incorporated City of Peachtree Corners as designated by the City Council. 
The MUO District shall be restricted to the redevelopment of existing office, institutional, residential, commercial and/or industrial sites; or to undeveloped or partially developed properties as deemed desirable by the City Council. Mixed-use Overlay sites should be located on major thoroughfare's where infrastructure is available to support such a use. 
Existing conditions of zoning which apply to MUO properties shall remain in effect. Where such conditions conflict with any requirement of this Section, the more restrictive requirement shall take precedence. Notwithstanding the above, the City Council may modify or dissolve pre-existing conditions of zoning upon official designation of the Overlay District. 
3.  Concept Plan (CPL) Required . All MUO projects shall be governed by an approved Concept Plan. The Concept Plan shall be submitted, reviewed and approved in accordance with applicable Zoning Resolution and Development Regulation requirements. Upon approval of the Concept Plan, individual pods of the project may be undertaken through the Development Permit and Subdivision Platting process contained in the Development Regulations. MUO projects may be constructed as a single phase, or may be constructed in multiple phases, in accordance with the approved Concept Plan. Notwithstanding the forgoing, the City Council may require the Concept Plan to be submitted to the City Council for review and approval. Such requirement for the City Council review shall be established at the time the Overlay District is designated. 
4.  Density, Building Height, and Minimum Project Size . Residential density shall be based upon gross project acreage, and may be developed up to a maximum of 32 units per acre. Maximum building height shall be governed by the underlying zoning district. The City Council may reduce maximum project density and/or establish increased building heights on a case-by-case basis at the time an Overlay District is established. 
MUO projects shall contain a minimum of ten (10) contiguous acres of land area; except that expansion of an existing or approved MUO project may contain less land area. Residential uses may occupy no more than 70 percent of the gross site acreage (exclusive of required common area). 
5.  Permitted Uses and Structures . MUO projects shall incorporate residential uses with office and/or commercial uses and shared common area(s). Residential uses may include single-family detached, single-family attached, multifamily, and residential/business dwellings. 
The Mixed-Use Overlay District encourages the mixing of uses both horizontally and vertically. Within the Overlay district, the permitted uses of the R-100 (Single-Family Residence District); R-75 (Single-Family Residence District); R-60 (Single-Family Residence District); R-ZT (Single Family Residence Zero Lot Line/Townhouse District); RM-6, RM-8, RM-10, and RM-13 (Multifamily Residence Districts) are allowed as specified below. Uses subject to approval of a Special Use Permit in the underlying district shall continue to require approval of said permit. 
A.  Single-Family Detached Pods (Individual Lots). 
(1)  Single-Family Detached Dwellings, except Manufactured Homes. 
(2)  Zero Lot Line Single-Family Detached Dwellings. 
B.  Single-Family Attached Pods (Individual Lots). 
(1)  Townhouses. 
C.  Residential/Business Dwelling Pods. 
(1)  Residential/Business Dwellings. 
(2)  Business activities shall be limited to those allowed within the C-1 or O-I Zoning Districts provided: 
(a)  Only one (1) business may be operated from the residence. 
(b)  No more than 50 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for conducting the business. 
D.  Multifamily Residence Pods. 
(1)  Multifamily Dwellings, Lofts, Condominiums. 
E.  Commercial/Office/Residential Pods. 
(1)  All uses permitted in the O-I, Office-Institutional District. 
(2)  All uses permitted in the C-1, Neighborhood Business District. 
(3)  All uses permitted in the C-2, General Business District, including temporary uses. Recovered Materials Processing and Yard Trimmings Composting are not permitted. 
(4)  Mixed-Use Commercial Buildings which include Multifamily Dwellings, Lofts or Condominiums. 
(5)  Residential/Business Dwellings. 
6.  Development Requirements. 
A.  Single-Family Detached on Individual Lots: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: No minimum, except that each building envelope shall contain at least 1,000 square feet outside the 100-year floodplain elevation. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width of all building lots shall be at least 40 feet. 
(3)  Minimum Road Frontage per lot: 40 feet. Exception: Road frontage may be reduced to 20 feet for lots with frontage upon cul-de-sac turnarounds or "eyebrow" culs-de-sac. 
(4)  Minimum front yard (from streets interior to the development): 5 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: 5 feet per side (single-family detached); or 10 ft. one side/0 ft. opposite side (zero lot-line). 
Note: (zero lot-line will require 8-ft. access/ maintenance easement on the adjoining lot.) 
(6)  Minimum rear yard: 5 feet. 
(7)  Where adjacent to a required buffer, the minimum required side or rear yard setback(s) shall increase an additional 5-feet for every 10-foot incremental increase in building height above 35-feet. 
(8)  Sodded yards: All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
(9)  Minimum Garage Required: Two-(2)-car garage. 
(10)  The required garage and off-street parking must be located to the rear of at least 50 percent of all dwelling units. Where garages are front entry, the garage façade shall be recessed a minimum of four additional feet from the building line. 
(11)  All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
B.  Single-Family Attached on Individual Lots: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: None. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 18 feet. 
(3)  Minimum Road Frontage per lot: 0 feet. 
(4)  Minimum front yard (from streets interior to the development): 0 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: 5 feet on non-attached side. 
(6)  Minimum rear yard: 5 feet. 
(7)  Where adjacent to a required buffer, the minimum required side or rear yard setback(s) shall increase an additional 5-feet for every 10-foot incremental increase in building height above 35-feet. 
(8)  Sodded yards: All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
(9)  Minimum garage required: One-(1)-car garage. 
(10)  The required garage and off-street parking must be located to the rear of at least 50 percent of all dwelling units. 
(11)  Firewalls: A minimum of a two-(2)-hour rated firewall shall be required between each attached dwelling unit. A four-(4)-hour rated firewall shall be required between every fourth (4 th ) attached dwelling unit. Firewalls shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building codes of Peachtree Corners. 
(12)  All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
C.  Residential/Business Dwellings: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: None. 
(2)  Minimum unit width: 18 feet. 
(3)  Minimum Road Frontage per lot: 0 feet. 
(4)  Minimum front yard (from streets interior to the development): 0 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard: 0 feet on non-attached side. 
(6)  Minimum rear yard: 0 feet. 
(7)  Where adjacent to a required buffer, the minimum required side or rear yard setback(s) shall increase an additional 5-feet for every 10-foot incremental increase in building height above 35-feet. 
(8)  Sodded yards: All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
(9)  Minimum garage required: One-(1)-car garage. 
(10)  The required garage and off-street parking must be located to the rear of at least 50 percent of all dwelling units. 
(11)  The businesses shall have direct entry from the street frontage sidewalk. 
(12)  All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
(13)  Dumpsters must be screened on all sides by a minimum six-(6)-foot high brick or masonry wall with access via an opaque metal gate. 
D.  Multifamily Residences: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: None. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: None. 
(3)  Minimum Road Frontage: 40 feet. 
(4)  Minimum front yard: 0 feet. 
(5)  Maximum front yard: 15 feet, except when common area is provided between the street and building. 
(6)  Minimum side yard: 0 feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard: 0 feet. 
(8)  Where adjacent to a required buffer, the minimum required side or rear yard setback(s) shall increase an additional 5-feet for every 10-foot incremental increase in building height above 35-feet. 
(9)  Minimum building height: 2 floors/stories. 
(10)  Sodded yards: All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
(11)  Parking shall be provided in designated lots/ decks subject to review and approval of the Director of Planning and Development. 
(12)  All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
(13)  Dumpsters must be screened on all sides by a minimum six-(6)-foot high brick or masonry wall with access via an opaque metal gate. 
E.  Commercial/Office/Residences: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: None. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: None. 
(3)  Minimum Road Frontage: 40 feet. 
(4)  Minimum front yard: 0 feet. 
(5)  Maximum front yard: 15 feet except when common area is provided between the street and building. 
(6)  Minimum side yard: 0 feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard: 0 feet. 
(8)  Where adjacent to a required buffer, the minimum required side or rear yard setback(s) shall increase an additional 5-feet for every 10-foot incremental increase in building height above 35-feet. 
(9)  Sodded yards: All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
(10)  Dwellings may be constructed on floors/stories above first floor non-residential uses. 
(11)  All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
(12)  Dumpsters must be screened on all sides by a minimum six-(6)-foot high brick or masonry wall with access via an opaque metal gate. 
7.  Common Area . Common Area shall be provided according to the following standards: 
A.  At least twenty percent (20%) of the gross project acreage (excluding 100-year floodplain and wetland areas) shall be designated on a recorded plat as Permanent Common Area for the use of the residents and visitors to the development. 
B.  Sidewalks and associated amenities may be credited toward Common Area calculations, if the sidewalk is constructed at a width of 8-feet or greater and the streetscape is enhanced with decorative, commercial quality street furniture, fountains, planters, public seating and/or similar improvements (subject to review of streetscape design by the Department of Planning and Development). 
C.  Landscaped strips along internal or external streets may be credited toward common area calculations, if the landscaped strip is constructed at a continuous width of 25-feet or greater. 
D.  Wetland and floodplain areas shall be preserved in their natural state except for the installation of required detention facilities and stormwater BMP's. 
E.  Stormwater facilities may be located within common area, if designed and improved as an amenity, subject to review and approval of the Director of Planning and Development. 
F.  Common areas shall be distributed throughout the project to provide linkages, amenities and visual appeal for the development. Final common area design shall include provision of at least one (1) centrally located public gathering area (with related amenities and improvements) in the form of a town green, amphitheater, landscaped plaza, or similar approved element. 
G.  Common Area Ownership. Common Areas, stormwater facilities, floodplain and wetland areas shall be owned in fee-simple by a mandatory property owner's association or approved entity which administers a reciprocal access and maintenance agreement for the project; or other entity approved in advance by the City Council during the normal course of business. The developer shall record the deed to the Common Area prior to, or concurrent with, the recording of the first Final Subdivision Plat or Certificate of Occupancy. An Access Easement following the alignment of future public streets is acceptable. However, "pocket parks" or "greens" may be deeded concurrent with the unit or phase of the final subdivision plat of which it is a part. 
H.  Property Owner's Association. The property owner's association bylaws or covenants, at a minimum, shall contain the following provisions: 
1.  Governance of the association by the Georgia Property Owner's Association Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq.) or a successor to that Act that grants lien rights to the association for maintenance expenses and tax obligations. 
2.  Responsibility for maintenance of common areas. 
3.  Responsibility for insurance and taxes. 
4.  Automatic compulsory membership of all property owners and subsequent lot purchasers and their successors; and compulsory assessments. 
5.  Conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the developer to the property owners. 
6.  Guarantee that the association will not be dissolved without the advance approval of the City Council. 
7.  Restrict the time of deliveries to commercial businesses and dumpster pick-up to between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
I.  Maintenance. The property owner's association, or other entity approved in advance by the City Council, shall be responsible for the continuous maintenance of buffers, common areas and recreation areas. 
8.  Buffer and Landscaping Requirements. 
A.  A naturally vegetated, undisturbed buffer, replanted where sparsely vegetated and supplemented by an eight-foot (8') high solid opaque wall or fence along the interior of the buffer, shall be provided adjacent to external residential properties. Where adjacent properties are zoned or developed for single-family residential uses a buffer of 75-feet in width shall be provided, and where adjacent properties are zoned or developed for fee-simple townhouse/condominium uses a buffer of 50-feet in width shall be provided. These minimum buffer widths may be adjusted by the City Council at the time an Overlay District is established. Buffers shall not be required adjacent to adjoining property zoned for or developed as office, institutional, commercial, industrial or multifamily uses. Ordinance (BLT) with the following exceptions: 
B.  The development shall comply with the requirements of the Buffer, Landscape and Tree [Ordinance]. 
(1)  Buffers shall not be required between nonresidential uses and residential uses internal to the Mixed-Use Development. 
(2)  The ten (10) foot wide landscape strip shall only be required on external roadways, and planted with approved understory trees. 
(3)  All required parking lot trees shall be native straight-trunked hardwood shade trees. 
(4)  Mixed-Use Overlay projects shall provide, at a minimum, 20 Tree Density Units per acre for the entire development. 
(5)  Street trees shall be required along both sides of all internal and external streets spaced every 50 feet on center. Each tree shall be a minimum 4-inch caliper (dbh) at time of planting and shall be a native straight-trunked hardwood shade tree species or similar tree suitable to this region. 
C.  Above-ground planters may not be used to fulfill tree planting or tree density requirements. 
9.  Parking. Parking for single-family detached or attached uses shall be on a per lot basis. Parking for both multi-family and non-residential uses may be provided through a combination of on-street parking and off-street parking in surface parking lots and above and/or below ground parking structures. 
A.  Parking spaces shall be as required by the 2012 Zoning Resolution for each use, per Section 1002. 
B.  Parking for non-residential or multi-family uses may be granted a 20 percent reduction in required parking, when parking is shared between adjacent uses within the project. An additional ten percent reduction may be administratively approved by the Director. Final parking design plans shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of Planning and Development. and approval of the Development Division. 
C.  Up to 50 percent of multi-family and non-residential parking may be provided by on-street parking spaces internal to the development. Designated on-street parking spaces shall not be allowed on external streets. 
D.  Parking structures must be designed so that the only openings at street-level are those to accommodate vehicle entrances and pedestrian access to the structure, as follows: 
(1)  Any openings for ventilation, service or emergency access located on the first-(1 st )-floor level, where the building façade must be decorative and must be an integral part of the overall building design. 
(2)  The balance of the street frontage of a parking structure must be either occupied retail/office space or designed to screen the parking areas utilizing decorative elements such as grill-work, brick, louvers, or a vegetative screen. 
(3)  Deck floors located above the first-floor level of a parking structure must be screened from view from the street utilizing decorative elements such as grill-work, brick or louvers (minimum 42" in height). In no instance, will cabling alone be sufficient to meet this screening requirement. 
E.  Off-street parking areas shall be screened from adjacent roadways and sidewalks by an opaque decorative fence or wall, berm, or vegetative screen at least 30-inches in height. Fence or wall shall be of similar design and materials to the surrounding buildings. Screening shall be installed between the parking area and the sidewalks. Perpendicular driveway crossings and pedestrian paths are allowed through the screening. 
10.  Signage . A Unified Signage Plan shall govern all signage within the development. Signs and the amount of signage shall be subject to the requirements of the Sign Ordinance with the following exceptions: 
A.  Oversized or billboard signs shall be prohibited. 
B.  Ground signs shall be limited to monument-type signs. Base and sign structure shall be constructed of materials such as brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the building. 
C.  Blinking, exposed neon, portable, inflatable and temporary signage shall be prohibited. 
D.  Internally illuminated wall signs may not be located within 150-feet of adjacent property developed for single-family residential uses. 
11.  Street/Pedestrian Lighting and Street Furniture. 
A.  Streetlights utilizing decorative fixtures and poles shall be provided along all internal streets and along all public rights-of-way. Streetlights shall be staggered, 150 feet on center, along both sides of the street. Pedestrian-scale lighting shall be provided every 50 feet along both sides of the street. The lamps of streetlights shall be directed down and capped. Pedestrian lighting shall utilize fixtures designed to accommodate a shielding plate. 
B.  Decorative, commercial-quality bike racks, benches, and trash receptacles shall be provided throughout the development in accordance with the approved pedestrian access plan. 
12.  Architectural Design . Architectural design of all buildings shall comply with the following: 
A.  For single-family detached residences: front facades shall have architectural treatments of brick, stone, stucco or wood shake. The balance of each elevation may be wood, wood shake or fiber-cement siding. 
B.  For attached townhouses and residential/business dwellings: front facades shall have architectural treatments of brick, stone or stucco. The balance of each elevation may be wood, wood shake or fiber-cement siding. 
C.  For multifamily residential buildings: architectural treatments of each building elevation shall be a minimum 50 percent brick, stone or stucco. The balance of each elevation may be wood, wood shake, or fiber-cement siding. 
D.  For non-residential and mixed use buildings: architectural treatments shall be of glass and/or brick, stone or stucco. Tilt-up or pre-cast concrete, wood, wood shake, fiber-cement siding or architectural metal may be used subject to review and approval of the Director of Planning and Development. 
Additionally: 
(1)  In order to encourage and complement street-level pedestrian activity, the street-level façade of non-residential buildings facing public or private streets shall incorporate varying edifice details such as trellises, windows or recessed panels suggestive of windows, door or colonnade openings, or storefronts every 20-30 linear feet. 
(2)  Contrasting accent colors of any wall, awning or other feature (other than a neutral color) shall be limited to no more than 15 percent of the total area for any single facade. 
(3)  Metal or portable buildings shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Buildings shall incorporate live plant material growing immediately in front of or on the building. 
(5)  Non-residential buildings of less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be designed with pitched roofs, minimum pitch of 4:12. Portions of the roof structure may be flat to accommodate vents, mechanical systems or similar appurtenances, if the adequately screened subject to review and approval of the Director. 
(6)  Roofing materials for pitched or mansard roofs shall be limited to the following: 
Metal standing seam of red, green or silver in color. 
Tile, slate or stone. 
Wood shake. 
Architectural shingles with a slate, tile or metal appearance. 
(7)  Parapets of flat-roofed buildings shall be articulated to provide visual diversity. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at least every 100 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or features shall be one (1) foot, and may be provided in height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. The rear of parapet articulations visible from street-level view (within 300 feet) shall be finished to match the exterior architectural treatment. 
(8)  Design of flat-roofed buildings shall include minimum one-(1)-foot deep cornices, extending along the entire front of the building and the sides of the building for a depth of at least ten (10) feet. 
(9)  Building design shall include a minimum one-(1)-foot high contrasting base, extending along the entire front of buildings and the sides of buildings for a depth of at least ten (10) feet. 
(10)  All mechanical, HVAC and like systems shall be screened from street level view (within 300 feet) on all sides by an opaque wall or fence of brick, stucco, split-faced block or wood. 
(11)  Accessories provided such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and/or bicycle racks shall be of commercial quality, and complement the building design and style. 
E.  Building plans shall be subject to review and approval of the Director of Planning and Development, or his/her designee, prior to the issuance of a Building Permit. Designs which are inconsistent with these performance guidelines may be denied. Alternate designs which have been denied by the Director may be submitted for review and approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1318. - Mixed-Use Development (MUD) District. 
1.  Purpose . The purpose of the Mixed-Use Development District is to promote the development of properties in a manner that integrates commercial and/or office with residential land uses, promotes pedestrian accessibility among uses, reduces automobile trips, provides a livable environment for project residents, and enhances the value and aesthetics of the surrounding community. MUD's utilize connective streetscapes to promote an environment conducive to human activity through the provision of landscaping, street/shade trees, street furniture and sidewalks to unify and interconnect varying uses. 
2.  Applicability . A Mixed-Use Development may only be permitted within a Major Activity Center as designated in the Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan, on tracts of land or assemblages of land located adjacent to or having immediate access to major thoroughfares, where infrastructure is available to support the intensity of such a use. 
Application for such a development is contingent upon being granted rezoning approval by the City Council after receiving a recommendation from the Director of Planning and Development and pursuant to Public Hearings before the Planning Commission and the City Council. 
Applications for rezoning not located within a Major Activity Center shall not be accepted for processing by the Department of Planning and Development. 
3.  Rezoning Site Plan Requirements and Design Criteria . All MUD projects shall be governed by an approved Concept Plan. The Concept Plan shall be submitted, reviewed and approved in accordance with applicable 2012 Zoning Resolution and Development Regulation requirements. Upon approval of the Concept Plan, individual pods of the development project may be undertaken through the Development Permit and Subdivision Platting process contained in the Development Regulations. MUD projects may be constructed as a single phase, or may be constructed in multiple phases, in accordance with the approved Concept Plan. 
Notwithstanding the forgoing, the City Council may require the Concept Plan to be submitted to the City Council for review and approval. Such requirements shall be established at the time of the rezoning. 
4.  Required Exhibits . As part of the application for rezoning, the following exhibits shall be prepared by design professionals, such as planners, engineers, architects or landscape architects and submitted to the Department of Planning and Development. No application for a Mixed-Use Development shall be accepted for processing without these required exhibits. 
A.  A location map indicating the existing zoning on the site and the adjacent areas and the boundary of the Major Activity Center within which it is located. 
B.  A Concept plan drawn no smaller than one (1) inch equals 100 feet showing the proposed mix of uses, pods and phases of development, and including the following information: 
• Lot lines and setbacks; 
• Location, shape, size and height of proposed buildings, common areas, plazas, and other amenities; 
• Lakes, ponds and floodplains and the source of floodplain data; 
• Stormwater detention areas; 
• Proposed landscaping; 
• Recreation facilities (if applicable); 
• Location of off-street parking. 
C.  A design palette governing, pedestrian amenities, and building architecture. 
D.  Architectural elevations of proposed buildings, indicating exterior treatments. 
E.  Information indicating the following: 
• Gross and net acreage, and density (see definition of density); 
• Lot sizes, if applicable (dimensions and square footage); 
• Building heights and stories; 
• Amount of common open space in square feet; 
• Tree areas to be retained and street trees and landscape features to be added; 
• Such other architectural and engineering data as may be required to evaluate the project. 
5.  Density, Building Height, and Minimum Project Size . Residential density shall be based upon gross project acreage, and may be developed up to a maximum of 32 units per acre. Maximum building height shall be limited to a maximum of 25 stories, not to exceed 300 feet. The City Council may reduce maximum project density and building height on a case-by-case basis at the time of rezoning. The City Council shall establish maximum project density on a case-by-case basis at the time of rezoning. The City Council may increase maximum building height on a case-by-case basis by Special Use Permit. 
MUD projects shall contain a minimum of five (5) contiguous acres of land area; except that expansion of an existing or approved MUD project may contain less land area. Residential uses may occupy no more than 70 percent of the gross site acreage (exclusive of required Common Area). 
6.  Permitted Uses and Structures . MUD projects shall incorporate residential uses with office and/or commercial uses and shared common area(s). Residential uses may include single-family detached, single-family attached, multi-family, and residential/business dwellings. 
MUD requires the mixing of uses horizontally and/or vertically, as specified below. 
A.  Single-Family Detached Pods (Individual Lots). 
1.  Single-Family Detached Dwellings, except Manufactured Homes. 
2.  Zero Lot Line Single-Family Detached Dwellings. 
B.  Single-Family Attached Pods. 
1.  Townhouses or villas. 
C.  Residential/Business Dwelling Pods. 
1.  Residential/Business Dwellings. Business activities shall be limited to those allowed within the C-1 or O-I Zoning District provided: 
a)  Only one (1) business may be operated from the residence. 
b)  No more than 50 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for conducting the business. 
D.  Multi-family Residence Pods. 
1.  Multi-family Dwellings, Lofts, Condominiums. 
E.  Commercial/Office/Residential Pods. 
1.  All uses permitted in the O-I, Office-Institutional District. 
2.  All uses permitted in the C-1, Neighborhood Business District. 
3.  All uses permitted in the C-2, General Business District, including temporary uses. Recovered Materials Processing and Yard Trimmings Composting are not permitted. 
4.  Mixed-Use Commercial/Office Buildings, which also include Multi-family Dwellings, Lofts or Condominiums. 
5.  Residential/Business Dwellings. 
7.  Design Criteria. 
A.  Single-Family Detached on Individual Lots: 
1.  Minimum lot area: No minimum, except that each building envelope shall contain at least 1,000 square feet outside the 100-year floodplain elevation. 
2.  Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width of all building lots shall be at least 40 feet. 
3.  Minimum Road Frontage per lot: 40 feet. Exception: Road frontage may be reduced to 20 feet for lots with frontage upon cul-de-sac turnarounds or "eyebrow" cul-de-sacs. 
4.  Minimum front yard (from streets interior to the development): 5 feet. 
5.  Minimum side yard: 5 feet per side (single-family detached); or 10 ft. one side/0 ft. opposite side (zero lot-line). 
Note: (zero lot-line will require 8-ft. access/ maintenance easement on the adjoining lot.) 
6.  Minimum rear yard: 5 feet. 
7.  Enhanced setbacks, office, or lower intensity uses shall be used as transitions to single-family neighborhoods or single-family zoning districts. 
8.  Sodded yards: All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
9.  Minimum Garage Required: Two-(2)-car garage. 
10.  The required garage and off-street parking must be located to the rear of at least 50 percent of all dwelling units. Where garages are front entry, the garage façade shall be recessed a minimum of four additional feet from the building line. 
11.  All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
B.  Attached Townhomes or Villas: 
1.  Minimum lot area: None. 
2.  Minimum lot width: None. 
3.  Minimum Road Frontage per lot: 0 feet. 
4.  Minimum front yard (from streets interior to the development): 0 feet. 
5.  Minimum side yard: None. 
6.  Minimum rear yard: None. 
7.  Enhanced setbacks, office, or lower intensity uses shall be used as transitions to single-family neighborhoods or single-family zoning districts. 
8.  Sodded yards: All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
9.  Minimum garage required: Townhomes: One-(1)-car garage. Villas: Two-(2)-car garage. 
10.  The required garage and off-street parking for townhomes must be located to the rear of at least 50 percent of all dwelling units. 
11.  Firewalls: A minimum of a two-(2)-hour rated firewall shall be required between each attached dwelling unit. A four-(4)-hour rated firewall shall be required between every fourth (4 th ) attached dwelling unit. Firewalls shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building codes of Peachtree Corners. 
12.  All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
C.  Residential/Business Dwellings: 
1.  Minimum lot area: None. 
2.  Minimum unit width: None. 
3.  Minimum Road Frontage per lot: 0 feet. 
4.  Minimum front yard (from streets interior to the development): 0 feet. 
5.  Minimum side yard: 0 feet. 
6.  Minimum rear yard: 0 feet. 
7.  Enhanced setbacks, office, or lower intensity uses shall be used as transitions to single-family neighborhoods or single-family zoning districts. 
8.  Sodded yards: All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
9.  Minimum garage required: One-(1)-car garage. 
10.  The required garage and off-street parking must be located to the rear of at least 50 percent of all dwelling units. 
11.  The businesses shall have direct entry from the street frontage sidewalk. 
12.  All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
13.  Dumpsters must be screened on all sides by a minimum six-(6)-foot high brick or masonry wall with access via an opaque metal gate. 
D.  Multi-family Residences: 
1.  Minimum lot area: None. 
2.  Minimum lot width: None. 
3.  Minimum Road Frontage: 40 feet. 
4.  Minimum front yard: 0 feet. 
5.  Maximum front yard: 15 feet, except when Common Area is provided between the street and building. 
6.  Minimum side yard: 0 feet. 
7.  Minimum rear yard: 0 feet. 
8.  Enhanced setbacks, office, or lower intensity uses shall be used as transitions to single-family neighborhoods or single-family zoning districts. 
9.  Minimum building height: 2 floors/stories. 
10.  Sodded yards: All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
11.  Parking shall be provided in designated lots/ decks subject to review and approval of the Director of Planning and Development. 
12.  All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
13.  Dumpsters must be screened on all sides by a minimum six-(6)-foot high brick or masonry wall with access via an opaque metal gate. 
E.  Commercial/Office/Residences: 
1.  Minimum lot area: None. 
2.  Minimum lot width: None. 
3.  Minimum Road Frontage: 40 feet. 
4.  Minimum front yard: 0 feet. 
5.  Maximum front yard: 15 feet except when Common Area is provided between the street and building. 
6.  Minimum side yard: 0 feet. 
7.  Minimum rear yard: 0 feet. 
8.  Enhanced setbacks, office, or lower intensity uses shall be used as transitions to single-family neighborhoods or single-family zoning districts. 
9.  Sodded yards: All grassed areas shall be sodded. 
10.  Dwellings may be constructed on floors/stories above first (1 st ) floor non-residential uses. 
11.  All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
12.  Dumpsters must be screened on all sides by a minimum six-(6)-foot high brick or masonry wall with access via an opaque metal gate. 
8.  Common Area. Common area shall be provided according to the following standards: 
A.  At least twenty percent (20%) of the gross project acreage (excluding 100-year floodplain and wetland areas) shall be designated on a recorded plat as Permanent Common Area for the use of the residents and visitors to the development. 
B.  Sidewalks and associated amenities may be credited toward Common Area calculations, if the sidewalk is constructed at a width of 8-feet or greater and the streetscape is enhanced with decorative, commercial quality street furniture, fountains, planters, public seating, amenities within the project that encourage pedestrian connectivity between uses such as plazas, arcades, greenways and/or similar improvements that are clearly intended as gathering spaces or that act as connectors to adjacent buildings or uses may be counted toward the twenty (20) percent common area requirement (subject to review of streetscape design or other required submittals by the Department of Planning and Development). 
C.  Landscaped strips along internal or external streets may be credited toward Common Area calculations, if the landscaped strip is constructed at a continuous width of 25 feet or greater. 
D.  Offsite sidewalks, greenways, bike trails, and similar improvements providing inter-parcel access along with associated landscape strips constructed as part of the Mixed-Use Development may be counted toward the twenty (20) percent Common Area requirement, subject to the filing of appropriate reciprocal access agreements between property owners. 
E.  Wetland and floodplain areas shall be preserved in their natural state except for the installation of required detention facilities and stormwater BMP's. However, these areas do not count toward the Common Area requirement. 
F.  Stormwater facilities may be located within Common Area, if designed and improved as an amenity, subject to review and approval of the Director of Planning and Development. 
G.  Common areas shall be distributed throughout the project to provide linkages, amenities and visual appeal for the development. Final Common Area design shall include provision of at least one (1) centrally located public gathering area (with related amenities and improvements) in the form of a town green, amphitheater, landscaped plaza, or similar approved element. 
H.  Common Area Ownership. Common areas, stormwater facilities, floodplain and wetland areas shall be owned in fee-simple by a mandatory property owner's association or approved entity, which administers a reciprocal access and maintenance agreement for the project; or other entity approved in advance by the City Council, during their normal course of business. The developer shall record the deed to the Common Area prior to, or concurrent with, the recording of the first Final Subdivision Plat or Certificate of Occupancy. An access easement following the alignment of future public streets is acceptable. However, "pocket parks" or "greens" may be deeded concurrent with the unit or phase of the Final Subdivision Plat of which it is a part. 
I.  Property Owner's Association. The property owner's association bylaws or covenants, at a minimum, shall contain the following provisions: 
1.  Governance of the association by the Georgia Property Owner's Association Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq.) or a successor to that Act that grants lien rights to the association for maintenance expenses and tax obligations. 
2.  Responsibility for maintenance of common areas. 
3.  Responsibility for insurance and taxes. 
4.  Automatic compulsory membership of all property owners and subsequent lot purchasers and their successors; and compulsory assessments. 
5.  Conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the developer to the property owners. 
6.  Guarantee that the association will not be dissolved without the advance approval of the City Council. 
7.  Restrict the time of deliveries to commercial businesses and dumpster pick-up to between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
J.  Maintenance. The property owner's association, or other entity approved in advance by the City Council, shall be responsible for the continuous maintenance of buffers, common areas and recreation areas. 
9.  Buffer and Landscaping Requirements . 
A.  A naturally vegetated, undisturbed buffer, replanted where sparsely vegetated and supplemented by an eight-foot (8') high solid opaque wall or fence along the interior of the buffer, shall be provided adjacent to external residential properties. Where adjacent properties are zoned or developed for single-family residential uses a buffer of 75-feet in width shall be provided, and where adjacent properties are zoned or developed for fee-simple townhouse/condominium uses a buffer of 50-feet in width shall be provided. These minimum buffer widths may be adjusted by the City Council at the time of rezoning. Buffers shall not be required adjacent to adjoining property zoned for or developed as office, institutional, commercial, industrial or multifamily uses. 
B.  The development shall comply with the requirements of the Buffer, Landscape and Tree Ordinance (BLT) with the following exceptions: 
1.  Buffers shall not be required between nonresidential uses and residential uses internal to the mixed-use development. 
2.  The ten (10) foot wide landscape strip shall only be required on external roadways, and planted with approved understory trees. 
3.  All required parking lot trees shall be native straight-trunked hardwood shade trees. 
4.  Each phase or Pod within the Mixed-Use District shall provide, at a minimum, 20 Tree Density Units per acre for the entire development. 
5.  Street trees shall be required along both sides of all internal and external streets spaced every 50 feet on center. Each tree shall be a minimum 4-inch caliper (dbh) at time of planting and shall be a native straight-trunked hardwood shade tree species or similar tree suitable to this region. 
C.  Above ground planters may not be used to fulfill tree planting or tree density requirements. 
10.  Parking Structures. 
A.  Parking structures must be designed so that the only openings at street-level are those to accommodate vehicle entrances and pedestrian access to the structure, as follows: 
1.  Any openings for ventilation, service or emergency access located on the first (1 st ) floor-level in the building façade must be decorative and must be an integral part of the overall building design. 
2.  The balance of the street frontage of a parking structure must be either occupied retail/office space or designed to screen the parking areas utilizing decorative elements such as grill-work, brick, louvers, or a vegetative screen. 
3.  Deck floors located above the first (1 st ) floor-level of a parking structure must be screened from view from the street utilizing decorative elements such as grill-work, brick or louvers (minimum 42" in height). In no instance will cabling alone be sufficient to meet this screening requirement. 
B.  Off-street parking areas shall be screened from adjacent roadways and sidewalks by an opaque decorative fence or wall, berm or vegetative screen at least 30-inches in height. Fence or wall shall be of similar design and materials to the surrounding buildings. Screening shall be installed between the parking area and the sidewalks. Perpendicular driveway crossings and pedestrian paths are allowed through the screening. 
11.  Signage . A Unified Signage Plan shall govern all signage within the development. Signs and the amount of signage shall be subject to the requirements of the Sign Ordinance with the following exceptions: 
A.  Oversized or billboard signs shall be prohibited. 
B.  Ground signs shall be limited to monument-type signs. Base and sign structure shall be constructed of materials such as brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the building. 
C.  Blinking, exposed neon, portable, inflatable and temporary signage shall be prohibited. 
D.  Internally illuminated wall signs may not be located within 150-feet of adjacent property developed for single-family residential uses. 
12.  Street/Pedestrian Lighting and Street Furniture . 
A.  Streetlights utilizing decorative fixtures and poles shall be provided along all internal streets and along all public rights-of-way. Streetlights shall be staggered, 150 feet on center, along both sides of the street. Pedestrian scale lighting shall be provided every 50 feet along both sides of the street. The lamps of streetlights shall be directed down and capped. Pedestrian lighting shall utilize fixtures designed to accommodate a shielding plate. 
B.  Decorative, commercial-quality bike racks, benches, and trash receptacles shall be provided throughout the development, in accordance with the approved Pedestrian Access Plan. 
13.  Architectural Design . Architectural design of all buildings shall comply with the following: 
A.  For single-family detached residences: front facades shall have architectural treatments of brick, stone, stucco or wood shake. The balance of each elevation may be wood, wood shake or fiber-cement siding. 
B.  For attached townhouses, villas and residential/business dwellings: front facades shall have architectural treatments of brick, stone or stucco. The balance of each elevation may be wood, wood shake or fiber-cement siding. 
C.  For multifamily residential buildings: architectural treatments of each building elevation shall be a minimum 50 percent brick, stone or stucco. The balance of each elevation may be wood, wood shake, or fiber-cement siding. 
D.  For Non-Residential and Mixed-Use buildings: architectural treatments shall be of glass and/or brick, stone or stucco. Tilt-up or pre-cast concrete, wood, wood shake, fiber-cement siding or architectural metal may be used subject to review and approval of the Director of Planning and Development. 
Additionally: 
1.  In order to encourage and complement street level pedestrian activity, the street-level façade of non-residential buildings facing public or private streets shall incorporate varying edifice details such as trellises, windows or recessed panels suggestive of windows, door or colonnade openings, or storefronts every 20—30 linear feet. 
2.  Contrasting accent colors of any wall, awning or other feature (other than a neutral color) shall be limited to no more than 15 percent of the total area for any single facade. 
3.  Metal or portable buildings shall be prohibited. 
4.  Buildings shall incorporate live plant material growing immediately in front of or on the building. 
5.  Non-residential buildings of less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be designed with pitched roofs, minimum pitch of 4:12. Portions of the roof structure may be flat to accommodate vents, mechanical systems or similar appurtenances, if adequately screened, subject to review and approval of the Director. 
6.  Roofing materials for pitched or mansard roofs shall be limited to the following: 
Metal standing seam of red, green or silver in color. 
Tile, slate or stone. 
Wood shake. 
Architectural shingles with a slate, tile or metal appearance. 
7.  Parapets of flat-roofed buildings shall be articulated to provide visual diversity. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at least every 100 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or features shall be one (1) foot, and may be provided in height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. The rear of parapet articulations visible from street level view (within 300 feet) shall be finished to match the exterior architectural treatment. 
8.  Design of flat-roofed buildings shall include minimum one-(1)-foot deep cornices, extending along the entire front of the building and the sides of the building for a depth of at least ten (10) feet. 
9.  Building design shall include a minimum one-(1)-foot high contrasting base, extending along the entire front of buildings and the sides of buildings for a depth of at least ten (10) feet. 
10.  All mechanical, HVAC and like systems shall be screened from street level view (within 300 feet) on all sides by an opaque wall or fence of brick, stucco, split-faced block or wood. 
11.  Accessories provided such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and/or bicycle racks shall be of commercial quality, and complement the building design and style. 
E.  Building plans shall be subject to review and approval of the Director of Planning and Development, or his/her designee, prior to the issuance of a Building Permit. Designs which are inconsistent with these performance guidelines may be denied. Alternate designs which have been denied by the Director may be submitted for review and approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1319. - T-O. Trails and Open Space 
1.  Purpose: The purpose of the Trails and Open Space, T-O, zoning classification is to accommodate a multi-use trail system through Peachtree Corners along with the development of one or more multi-use trails and associated trail components. T-O lands are intended to serve passive recreational uses and as an alternative transportation corridor. T-O land is not intended to be used for sports facility buildings or athletic fields. 
2.  Permitted Uses and Facilities: 
A.  Paved and soft paths to accommodate pedestrians, bicycles, skateboards, rollerblades and other people-powered vehicles 
B.  Trail hubs to accommodate: 
1.  Vehicular parking lots at trail access points 
2.  Restroom facilities 
3.  Fitness related activities 
C.  Active Recreation including: 
1.  Boating (ramps, docks, etc.) 
2.  Disc golf (course baskets) 
3.  Exercise course (equipment at stations) 
4.  Bicycling (lockers and bike racks) 
D.  Passive Recreation including: 
1.  Picnic (tables and shelters) 
2.  Photography (decks and overlooks) 
3.  Nature hikes (boardwalks) 
3.  Definitions: 
A.  Trail Segment - Land located within an adopted multi-use trail system that is rezoned T-O and contributed to that trail system 
B.  Density Credit - A development allocation awarded in exchange for land contributed to a trail system 
C.  Density Account - A record established to keep track of Density Credits awarded to a specific recipient. 
4.  Applicability: 
A.  Lands located along the Peachtree Corners Beltline and contributed to that multi-use trail will be reimbursed with Density Credits that can be utilized within the boundaries of the Central Business District, (as shown on CBD boundary map, 'Exhibit A' page CDA:122). 
B.  Lands located along the Crooked Creek Trail and contributed to that multi-use trail will be reimbursed with Density Credits that can be utilized within the boundaries of the Holcomb Bridge Road Corridor Study area, (as shown on Holcomb Bridge Road Corridor boundary map, 'Exhibit B' page CDA:123). 
5.  Provisions: 
A.  Trail Segments shall be contributed to the trail system through land donation, conservation easement, or other acceptable mechanism that preserves public access to the contributed land in perpetuity. 
B.  Individuals who contribute Trail Segments shall be reimbursed with Density Credits that can only be used within the boundary of the area associated with that trail. 
C.  Density Credits shall be granted at the rate of thirteen (13) multi-family units per acre of land contributed to a trail (or prorated portion thereof). 
D.  The City shall establish a Density Account for each individual that makes a Trail Segment contribution. 
E.  A Density Account holder may sell, assign, or convey his/her Density Credits in part or in total to one or more properties within the area associated with that trail (i.e. Beltline contribution can be utilized within the Central Business District; Crooked Creek Trail contribution can be utilized within the Holcomb Bridge Road Corridor Study area.) 
F.  The use of Density Credits shall be approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
_____
ARTICLE XIV. - MINIMUM AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 1400. - Minimum area requirements. 

 
1 When developing 3-plex, 4-plex subdivision under RM category, lot size is determined as follows: 18,000 square feet plus 550 square feet per unit. 
2 The Gwinnett County Health Department may require larger lots for septic tanks. Approximately 75 percent of Gwinnett County's soils will require a lot size of at least 25,500 square feet. 
3 In all districts, stormwater facility lots shall maintain a minimum lot width of 30 feet at the minimum building setback line. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1401. - Minimum yard and height requirements. 

 
1 Also see Section 606, Buffer Between Dissimilar Districts. 
2 For structures in excess of 5 stories or 60 feet, the setback from any abutting single-family district shall be increased by one foot for every additional one-foot rise in building height, up to a maximum of 200 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
_____
ARTICLE XIVA. - MODIFIED SINGLE-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 1400A.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of Modified single-family development is to permit a procedure for development which will result in improved living and working environments; which will promote more economic subdivision layout; which will encourage ingenuity and originality in total subdivision and individual site design; and which can preserve open space to serve recreational, scenic, and public service purposes, and other purposes related thereto. To achieve these goals: 
1.  Variations in lot areas are permitted. 
2.  Procedures are established to assure adequate maintenance and restricted use of open space areas for the benefit of the inhabitants of the subdivisions. 
3.  Procedures are established to assure adequate protection of existing and potential developments adjoining the proposed Modified development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1400A.2. - Special Use Permit Required. 
A Modified single-family development may be permitted in an R-100 or R-75 district provided the applicant for such a development is granted a Special Use Permit by the City Council after receiving recommendations from the Director of Planning and Development and Planning Commission and after a Public Haring. The City Council may reduce the individual lot size that would otherwise be required, up to 30 percent in an R-100 district and up to 25 percent in an R-75 district. Maximum density shall not exceed 2.3 units per acre for the R-100 Modified zoning designation and 3.0 units per acre for the R-75 Modified zoning designation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1400A.3. - Minimum Size of a Modified Development. 
Modified developments shall consist of at least 16 dwelling units, except that Modified developments that are found by the City Council to be a logical extension of an existing or approved Modified development may contain fewer dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1400A.4. - Subdivision Approval Required. 
No Modified development may be constructed except in accordance with the provisions of the City of Peachtree Corners Development Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
_____
Sec. 1400A.5. - Modification of Yard and Lot Requirements. 
Modification and variation of yard and lot requirements may be permitted subject to the following minimum standards (Table 1400A.5.1.). 
The following table indicates the minimum setbacks, lot width and height requirements for modified developments: 

 
1 In all districts, stormwater facility lots shall maintain a minimum lot width of 30 feet at the minimum building setback line. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
_____
Sec. 1400A.6. - Open Space Requirements; Ownership. 
In each district allowing Modified development, the lot size may be reduced from the general lot size for that district to a specified minimum lot size for Modified development, in accordance with the percentage reduction limits and Section 1400A.5.1. Minimum Yard and Height Requirements for Modified Development. All such lot reductions shall be compensated for by an equivalent amount of land in open space to be preserved and maintained for its scenic values, recreation or conservation purposes. Up to one-half of such open space may be located in a 100-year floodplain or an existing lake, and up to 100 percent may be located within a permanent proposed lake which does not function solely as a detention facility or within delineated wetlands. 
Open space shall not include areas devoted to public or private vehicular streets or any land which has been, or is to be, conveyed to a public agency, via a purchase agreement for such uses as parks, schools, or other public facilities, or which lies within any required recreation area, overhead power easement, or stormwater detention facility. 
If open space is not dedicated to public use, it shall be protected by legal arrangements, satisfactory to the City Council, sufficient to assure its maintenance and preservation for whatever purpose it is intended. Covenants or other legal arrangements shall specify ownership of the open space; method of maintenance; responsibility for maintenance; maintenance taxes and insurance; compulsory membership and compulsory assessment provisions; guarantees that any association formed to own and maintain open space will not be dissolved without the consent of the City Council; and any other specifications deemed necessary by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1400A.7. - Criteria for Modified Development Concept Plan Review. 
A proposal for a Modified development shall provide for a total environment better than that which could be achieved under standard regulations. If, in the opinion of the City Council, the proposed plan could be improved with respect to the criteria listed below by the reasonable modification of the location of open space or buildings or configurations of lots, streets and parking areas, the proposed plan shall be so modified or denied. In acting on a proposed plan, the City Council shall give particular consideration to the following criteria: 
Required Exhibits 
The following exhibits shall be prepared by design professionals, such as planners, engineers, architects or landscape architects and submitted to the Department of Planning and Development. No application for a Modified single family development shall be accepted for processing without these required exhibits. 
A.  A location map indicating existing zoning on the site and the adjacent areas. 
B.  A concept plan drawn no smaller than one (1) inch equals 100 feet, including the following information: 
- Lot lines and setbacks; 
- Location, shape, size and height of the existing and proposed decorative walls and elements and entrance features; 
- Topography with contour intervals no greater than 2 feet; 
- Lakes, ponds and floodplains and the source of floodplain data; 
- Stormwater detention areas; 
- Existing and proposed landscaping; 
- Recreation facilities (if applicable); 
- Stages of development, if any; 
- Location of off-street parking. 
C.  Floor plans and elevations of all typical units and any other structures such as recreation buildings. 
D.  Information indicating the following: 
- Gross and net acreage (see definition of net density); 
- Lot sizes (dimensions and square footage); 
- Building heights and stories; 
- Building coverage for each lot; 
- Amount of common open space in square feet (if applicable); 
- All tree areas to be retained or added; 
- Parking facilities; and 
- Such other architectural and engineering data as may be required to evaluate the project. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1400A.8. - All Modified Amendments to be Conditional Zoning Amendments. 
All Modified Single Family zoning amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be Conditional Amendments. In addition to any other conditions that may be imposed by the City Council pursuant to the provisions for conditional zoning in this Zoning Resolution, a Concept Plan showing the approximate location of all buildings, walls, fences, property lines, front and rear building lines, landscaping, parking areas and uses and any other features deemed appropriate by the City Council as a result of the concept plan review and public hearing shall be included as part of the amendment, and the use of the property for its zoned purposes shall be conditioned on said Concept Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE XV. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 1500. - Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
The Director of the Department of Planning and Development or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed, on behalf of the City Council of City of Peachtree Corners, to administer and enforce this Resolution. Such authority shall include the right to order, in writing, the remedy of any condition found in violation of this Resolution, and the right to bring legal action in all courts of competent jurisdiction to ensure compliance with its provisions, including injunction, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1501. - Building Permit Required. 
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a Building Permit issued by the Department of Planning and Development Director. No building Permit shall be issued except in conformance with the provisions of this Resolution. 
All applications for Building Permits for uses other than one-(1)-family and duplex dwellings shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the sizes and the locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use and the location on the lot of the building or structure to be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this Resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1502. - Certificates of Occupancy Required. 
A Certificate of Occupancy issued by The Department of Planning and Development Director is required prior to use or occupancy of: 
1.  Any lot or change in the use thereof. 
2.  A building hereafter erected or a change in the use of an existing building. 
3.  A change in any lawful non-conforming use. The Certificate of Occupancy shall state specifically wherein the non-conforming use fails to meet provisions of this Resolution. 
No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or building or structure complies with all the provisions of this Resolution. 
A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of The Department of Planning and Development Director and a copy shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1503. - Penalties for Violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this Resolution shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted Ordinance of the City of Peachtree Corners, and shall be punished either by a fine of not less than twenty-five ($25) dollars nor more than one thousand ($1,000) dollars, or by confinement in the Gwinnett County jail for a total term not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1504. - Alternative Sentences or Penalties. 
The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this Resolution on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of said suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE XVI. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 1600. - Zoning Board of Appeals Created. 
A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1601. - Membership and Appointment. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members residing within City of Peachtree Corners, appointed by the City Council. One member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be a member of the Planning Commission. No other member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall simultaneously hold any employment or elected office within the City of Peachtree Corners Government, which is inconsistent with his or her duties on the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1602. - Terms of Office. 
The term of office of each member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be for one (1) year, or thereafter until his/her successor is appointed. Members may be reappointed. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term, in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be removable for cause by the City Council of City of Peachtree Corners upon written charges and after a Public Hearing. 
Any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be disqualified to act upon a matter in which the member has an interest. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1603. - Officers. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect one (1) of its members, other than the member of the Planning Commission, as Chairman and a second one as Vice-Chairman. The Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall serve for one (1) year or until reelected or until successors are elected. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall appoint a Secretary who may be an employee of the City or a member of the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1604. - Procedure. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals may determine. The Chairman, or in his/her absence, the Vice-Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Zoning Board of Appeals and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1605. - Powers of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers: 
1.  To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Department of Planning and Development Director in the enforcement of this 2012 Zoning Resolution. 
2.  To hear and decide requests for the Special Exceptions of the Zoning Resolution upon which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to pass. 
3.  To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variances from the terms of the Zoning Resolution as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the Zoning Resolution will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the Zoning Resolution shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Zoning Board of Appeals that: 
A.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular property in question because of its size, shape or topography; and 
B.  The application of the Resolution to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
C.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
D.  Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the property owner; and 
E.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor impair the purposes or intent of this Resolution. 
No variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this Resolution or which would result in a greater intensity of development on a property than would otherwise be allowed if no variance were involved. 
4.  In exercising the above powers, the Zoning Board of Appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this Resolution, reverse decisions or determinations from which the appeal is taken and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the Director of Planning and Development from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or revoke or direct the issuance or revocation of a Building or other permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1605A. - Variances from the Definition of the Term "Family". 
The City Council shall have the power to hear and decide requests for variances from the definition of the term "Family" by Special Use Permit when such requests are submitted by groups of more than three (3) persons who are not all related by blood or marriage. Such variances may be granted in cases of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the City Council that: 
A.  There are extraordinary or exceptional conditions pertaining to the group in question, and relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor impair the purposes or intent of this Resolution; and 
B.  The group consists of between four (4) and eight (8) persons who live together as a single housekeeping unit and who would otherwise find it economically prohibitive to live in a group of three (3) or fewer persons in a single family residential district; and 
C.  The residential dwelling which forms the subject of the variance request contains at least eighty (80) square feet of bedroom space per occupant; and 
D.  The residential dwelling which forms the subject of the variance request is served by public water and sewer service or public water and a septic system approved by the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department for the proposed number of occupants; and 
E.  The residential dwelling which forms the subject of the variance request is located on a lot having an area of at least one (1) acre; and 
F.  The residential dwelling lot which forms the subject of the variance request contains a paved parking area of no less than 1,200 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1606. - Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any official of the City of Peachtree Corners affected by any decision of the Director of Planning and Development. Such appeal shall be taken within fifteen (15) days after the decision appealed from by filing with the Director of Planning and Development and with the Zoning Board of Appeals, a Notice of Appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Director of Planning and Development shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Director of Planning and Development certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a restraining order granted by a court of record on application, and notice to the Director of Planning and Development for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1607. - Required Public Hearings By the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Before the Zoning Board of Appeals acts upon an application for a Variance or a Special Exception, it shall hold a Public Hearing thereon. The notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least 15 but not later than 45 days prior to the hearing in the official organ of the City. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
In addition, the City shall erect in a conspicuous place on the property involved, a sign which shall contain information as to the Variance or Special Exception applied for and the time and place of Hearing. Said sign shall be erected in accordance with the City of Peachtree Corners Public Notification Policies for Rezoning, Special Use Permit, Variance, and Special Exception Applications. Failure to erect and maintain the sign as specified above shall not invalidate the subsequent determination of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1608. - Reapplication to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
If an application for a Special Exception or Variance is denied by the Zoning Board of Appeals, a reapplication for such Special Exception or Variance may not be made earlier than 12 months from the date of the original application, except as provided in Section 1701. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1609. - Appeals from Decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may present an Appeal to the Superior Court. Such an Appeal to the Superior Court shall be by Petition for Writ of Certiorari in accordance with State Law. 
On Appeal, the case shall be heard by the Judge of the Gwinnett County Superior Court without a jury unless one (1) of the parties files a written demand for a jury trial within thirty (30) days from the filing of the Appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1610. - Administrative Variances. 
The Director of Community Development shall have the power to grant variances (except for density and use variances) from the development standards of this ordinance where, in his/her opinion, the intent of the ordinance can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a variance. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variances from the following requirements: 
a.  Front yard or yard adjacent to public street — variance not to exceed ten (10) feet. 
b.  Side yard — variance not to exceed five (5) feet. 
c.  Rear yard — variance not to exceed ten (10) feet. 
d.  Height: 
1.  Residential: Variance up to but not exceeding ten feet, provided that no increase in the height for a sign or fence, except as permitted in Section 1610.i below, may be granted nor may the variance result in an increase in the number of stories than would otherwise be allowed under the applicable zoning district. 
2.  Non-residential: Variance up to but not exceeding 15 feet, provided that no increase in the height for a sign or fence may be granted nor may the variance result in an increase in the number of stories than would otherwise be allowed under the applicable zoning district. 
e.  Buffers — the dimensions or screening treatment of a buffer as required under Section 606 may be reduced by no more than 50 percent where the Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan recommends a more compatible land use on the neighboring property than that for which said property is actually zoned, or in other situations where the intent of the required buffer can be equally or otherwise achieved; provided, however, that no buffer required as a condition of zoning shall be modified. 
f.  Demarcation of parking spaces — parking spaces may be left unmarked, provided all the of the following conditions are present: 
1.  The parking lot must be designated to serve only a multi-family residential project which is designed and intended for rental occupancy. 
2.  The parking lots must be designed in relation to the internal circulation system such that the areas reserved for parking are easily identified and clearly distinct from the interior driveways because of their location, design, orientation, or configuration, such as in parking areas with a single interior driveway having parking spaces located perpendicular to and along the sides of the access driveway, allowing the curbing to delineate the exterior dimension of the single parking bay. 
3.  Approval for the elimination of the striping has been obtained by the applicant in writing from the Gwinnett County Traffic Engineering Division of the Engineering Department and the Fire Services Division of the Gwinnett County Public Safety Department. 
g.  Accessory structures allowed within the front yard — accessory structures may be allowed within the front yard of residential zoning districts provided all the following conditions are met: 
1.  The residentially-zoned property contains at least three acres. 
2.  The accessory structures are limited to a swimming pool, garage/carport, barn, storage building, or other similar structures. 
3.  The accessory structure is setback a minimum of 100 feet from the right-of-way and located no closer than 40 feet to any side property line. (If the accessory use if for animal quarters, this must be a minimum of 100 feet from any property line.) 
4.  The accessory structure shall be screened with walls, fences, or suitable landscaping so that it is not visible from the street. 
h.  Reduction in unit width for villas in R-TH Zoning District, not to exceed 10 feet. The Director of Planning and Development shall have the power to grant variances from the requirements of the amendment to the 2012 Zoning Resolution of City of Peachtree Corners Regarding the Keeping of Livestock and Household Pets Within Residential Zoning Districts, where, in his/her opinion, the intent of the amendment can be achieved and equal performance be obtained by granting a variance. Other than for conditions of zoning which specified a minimum area or distances for animal quarters, the Director of Planning and Development may grant the following variances: 
1.  For livestock or cattery, a reduction of no more than 25 feet in the minimum distance to any property line. 
2.  For Kennels and Fur Farms, a reduction of no more than 50 feet in the minimum distance to any property line. 
3.  The minimum distance to any property line for any animal quarters may be further reduced when a property line abuts a Flood Hazard area, steep slopes, ravines or other features which would provide a separation between the animal quarters and the uses on abutting property equal to or exceeding the minimum requirements of the Zoning Resolution. 
4.  The reduction of the minimum area required for the keeping of livestock as specified within the R-100 Single Family Residence District up to maximum of ten (10) percent of the minimum area required. 
5.  Reduction of the minimum distance to any property line for animal quarters for wild animals up to a maximum of 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-10-101, § 1, 11-20-2017) 
ARTICLE XVII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 1700. - Zoning Resolution and Map Amendment Procedure. 
A.  This Resolution, including the City of Peachtree Corners Zoning Maps, may be amended from time to time by the City Council of City of Peachtree Corners, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the City of Peachtree Corners Planning Commission for review and recommendation. 
B.  If the City of Peachtree Corners Planning Commission fails to submit a report within 30 days of its first meeting after it has received an amendment request complete in all respects, it shall be deemed to have given a recommendation of "no comment" on the proposed amendment. However, the City of Peachtree Corners Planning Commission and the applicant for an amendment may jointly agree to an extension of the thirty-(30)-day period. 
C.  Before the City of Peachtree Corners Planning Commission or the City Council of City of Peachtree Corners enact an amendment, they shall each hold a Public Hearing thereon. At least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of each such hearing, the City Council shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of City of Peachtree Corners, a notice of the Public Hearing. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the Public Hearing. 
D.  If a proposed amendment is for the rezoning of property and involves a change in the zoning classification of 25 or fewer parcels of land, then: 
1.  The notice, in addition to the requirements of Subsection C. above, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; 
2.  A sign containing the information outlined in Subsection D.1. above, shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the Public Hearing. The sign shall be placed in accordance with the City of Peachtree Corners Public Notification Policies for Rezoning, Special Use Permit, Variance, and Special Exception Applications. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1701. - Initiation of Amendments. 
Applications for amendment of the text or maps of this Resolution may be initiated by resolution of the City Council, or by motion of the Planning Commission, Director of Planning and Development, or by petition of any property owner addressed to the City Council. In the case of a petition for the rezoning of property, such petition shall be submitted by the owner of record of said property, the owner's agent or by a contract purchaser with the owner's written consent. 
Once a map amendment is initiated by the City Council, no application for a clearing, grubbing, grading, septic tank, building, development or other similar permit, or for a Variance or Special Use Permit for the affected property shall be accepted until final action is taken by the City Council on the proposed map amendment. Provided, however, that if the City Council does not take final action on the proposed map amendment within six (6) months from the date of initiation, Permit, Variance and Special Use Permit applications shall again be accepted and reviewed pursuant to existing zoning. And, further provided that such permit applications shall be accepted during the map amendment process, if the proposed use is authorized under the same conditions in both the existing and proposed zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1702. - Standards Governing Exercise of the Zoning Power. 
The City Council finds that the following standards are relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of property and shall govern the exercise of the zoning power: 
A.  Whether a proposed rezoning will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
B.  Whether a proposed rezoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
C.  Whether the property to be affected by a proposed rezoning has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
D.  Whether the proposed rezoning will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
E.  Whether the proposed rezoning is in conformity with the policy and intent of the Land Use Plan; and 
F.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed rezoning. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1703. - Impact Analysis. 
A.  The initiating party, if a party other than the City Council, shall be required to file, with its application for amendment, a written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed zoning with respect to each of the matters enumerated in Section 1702 above. Such a zoning proposal and analysis shall be a public record. 
B.  The Department of Planning and Development shall, with respect to each such zoning proposal, investigate and make a recommendation with respect to each of the matters enumerated in Section 1702, above. The Department of Planning and Development shall make a written record of its investigation and recommendations, and this record shall be a public record. 
C.  The City of Peachtree Corners Planning Commission shall, with respect to each such zoning proposal, investigate and make a recommendation with respect to each of the matters enumerated in Section 1702, above. The Planning Commission shall make a written record of its investigation and recommendations, and this record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1704. - Action by City Council. 
Following its public hearing the City Council may: 
A.  Adopt the proposed amendment as presented; 
B.  Adopt the proposed amendment as revised or supplemented by conditions of approval established by the City Council; said revisions may include, if the proposed amendment is for the rezoning of property, rezoning to the proposed zoning district with conditions or rezoning to any other less intense zoning district with or without conditions; 
C.  Deny the proposed amendment in whole or in part; or 
D.  Table the proposal. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1705. - Special Use Permit Procedure. 
The Special Use Permit Standards of Review are as follows: 
A.  A Special Use listed under the zoning district is desired for development and a more intensive zoning district which contains that use as a use by right would not be appropriate for the property; or 
B.  A Special Use listed under the zoning district is desired for development and no zoning district contains that use as a use by right; or 
C.  A unique use not addressed in any zoning district is desired for development and is not likely to be duplicated within City of Peachtree Corners; or 
D.  The density of development may be affected by the height of a non-residential or multi-family residential building; or 
E.  The neighboring properties may be affected by the height of any non-residential or multi-family residential building or structure; and 
F.  The Special Use would be consistent with the needs of the neighborhood or the community as a whole, be compatible with the neighborhood and would not be in conflict with the overall objective of the Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan or the City of Peachtree Corners Comprehensive Plan, upon its adoption. 
In order to accommodate these special uses, the Special Use Permit allows the City Council to approve a special use on a particular parcel without changing the general zoning district. Such approval shall be subject to the requirements set forth below and any additional conditions deemed necessary to ensure the compatibility of the special use with the surrounding properties. All Special Use Permit applications shall be for firm development proposals only. The Special Use Permit shall not be used for securing early zoning for conceptual proposals which may not be undertaken for some time. A Special Use Permit application shall be considered only if it is made by the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent. The minimum requirements for a Special Use Permit are: 
1.  Any uses permitted under a Special Use Permit shall also conform to the requirements of this Resolution and the Development Regulations for the use as found in the zoning district. 
2.  The application and review process for a Special Use Permit shall be the same as for the zoning district under which the special use is found. In addition to the information and/or site plans which are required to be submitted for the proposed development, additional information deemed necessary by the Director in order to evaluate a proposed use and its relationship to the surrounding area shall be submitted. In the review process, particular emphasis shall be given to the evaluation of the characteristics of the proposed use in relationship to its immediate neighborhood and the compatibility of the proposed use with its neighborhood. 
3.  In the approval process for a Special Use Permit application, the City Council shall consider the policies and objectives of the Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan, or the City of Peachtree Corners Comprehensive Plan if one has been adopted, particularly in relationship to the proposed site and surrounding area, and shall consider the potential adverse impacts on the surrounding area, especially in regards but not limited to traffic, storm drainage, land values and compatibility of land use activities. 
4.  If an application is approved and a Special Use Permit is granted, all conditions which may have been attached to the approval are binding on the property. All subsequent development and use of the property shall be in accordance with the approved plan and conditions. Once established, the special use shall be in continuous operation. Upon discovery that the operation of the special use has or had ceased for a period of 90 days or more and the owner of the property has not requested voluntary termination of the Special Use Permit, the Director shall forward a report to the City Council through the Planning Commission, which may recommend that action be taken to remove the Special Use Permit from the property. 
5.  Changes to a special use, or development of a site for the special use, shall be treated as an amendment to the Special Use Permit and shall be subject to the same application and review process as a new application. 
6.  The special use for which a Special Use Permit is granted shall commence operations or construction within 12 months of the date of approval by the Board of Commissioners. If, at the end of this 12-month period, the Director determines that active efforts are not proceeding toward operation or construction, a report may be forwarded to the City Council through the Planning Commission which may recommend that action be taken to remove the Special Use Permit from the property. 
7.  An application for a Special Use Permit in a residential district and which use is proposed to operate in a dwelling or as an accessory use to a dwelling is subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  The Special Use Permit shall be valid for no more than a two-(2)-year period. Upon or before the expiration of a Special Use Permit, the owner shall make application to continue the Special Use Permit, if continuance is desired. However, after the first two-(2)-year period the City Council may waive the two-(2)-year time limitation with the concurrence of the City of Peachtree Corners Planning Commission. 
b.  The special use shall operate within the dwelling on the property or, if approved by the City Council, in an accessory structure. 
c.  The exterior character of the dwelling shall be preserved in its residential state and there shall be no outside evidence of the operation of the special use to the neighborhood, except for any accessory structure approved by the City Council. 
d.  The owner of the property shall occupy the property and shall operate any business associated with the special use. 
e.  The owner of the property shall submit with the application a signed statement in which he/she agrees that the Special Use Permit, if approved, shall automatically terminate in the event that the property is sold, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to any other party, or the business which operates the special use is sold, transferred, otherwise conveyed or discontinued. The owner shall also agree to notify the Director in writing upon the occurrence of any of these events. 
f.  In addition to the information and/or site plans required by this Section, the owner of the property shall submit with the application for a Special Use Permit information regarding the ownership of any business associated with the use, the experience and background qualifications related to the operation of said business, prior similar businesses operated, applicable State of Georgia certifications, licenses and like information. 
8.  The owner of the property approved for a Special Use Permit, except such property approved for Modified Single Family Subdivisions, may voluntarily request termination of the Special Use Permit by notifying the Director of Planning and Development in writing. The Director shall notify the City Council through the Planning Commission of the voluntary terminations as they occur and shall change the Official Zoning Maps to reflect any voluntary terminations. The approval of a Special Use Permit for a specific use which may be operated by a lessee under a private agreement with a lessor in any non-residential district shall not obligate the City Council to be responsible for or be required to resolve any disputes which may arise out of the voluntary termination of the Special Use Permit by the property owner. 
9.  The Department of Planning and Development shall have the right to periodically examine the operation of the specific use to determine compliance with the requirements and any conditions. If the Director determines that the requirements and conditions are being violated, a written notice shall be issued to the owner of the property outlining the nature of the violation and giving the owner of the property a maximum of ten (10) days to come into compliance. If after ten (10) days the violations continue to exist, the Director shall forward a report to the City Council through the Planning Commission which may recommend that action be taken to remove the Special Use Permit from the property. 
10.  Upon approval by the City Council, a Special Use Permit shall be identified on the Official Zoning Maps. 
11.  Upon approval by the City Council of a Special Use Permit, the owner of the property shall be issued a notice from the Director which states the specific use permitted; the requirements of this Section and any conditions attached to the approval. 
12.  The Department of Planning and Development shall not issue a Certificate of Occupancy for the specific use unless all requirements and conditions of the Special Use Permit have been fulfilled by the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1706. - Withdrawal of Application for Amendment, Variance or Special Use Permit. 
Once an application for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map or an application for a Variance or Special Use Permit has been made, the applicant may withdraw such application without prejudice only until such time as the legal advertisement of a public hearing thereon is placed. An application may not be withdrawn by an applicant or property owner under any circumstance after legal advertisement of the Public Hearing has been placed. All applications, having been advertised, shall be considered by the City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate, and shall receive final action. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1707. - Lapse of Time Requirement for an Amendment, Variance or Special Use Permit Reapplication. 
The following shall apply to the applicable reapplication: 
1.  No application or reapplication for any zoning map amendment affecting the same land or any portion thereof shall be acted upon within 12 months from the date of last action by the City Council unless such 12-month period is waived by the City Council, and in no case may such an application or reapplication be reconsidered in less than six (6) months from the date of last action by the City Council. 
2.  No application or reapplication for the same type of Variance or Special Use Permit affecting the same land or any portion thereof shall be acted upon within twelve (12) months from the date of last action by the City Council, or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate, unless such twelve (12) month period is waived by the City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals as appropriate, and in no case may such an application or reapplication be reconsidered in less than six (6) months from the date of last action by the City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate. Administrative variances shall not be subject to this time lapse requirement as outlined in Article XVI, Section 1610. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1708. - Plans and Other Documents Showing Proposed Use and Impact Required. 
An application for an amendment to create or extend a Zoning District shall be accompanied by a Sketch Plan at scale and such other plans, elevations or additional information as the Director of Planning and Development and this Resolution may require, showing the proposed development, and its impact on natural and built systems. Additional information may include without limitation traffic studies, utility studies, and drainage studies. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1709. - Actions to be Taken if Plans of Property Owner are not Implemented Within Specified Time Limits. 
For any zoning map amendment for which the City Council is not the applicant, and upon which property no development permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy has been issued within 12 months of the date of approval of said amendment, the City Council may review the zoning district classification of the property and determine whether it shall be continued or initiated for rezoning. 
Such properties shall first be reviewed by the Planning Commission, which shall make such findings and recommendations as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1710. - Conditional Zoning. 
In adopting an amendment to the zoning map, or approving a Special Use Permit or a Variance, the City Council may impose special conditions which it deems necessary in order to make the requested action acceptable and consistent with the purposes of the district(s) involved and to further the goals and objectives of that Comprehensive Plan. Such conditions may consist of: setback requirements from any lot line; specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas or other land uses; driveway curb cut restrictions; restrictions as to what land uses or activities shall be permitted; maximum building heights or other dimensions; special drainage or erosion provisions; landscaping or planted area which may include the location, type and maintenance of plant materials; fences, walls, berms, or other buffering provisions or protective measures; preservation of existing trees or other vegetation; special measures to alleviate undesirable views, light, glare, noise, dust or odor; permitted hours of operation; architectural style; a requirement that the existing building(s) be retained; a requirement that developers must build according to the site plans as adopted; a limitation on exterior modifications of existing buildings; or any other requirement that the City Council may deem appropriate and necessary as a condition of rezoning or issuance of a variance or Special Use Permit. 
Such conditions: 
1.  Shall only be valid if they are included in the motion approving the amendment for adoption; 
2.  Shall be required of the property owner and all subsequent owners as a condition of their use of the property; and 
3.  Shall be interpreted and continually enforced by the Director of Planning and Development in the same manner as any other provision of this Resolution. 
4.  A building permit shall not be issued until after the presentation and approval by the Planning Commission and/or the City Council of final site, architecture and development plans required by such conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1800. - Conflict with Other Laws. 
Whenever the regulations of this Resolution require a greater lot width or depth of size of yard or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or covenants, the requirements of this Resolution shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or covenants require more restrictive standards than those of this Resolution, the provisions of such statutes or covenants shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1801. - Severability. 
In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Resolution shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Resolution, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the Resolution, if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1802. - Repeal of Conflicting Resolutions. 
All Resolutions and part of Resolutions in conflict with this Resolution are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
ARTICLE XIX. - APPENDIX OF INACTIVE ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 1900. - Purpose. 
This appendix is provided as a reference for projects developed under prior to adoption of current regulations. No new zoning applications will be accepted for the following zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1901. - R-TH Single Family Residence Townhouse District. 
(Prior to January 2005). This zoning district is intended primarily for rowhouse or townhouse attached or detached single-family dwelling units. Such dwelling units may be held in the condominium form of ownership, or in fee simple. It is not the intention of City of Peachtree Corners or of this ordinance to determine or dictate which form of ownership is most desirable. 
Within the R-TH Single Family Residence Townhouse District, the following requirements shall be met: 
a.  All dedicated street rights-of-way shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet. 
b.  Front and rear yard setbacks shall total a minimum of 75 feet with a minimum of 20 feet for a yard which faces on an interior street. If the subject property abuts property zoned R-60, R-75, R-100, or property developed as same, the rear yard setback shall be 40 feet at the point of abutment. 
c.  Side yards shall be a minimum of 20 feet to any exterior property line. Side yards between individual units, groups of units or rows of units shall be determined based upon individual site plan review. 
d.  Densities shall not exceed eight (8) units per gross acre. 
A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces per unit shall be provided. 
e.  A minimum of a two-(2)-hour rated firewall shall be required between each attached dwelling unit. A four-(4)-hour rated firewall shall be required between every fourth attached dwelling unit. Firewalls shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building codes of City of Peachtree Corners. 
The specific requirements set forth above are not necessarily exhaustive of all requirements or conditions which the City Council may require prior to approval of any rezoning application under this district. This enactment specifically reserves, in the favor of the City Council, the discretion to deny any individual rezoning application submitted hereunder, if after review of the site plan and other materials submitted therewith and a careful consideration of all of the facts and circumstances relating to the proposed development, the City Council deems the proposed development not to be in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the present and future citizens of Peachtree Corners. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1902. - R-ZT Single Family Residence Zero Lot Line/Townhouse District. 
(Prior to January 2005). This district is intended to provide areas for the development of moderate density residential uses and structures in moderately spacious surroundings. It is intended that these districts be located in the urban and suburban portions of City of Peachtree Corners where a protected environment suitable for moderate-density residential use can be provided, as well as in established moderate-density residential areas as a means to ensure their continuance. The use of this district is also appropriate on a smaller scale in the suburban portions of the City as a transitional zone between low-density residential districts and commercial districts, industrial districts, or major transportation arteries, or other uses that are not compatible with a low-density residential environment. In fulfilling the intent of this district, the townhouse or rowhouse concept may be used which permits the construction of single-family dwellings immediately adjacent to one another without side yards between the individual units and which units may or may not be structurally connected. The intent of this district may also be fulfilled by the use of the Zero Lot Line concept, which permits the construction of detached single-family dwellings on lots without a side yard requirement on one side of the lot. This concept permits better use of the entire lot by compacting the usual front, rear and side yards into one or more internal gardens which may be completely walled in or screened. 
A.  Within the R-ZT Single Family Residence Zero Lot Line/Townhouse District, the following uses are permitted: 
1.  Zero Lot Line Single Family Detached Dwellings. 
2.  Townhouses. 
3.  Single Family Detached Dwellings. 
4.  Customary Home Occupations (provided the building lot is a minimum of 60 feet in width and 7,200 square feet in area). 
B.  Within the R-ZT Single Family Residence Zero Lot Lot/Townhouse District, the following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Maximum density shall not exceed eight (8) units per acre for attached dwelling units and six (6) units per acre for detached dwelling units. 
2.  Minimum lot width for Zero Lot Line or single family detached units - 40 feet. Minimum lot width for townhouse attached units - 22 feet. Zero Lot Line or single family detached lots shall maintain a minimum road frontage of 20 feet. Townhouse lots shall maintain a minimum road frontage of 15 feet. 
3.  Minimum front yard depth shall be 20 feet. 
4.  Minimum side yard depth - None for townhouses except that on corner lots the minimum side yard of the corner side shall be 20 feet. Zero lot line lots shall have a zero (0) foot side yard on one (1) side and a minimum of ten (10) feet on the opposite side. Single family detached units shall have a minimum five (5) foot side yard on each side. 
5.  Minimum rear yard depth - When abutting an R-75 or R-100 district, the rear yard shall be equal to the required buffer plus an additional five (5) feet. However, the rear yard setback shall not be less than 25 feet. 
6.  Maximum height - 35 feet or two and one-half (2½)stories. 
7.  Provide two (2) or more off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
8.  Provide sidewalks adjacent to interior streets, excluding cul-de-sac turnarounds. 
9.  Provide a minimum 40-foot building setback adjacent to exterior streets. The setback may be reduced to 30 feet if a berm, landscaping, fence or wall is provided adjacent to the exterior street(s). 
10.  A maximum of eight (8) dwelling units shall be allowed in each row of townhouses. When an end unit of a townhouse row does not side on a street, an open space or court of at least twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided between it and the adjacent row of townhouses, and this open space shall be divided between the two (2) immediately adjacent townhouse lots as to property or lot lines. 
11.  Where townhouse lots and dwelling units are designed to face upon an open or common access court rather than upon a street, this open court shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet in width and said court shall not include vehicular drives or parking areas. 
12.  Townhouses shall be constructed up to side lot lines without side yards, and no windows, doors, or other opening shall face a side lot line except that that the outside wall of end units may contain such openings. 
13.  Zero Lot Line dwellings shall be constructed against the lot line on one (1) side of a lot, and no windows, doors, or other openings shall be permitted on this side. The access for exterior maintenance shall be assured through a perpetual wall maintenance easement of five (5) feet in width, as necessary. 
14.  A minimum of a two-(2)-hour rated firewall shall be required between each attached dwelling unit. A four-(4)-hour rated firewall shall be required between every fourth attached dwelling unit. Firewalls shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building codes of City of Peachtree Corners. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1902.1. - All R-ZT Amendments to be Conditional Zoning Amendments. 
All R-ZT Single Family Residence Zero Lot Line/Townhouse amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be conditional amendments. In addition to any other conditions that may be imposed by the City Council pursuant to the provisions for conditional zoning in this 2012 Zoning Resolution, a Concept Plan showing the approximate location of all buildings, walls, fences, property lines, landscaping, parking areas and uses and any other features deemed appropriate by the City Council as a result of the above concept plan review and public hearing, shall be included as part of the amendment, and the use of the property for its zoned purposes shall be conditioned on said concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1902.2. - Concept Plan Review. 
The purpose of the concept plan review is to encourage logic, imagination, innovation and variety in the design process and ensure the soundness of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area. The Director of Planning and Development shall review plans for compliance with concept plan review criteria. The recommendations of both the Director of Planning and Development and the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council. 
A.  Required Exhibits . The following exhibits shall be prepared by design professionals, such as planners, engineers, architects or landscape architects and submitted to the Department of Planning and Development. No application for an R-ZT district shall be accepted for processing without these required exhibits. 
1.  A location map indicating existing zoning on the site and the adjacent areas. 
2.  A concept plan drawn no smaller than one (1) inch equals 100 feet, including the following information: 
a.  Lot lines and setbacks; 
b.  Location, shape, size and height of existing and proposed buildings, decorative walls and elements and entrance features; 
c.  Topography with contour intervals no greater than 20 feet; 
d.  Lakes, ponds and floodplains and the sources of floodplain data; 
e.  Stormwater detention areas; 
f.  Existing and proposed landscaping; 
g.  Recreation facilities (if applicable); 
h.  Stages of development, if any; 
i.  Location of off-street parking. 
3.  Floor plans and elevations of all typical units and any other structures such as recreation buildings. 
4.  Information indicating the following: 
a.  Gross and net acreage (see definition of net density); 
b.  Lot sizes (dimensions and square footage); 
c.  Building heights and stories; 
d.  Building coverage for each lot; 
e.  Amount of common open space in square feet (if applicable); 
f.  All tree areas to be retained or added; 
g.  Parking facilities; 
h.  Other architectural and engineering data as may be required to evaluate the project. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
[Sec. 1903. - Reserved for future use.] 
Sec. 1904. - Chattahoochee River Tributary Protection: Stream Buffer Zones Required. 
This section of the Zoning Resolution is adopted pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-453. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1904.1. - Findings and Purposes. 
The City of Peachtree Corners City Council finds that: 
1.  The Chattahoochee River provides multiple benefits, which include use of the river as the primary water supply for metropolitan Atlanta. 
2.  The water quality of the Chattahoochee River depends upon the water quality of the flowing streams tributary to the river. 
3.  Sediment and other polluting materials and conditions, including, but not limited to, pesticides, nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus, toxic materials, and elevations in water temperatures, are harmful to the water quality of the river and its tributaries. 
4.  The riparian vegetation along these watercourses helps preserve water quality. Dense tree growth helps to prevent stream bank erosion and streamside vegetation reduces the amount of sediment and other polluting materials that would otherwise wash into streams. Riparian trees, by shading, help maintain cooler water temperatures and thus enhance water quality. 
Purposes are: 
1.  Promote health, safety and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion siltation and water pollution. 
2.  Create vegetation buffer areas adjacent to tributary streams in the drainage basin of the Chattahoochee River. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1904.2. - Stream Buffer Zone. 
This protection area means the stream channel and the land area extending outward thirty-five (35) horizontal feet from the banks on either side of all flowing streams in the drainage basins of all tributaries of the Chattahoochee River located in [the] City of Peachtree Corners. A flowing stream is defined for the purpose of this section as any stream that is portrayed on the most current United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute quadrangle as a perennial stream Fifteen (15) feet adjacent to the stream bank of said area will be left as a natural buffer and 35-foot minimum will be left as an accessory building setback. (This is not a change in the minimum rear yard setback nor permission to build in the floodplain.) Stream buffer zone (i.e., 15 feet from bank) must be shown on final subdivision plats, commercial and industrial site plans and multi-family residential site plans. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1904.3. - Permit Required. 
No person shall engage in any land disturbing activity within the area without having obtained a development permit or building permit from the Department of Planning and Development. 
No permit will be issued for any land disturbing activity within the protection area unless the land disturbing activity is for the purpose of constructing one (1) of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route, or a public utility including sanitary sewer lines. 
2.  The construction of public utilities including sanitary sewer lines. 
3.  A dam and/or impoundment, a detention, retention, or sediment control pond or facility. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 
Sec. 1904.4. - Exception. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Any public agency or its contractor. 
2.  Any person performing work within a right-of-way of any public agency pursuant to a permit issued by such public agency. 
3.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property provided a written factual report is presented to the Director of Planning and Development within ten (10) days. 
4.  Any development which has received a development permit prior to the adoption of this Section. 
5.  Any work consisting of the operation, repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land existing on the date of adoption of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02-69, Exh. A, 2-28-2016) 


EXHIBIT B 
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL ZONING HEARING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR THE CITY OF PEACHTREE CORNERS CONSISTENT WITH THE ZONING PROCEDURES ACT OF THE STATE OF GEORGIA 
WHEREAS , the City of Peachtree Corners' Mayor and City Council Zoning Hearing Policies and Procedures are attached hereto and incorporated herein and shall govern the procedures for conducting public hearings on zoning matters; and 
WHEREAS , the first reading of this Ordinance was held on February 16, 2016 and the second reading and Public Hearing pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5 were held on February 28, 2016; and 
WHEREAS , this Ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Peachtree Corners, GA while in special called meeting on February 28, 2016, that the Mayor and City Council Zoning Hearing Rules and Procedures, as attached hereto and incorporated herein, are hereby adopted and approved as follows: 
SECTION 1. That before adopting any change to the Zoning Map or Zoning Decisions as defined in OCGA §36-66-3, the Mayor and City Council shall hold a public hearing following the public hearing by the Planning Commission where a recommendation was made on the petition. 
SECTION 2. That notice of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council hearings shall be given simultaneously at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the Mayor and City Council's public hearing and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. Re-notification is not required when a petition is deferred by the Mayor and City Council. 
SECTION 3. That the applicant or agent shall post a free standing sign, not attached to any tree or utility pole, as issued by Planning and Zoning Division in a conspicuous location on each public street frontage of the subject property not later than the 15th day prior to the Planning Commission hearing. 
SECTION 4. That the sign shall be mounted and posted as specified by Planning and Zoning Division. Property that is not posted on the 15th day before the scheduled first hearing date will be administratively removed from the agenda. 
SECTION 5. That when the Planning Commission or the Mayor and City Council defers a petition, the applicant is required to post an updated sign with new hearing dates 15 days prior to the next scheduled hearing date. When a petition is deferred by the Mayor and City Council for less than 15 days, posting an updated sign is not required. 
SECTION 6. That the Planning and Zoning Division shall give notice by regular mail to all property owners within 300 feet of the boundaries of the subject property who appear on the tax records of Gwinnett County as retrieved by the City's Geographic Information System. The notices shall be mailed a minimum of 15 days prior to the hearing date. Re- notification by mail is not required when a petition is deferred by the Mayor and City Council. 
SECTION 7. That the published and mailed notices shall contain the time, place, and purpose of the hearing, the location of the property, and the present and proposed zoning classifications and/or requested use permit. The posted sign shall include the public hearing number and the date, time, and location of the public hearing. Notice shall not be considered inadequate if the mail is not delivered. 
SECTION 8. That the First Reading of this ordinance was on February 16, 2016. 
SECTION 9. That the conduct of zoning hearings in Peachtree Corners shall follow the script as set out below: 
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL ZONING HEARING POLICY AND PROCEDURES SCRIPT 
The Mayor and City council have previously adopted procedures for holding public hearings. Additionally, you will find a copy of the standards of review available at the sign-in table. The City Clerk will call cases on the agenda for public hearing. The Community Development Department will provide a summary of the application and present any recommendations or result of an investigation. The Community Development Director shall make a presentation of the case, after which Mayor and Council may ask questions of the Community Development Director or other city representative providing the report or recommendations. 
After presentation by Community Development Director, the Mayor shall then ask for public comment in support of the zoning request which may include, but is not limited to, the applicant. Those speaking in favor of the zoning request shall be provided a time period of ten (10) minutes to present data, evidence and opinions in support of the zoning request. Those wishing to speak in support of the zoning request may divide their time as they see fit, and the applicant may reserve time for the ten (10) minute allotment for rebuttal. Any member of the Council, upon recognition by the Mayor, may ask questions of the applicant or agent of the application. The period of questions from council shall not be deducted from the applicant's ten (10) minute period. 
At the conclusion of the presentation of data, evidence and opinions in support of the zoning request, those who wish to speak in opposition to the zoning request shall be provided a time period of ten (10) minutes to present data, evidence and opinions in opposition to the zoning request. Those wishing to speak in opposition to the zoning request may divide their time as they see fit. The city shall not be obligated to provide the full ten (10) minute period to the opponents if they elect not to use that much time. Any member of the Council, upon recognitionby the Mayor, may ask questions of any person giving public comment. The period of questions from council shall not be deducted from the ten (10) minute period. . 
At the conclusion of the public comment from opposition, the applicant shall be permitted to utilize any time reserved from the initial ten (10) minutes for rebuttal. 
After completion of this procedure, the Mayor will indicate that the public hearing is closed. Upon closing of the public hearing, there shall be no more addressing of the Mayor or Council by either the applicant or opposition. 
Exhibit "C" 
  
Official Zoning Map for the City of Peachtree Corners 
  
Dated, February 2014  As Adopted February 28, 2016 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia State Law. 

 