/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
1/393
THE CODE OF THE CITY OF WALTHOURVILLE, GEORGIA
____________
Published by Order of the Mayor and City Council
____________
M MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION
CC Tallahassee, Florida .....2011
OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF
WALTHOURVILLE, GEORGIA
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION
____________
Daisy Pray
Mayor
____________
Patricia Green, Post 1
Charlie Anderson, Post 2
Larry D. Baker, Post 3 (Mayor Pro-Tem)
Luciria L. Lovette, Post 4
James Hendry, Post 5
City Council
____________
Jeff Arnold
City Attorney
____________
Juanita Johnson
City Clerk
PREFACE
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
2/393
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Walthourville,
Georgia.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the mayor and city council.
The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The
absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the
Code.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within
each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and
which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their
location within the Code is included at the back of this Code.
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local
government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash
refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter.
Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this
system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their
proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one
section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would
be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles,
may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the
end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or
division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that
the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters.
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an
abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents
the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon
indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of
the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may
or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:
CHARTER CHT:1
RELATED
LAWS
RL:1
SPECIAL ACTS SA:1
CHARTER
COMPARATIVE
TABLE
CHTCT:1
RELATED
LAWS
COMPARATIVE
TABLE
RLCT:1
SPECIAL ACTS
COMPARATIVE
TABLE
SACT:1
CODE CD1:1
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
3/393
CODE
APPENDIX
CDA:1
CODE
COMPARATIVE
TABLES
CCT:1
STATE LAW
REFERENCE
TABLE
SLT:1
CHARTER
INDEX
CHTi:1
CODE INDEX CDi:1
Indexes
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several
headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language
generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the
indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is
interested.
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the
publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be
properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders
of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete
pages.
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised
pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted
according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be
inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and
filed for historical reference purposes.
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Mary McEwen, Code Attorney, and Karen Barrington,
Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members
of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Juanita Johnson, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the
progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a
Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be
a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs.
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of
Walthourville, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents;
section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering
system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or
reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the
City of Walthourville, Georgia.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
4/393
© Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Walthourville, Georgia. 2011.
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
Subpart A - CHARTER
FULL TITLE
An Act to incorporate the City of Walthourville in the County of Liberty; to create a Charter for said city; to
prescribe the corporate limits of said city; to provide for the government of said city: to enumerate the corporate
powers of the city; to provide for ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations; to provide for the officials of said
city and their selection, oath, compensation, powers, duties and terms of office; to provide for filling vacancies;
to provide for the fiscal administration of the city government; to provide for the levy and collection of taxes; to
provide for elections; to provide for the registration of voters; to provide for the method of conducting elections;
to provide for the establishment of a recorder's court; to provide for the appointment of the recorder; to provide
for the qualifications and compensation of the recorder; to provide for the jurisdiction of the recorder's court; to
provide for appeals from the recorder's court; to provide for the payment of court costs; to provide for rules for
the recorder's court; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to provide for severability; to repeal
conflicting laws; and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia:
FOOTNOTE(S):
(1) Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the city, as enacted by 1974 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1056), page
2704. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions.
The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Any
provisions regarding the title, publication date, approval date, notice to introduce legislation, and jurat have been
omitted. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of
headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by
brackets.
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, CORPORATE LIMITS AND CORPORATE POWERS
Sec. 1-1. - Incorporation.
This Act shall constitute the Charter of the City of Walthourville, Georgia. The City of Walthourville, Georgia, in
the County of Liberty, and the inhabitants thereof, shall be a body politic and corporate under the name and style
of the "City of Walthourville," and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may contract and be contracted
with, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all the courts of law and equity, and in all actions
whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal and change it at pleasure.
Sec. 1-2. - Corporate limits.
The corporate limits of the City of Walthourville shall include all the area embraced within 4,800 feet in every
direction from the center of the crossing of the Hinesville-Walthourville Road (Old Hinesville-Ludowici Road)
and the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad, except that where said line intersects or touches the boundary line of
Long County, the corporate limits of Walthourville shall follow the Long County line.
Sec. 1-3. - Corporate powers.
The corporate powers of the city, to be exercised by the mayor and council, shall include, but shall not be limited
to, the following:
(1)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
5/393
To assess and collect ad valorem tax upon all property, both real and personal, within the limits of said city, for
the purpose of providing revenue for the ordinary expenses of the municipal government; to levy and collect an
excise tax upon the business of selling malt beverages; to levy and collect a specific or occupation tax on all
businesses, occupations, professions, callings, or trades exercised within the city as may be deemed just and
proper, and by ordinance to classify said businesses; to fix license fees on all privileges, occupations, trades, and
professions within the police powers of the city.
(2)
To provide by ordinance for the return or assessment, or both, of all real or personal property for taxation, at the
value provided for by law, and no more; to penalize defaulters, to prescribe the time or times at which same shall
be due, and have the power to enforce the same by an execution issued by the clerk, directed to the chief of
police, and bearing teste in the name of the mayor, and sales thereunder shall be had as prescribed in Chapter 92-
44 of the Code of Georgia of 1933, as now or hereafter amended.
Editor's note—
The provisions of chapter 92-44 of the Code of Georgia of 1933 can now be found at O.C.G.A., § 48-5-359.
(3)
To provide by ordinance for the registration of all businesses and occupations that are subject to a specific tax or
license fee, and the time when same shall be due; to provide penalties for engaging in same without first
registering and paying the tax or fee; to enforce the collection of same by execution, as provided in the previous
subsection.
(4)
To prohibit a nuisance in the city and to provide for its abatement, whether on public or private property. The
recorder of the city shall have jurisdiction of all nuisance abatement proceedings in the city. The city may
provide by ordinance for any building, structure, or condition maintained in violation of any valid law of this
State or any valid ordinance of the city, to be adjudged a nuisance and for its abatement at the owner's expense
upon his failure or refusal to abate the same within ten days after written notice from the city to do so and after
an opportunity to be heard on same.
(5)
To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards.
(6)
To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety
regulations not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting.
(7)
To regulate and control all hotels and public houses within the city.
(8)
To regulate and license or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the
impoundment of same for violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for their disposition by sale, gift,
or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance.
(9)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
6/393
To require the owners of lots to drain same; to fill up excavations or depressions; to drain cellars and cisterns and
fill up same if necessary; and upon failure to do so after reasonable notice, to have same done at owner's
expense, and to enforce the collection of the amount so expended by an execution against said property on which
said work was done.
(10)
To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the
operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in amounts prescribed by
ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles, or any other
reasonable regulations as may be prescribed by ordinance.
(11)
To regulate junk dealers; pawn shops; the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the sale and
use of firearms; the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials; the use
of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or
property.
(12)
To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave,
curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of and light
streets, roads, alleys and walkways within the corporate limits of the city, at the expense of the owners of the
adjoining property, enforcing the payment of said cost by execution against the said adjoining property, and
against the owners of the same, which shall be issued and levied as executions for taxes, and sales thereunder
and all the incidents of purchase and redemption shall be the same as if said sale was had for taxes.
(13)
To construct or extend sewers in any of the streets or alleys of said city or any territory thereof; to assess such
part of the costs of the same on the real estate abutting on the street or alley on which may be extended,
according to frontage, as may be just and reasonable, and to enforce the payment of the same by execution
against the abutting real estate and the owners thereof in the same manner as an execution for taxes.
(14)
To grant franchises and rights-of-way through the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the
use of public utilities.
(15)
To establish minimum standards for and to regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and
equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing, and housing for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare,
and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards.
(16)
To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs,
fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets
and roads within the corporate limits of the city.
(17)
To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural
streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
7/393
(18)
To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks, public
grounds, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment,
airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, conservation, athletic, curative, correctional,
detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or
outside the corporate boundaries of the city; and to regulate the use thereof; and for such purposes property may
be acquired by condemnation under Part II of Title 36 of the Code of Georgia of 1933, as now or hereafter
amended, or other applicable public acts.
(19)
To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to provide power and authority to
take all necessary and proper means for keeping the city limits free from garbage, trash and filth. Charges or fees
may be imposed to cover the costs of such services, which if unpaid, shall constitute a debt which shall be
subject to a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner, and
under the same remedies, as a lien for city property taxes.
(20)
To provide for the prevention and punishment of vice, obscenity, immorality, disorderly conduct, riots, and
public disturbances.
(21)
To acquire, construct, equip, maintain, operate, distribute, sell and dispose of public utilities, including but not
limited to a waterworks system, sewerage system, a natural gas system, an electrical power system, and a
community antenna television system, both inside and outside the corporate limits, subject to Chapter 91-9 of the
Code of Georgia. For water, gas and electricity furnished, and for all sewerage and sanitary service rendered,
said city may prescribed the charges, rates, fares, fees, regulations and standards and conditions of service to be
provided, and shall have a lien against any property of the persons served; said lien to be enforceable in the same
manner and with the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. The city may provide by ordinance for the
punishment of those who illegally use said systems. The city may issue bonds for purposes enumerated in this
Section.
(22)
To acquire, by purchase or otherwise, own and equip ice plants and cold storage plants, in connection with the
waterworks system of said city or otherwise, and to do and perform all acts in connection with ownership and
operation and conduct of same, ordinarily incident to the operation and conduct of the same, and to issue bonds
of said city, for the purposes of acquiring, owning and equipping or operating said plants.
(23)
To designate a depository or depositories for all city funds, and to require indemnity bond from such depository
or depositories in the sum fixed by the mayor and council.
(24)
To appropriate and borrow money, to provide for payment of the debts of the city, and to authorize the
expenditure of money for any municipal purpose, or for matters of national or state interest, and to issue general
obligation bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under
this Charter or the general laws of the State. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the
laws governing bond issues by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. Whenever the city
shall desire to create a bonded debt for the purpose of carrying into effect any of the powers and provisions of
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
8/393
this Act, it shall have the right and authority to do so when authorized by a majority of the qualified voters of the
city voting in an election.
(25)
To acquire, dispose of, lease and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal or mixed property, inside or outside
the city.
(26)
To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services but not limited to those stated in
(21) above, not to exceed periods of twenty-five years. The mayor and council may prescribe the rates, fares,
regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise
grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with laws of the State of Georgia.
(27)
To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements.
(28)
To levy taxes and to make appropriations for the purpose of advertising said city and its advantages and
resources so as to bring new capital and commercial and manufacturing and other enterprises into the city, and
also to levy taxes and to make payment from the general revenues and funds of the city for public and charitable
agencies.
(29)
To contract with any State department or agency or any other political subdivision for joint services or the
exchange of services; and to contract with such agencies or subdivisions for the joint use of facilities or
equipment; and to contract with any such agency or subdivision to perform any service or execute any project in
which the municipality has an interest.
(30)
To authorize the providing for surety bonds for employees, said bonds to be payable to the city, with premiums
payable by the city, when necessary or proper.
(31)
To provide that upon the conviction of the violation of any ordinance, rule, regulation or order, the offender may
be punished within limitations prescribed by the mayor and council in such ordinance, rule, regulation, or order
but not exceeding any limitation prescribed by this Act or State law.
(32)
To provide that persons given jail sentences in the recorder's court shall work out such sentences in any public
works or on the public streets of the city as provided by ordinance; or the mayor and council may provide for the
commitment of city prisoners to any county work camp, or other governmental agency or jail, by agreement with
the appropriate county or governmental officers.
(33)
To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be
detrimental, to the health, morals, safety, security, peace, convenience, or general welfare of inhabitants of the
city.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
9/393
(34)
To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to
promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, morals and general
welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all
powers granted in this Act as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to
exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by municipal governments under the
Constitution or general laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this Act shall be
held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to
be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to cities under the Constitution or applicable laws of
the State.
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Sec. 2-1. - Establishment of city government.
The legislative powers of the city shall be vested in a mayor and five councilmen to be known as the "Mayor and
council of the City of Walthourville." The mayor and council shall be elected at large by the qualified voters of
the city and shall exercise their powers in such manner as prescribed by this Act, the Constitution, and applicable
general laws of the State of Georgia, or if not prescribed, in such manner as prescribed by the duly established
ordinances of the city.
Sec. 2-2. - Qualifications for mayor and councilmen.
To be eligible for the office of mayor or councilman, elected or appointed, a person must be at least twenty-one
years of age, must meet the requirements of a qualified voter of said city, as prescribed by State law, and, except
for the first election held under this Charter, must have been a bona fide resident of the city for at least one year
in the case of a councilman and two years in the case of the mayor next preceding the election in which he offers
as a candidate. No person shall be eligible as mayor or councilman who shall have been convicted of a crime
involving moral turpitude unless such person has received a full pardon and has all rights of citizenship restored.
Sec. 2-3. - Mayor and Councilmen; election.
The following individuals are hereby designated as the initial mayor and councilmen of the City of
Walthourville:
Mrs. Lyndol Anderson — Mayor
Miss Celia Davis — Councilman, Post 1
Mrs. Carrie Kent — Councilman, Post 2
Mrs. Maxine Gaskin — Councilman, Post 3
Mrs. Faye Booth — Councilman, Post 4
Mrs. Ardith Herbert — Councilman, Post 5
The mayor and councilmen named in this Section shall serve for a term of office beginning on the date on which
they take their respective oaths of office on or after the effective date of this Act. Said mayor and councilmen
shall hold their respective offices until the 2nd Monday in January 1975, and until their respective successors are
duly elected and qualified.
On the first Wednesday in December 1974, and on said date every four years thereafter, an election shall be held
for the mayor and five councilmen. The terms of office for mayor and councilmen shall begin on the second
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
10/393
Monday in January in the year following their respective election. Except as otherwise provided herein, said
terms shall continue for four years and until their successors are elected and qualified.
In all elections held by the city for the purpose of selecting new members to the city council, candidates must
declare by number which post on the city council they are offering to fill. No candidate's name shall appear on a
general election ballot with a political party designation. All elections shall be nonpartisan and no political party
or body shall hold or conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for mayor or councilmen. The
candidate receiving a majority of the votes cast for each respective position shall be elected to the city council to
fill that particular vacancy on the council.
Editor's note—
The first sentence of the third paragraph has been superseded and made obsolete by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-9. Elections
to fill municipal offices must be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in each oddnumbered year.
Sec. 2-4. - Mayor and council.
(1)
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, all corporate, legislative and other powers of the city are vested in the
mayor and council. The mayor and council shall hold regular public meetings at a stated time and place as
provided by ordinance. The mayor and council shall meet in special session on call of (a) the mayor, or in his
absence, the mayor pro tem, or (b) two councilmen, and notice of which shall be served on the other members
personally or left at their respective residences at least twelve hours in advance of the meeting. Alternatively, or
in addition thereto, notice of a special session may be given by telephoning the other members. If this method is
used, the first order of business in the special session shall be to enter upon the minutes of the meeting an oath,
or an affidavit by the mayor, or the mayor pro tem or two councilmen calling the special session, attested to by
the city clerk or by another member of the council, any person authorized to administer oaths. Said oath or
affidavit must contain a statement that each councilman was either notified personally by telephone by the person
making the oath or affidavit, or was not capable of being so notified by reason of lack of knowledge of his
whereabouts, or his absence from the State. Any person who is found guilty of false swearing as defined by
section 26-2402 of the Code of Georgia, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, in the above proceeding
shall be punished as provided by law.
Editor's note—
The provisions of § 26-2402 of the Code of Georgia can now be found at O.C.G.A., § 16-10-71.
(2)
Any action taken in a special session which was called by a person later found guilty of false swearing regarding
the telephone notice of any member shall be void, unless ratified unanimously at a regular council meeting held
after said person is found guilty. A ratification of action taken in such a special session by the mayor and council
prior to a conviction for false swearing shall not be effective. Any liability to the city arising from action by the
mayor and council pursuant to a special session in which telephone notice is given, and in which the person
calling the meeting is found guilty of false swearing shall result in several liability for the persons so convicted.
Such notice of a special meeting shall not be required and shall be considered waived if the mayor and all
councilmen are present when the special meeting is called or convened. Only the business stated in the written
call or stated as being the purpose in the oath or affidavit required in special sessions convened under the
telephone notice provision of this Act may be transacted at a special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all
members of the council.
(3)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
11/393
Three of the five councilmen shall constitute a quorum; ordinances and resolutions shall be adopted by majority
vote. The mayor and council may, by ordinance, adopt rules and bylaws to govern the conduct of its business,
including procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of absent members. The mayor and council
may provide by ordinance for punishment for contemptuous behavior conducted in their presence.
Sec. 2-5. - Powers and duties of mayor with respect to council.
The mayor shall recommend such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the city;
may call the mayor and council together at any time when deemed necessary by him; shall preside at meetings of
the mayor and council; shall have a vote only in the case of a tie vote by councilmen; shall sign ordinances and
resolutions on their final passage; may obtain short term loans in the name of the city when authorized by the
council to do so; shall sign deeds, bonds and contracts when authorized by the council to do so; and shall
perform such other duties imposed by this Act and duly adopted ordinances.
Sec. 2-6. - Mayor pro tem.
The mayor and council on the second Monday in January of each year, and after the newly elected councilmen
have taken office following each regular election, shall elect from its membership a mayor pro tem for a term of
one year. Upon the mayor and council's failure to elect a mayor pro tem by the fourth Monday in January of each
year, the incumbent councilman who received the highest number of votes, when last elected, shall be declared
mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem shall have the authority and duty to perform the duties of the mayor
whenever the mayor, for any reason, cannot or will not act.
Sec. 2-7. - Vacancy in office of mayor or councilman.
A vacancy shall exist if the mayor or a councilman resigns, dies, moves his residence from the city, or for any
other reason no longer holds his office, except if granted a leave of absence by the mayor and council and such
leave of absence is entered on the minutes; or if he is adjudged incompetent or is convicted of malfeasance in
office, or of a felony.
The mayor and council shall appoint a qualified citizen of said city to fill any such vacancy in the office of
councilman for the remainder of the unexpired term. The person receiving the majority of the votes of said
council shall be declared elected, and the mayor shall vote in case of a tie.
At no time shall there be more than one appointed councilman holding office; and if a vacancy occurs on the
council with one member so appointed on the council, a special election shall be held within a period of fortyfive (45) days after the office becomes vacant pursuant to a call of a special election as provided by this Act;
however, if a special election is called pursuant to this Act, the vacancy previously filled by appointment as well
as the existing vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired terms in a special election; provided,
however, if a regular election for the city shall be held within three (3) months after the second vacancy occurs,
the first vacancy previously filled by appointment and the second vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired terms
at such regular election.
In the event a vacancy should occur in the office of mayor, a special election shall be called and held in the
manner prescribed by the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the Code of Georgia, as it now exists
or may hereafter be amended, so long as the vacancy occurs at least three (3) months prior to the regular
expiration date of the term. If the vacancy occurs within three (3) months of the expiration date of the term, the
mayor pro tem shall serve until the expiration date and shall be authorized during said period to exercise all of
the powers of the mayor, hereinbefore or hereinafter provided.
Editor's note—
The provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the Code of Georgia can now be found at
O.C.G.A., § 21-2-540 et seq.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
12/393
Sec. 2-8. - Compensation and expenses.
The mayor shall receive $150.00 per month, and each councilman shall receive $75.00 per month as
compensation for their services as such. Each councilman and the mayor, when authorized by the mayor and
council and upon presentation of itemized vouchers, shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in
the performance of their duties of office. Said compensation and expenses shall be paid from the funds of the
city.
Sec. 2-9. - Misfeasance or malfeasance in office.
In case the mayor or any councilman, while in office, shall be guilty of any misfeasance, malfeasance, willful
neglect, or abuse of the powers confided in him, he shall be subject to indictment in the Superior Court of
Liberty County, and on conviction shall be fined in a sum not exceeding $100.00, and shall be removed from
office. The said fine may be collected by execution and shall be paid to the city treasurer for the use of the city.
Sec. 2-10. - Bond of clerk.
The mayor and council shall require the clerk, before entering upon discharge of his duties, to give good and
sufficient bond in the amount to be decided by the mayor and council, said bond payable to the city, for the
faithful performance of his duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations or unlawful
expenditures. Said surety bond shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the State of
Georgia and approved by the mayor and council, and the premium thereon shall be paid by the city. The mayor
and council may require such bonds from any other officers and employees thereof.
Sec. 2-11. - City legislation.
Any action of the mayor and council having a regulatory or penal effect or required to be done by ordinance
under this Act, shall be done only by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be in written form before being introduced.
The affirmative vote of a majority of those members of the council present and voting shall be required to pass
any resolution or ordinance. After adoption of ordinances, the city clerk shall number ordinances consecutively,
in the order of their final adoption, and shall copy them into a permanent record book used solely for this
purpose; and the city clerk shall do likewise for resolutions, using a separate series of numbers and a separate
record book. The original copies of all ordinances, resolutions, and motions shall be filed and preserved by the
city clerk.
Sec. 2-12. - Readings.
No ordinance, except in the case of an emergency which shall be stated in the ordinance, shall be approved until
it shall have been read at two consecutive meetings of the mayor and council not less than seven days apart;
provided that this requirement may be waived by two-thirds of those voting upon the question of waiver.
Sec. 2-13. - Codification of ordinances.
The mayor and council may adopt a code of ordinances and may amend and repeal the same, or any part thereof.
ARTICLE III. - CITY ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 3-1. - Organization.
The mayor and council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge or consolidate offices, positions of
employment, departments, commissions, boards, and agencies of the city, may provide that the same person shall
fill a number of offices and positions of employment, and may transfer or change the functions and duties of
offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city.
Sec. 3-2. - Duties of mayor and council.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
13/393
The mayor shall have such powers and duties as may be provided by ordinance not inconsistent with this Act.
The mayor and council shall appoint a city attorney and members of boards and commissions and shall
determine their duties and compensation. The city attorney shall be appointed for an indefinite term but may be
removed by a majority vote of the mayor and council.
Sec. 3-3. - Administrative duties of mayor.
The mayor shall be the executive head of the city government, responsible for the efficient and orderly
administration of the city's affairs. He shall be responsible for the enforcement of laws, rules and regulations,
ordinances and franchises in the city, and the city attorney shall take such legal actions as the mayor may direct
for such purposes. He shall have authority to appoint, promote, demote, transfer, suspend and remove all officers
and employees and to direct and control their work, except as otherwise provided in the Act. He shall submit to
the council annual budgets, reports, and such other information as he may deem necessary or the council may
require. He shall have authority to make allotments of funds within the limits of appropriations and no
expenditure shall be made without his approval. If no other employee is designated as purchasing agent, he shall
act as purchasing agent for the city. He may conduct inquiries and investigations into the conduct of the city's
affairs and shall have such other powers and duties as may be provided by ordinances not inconsistent with this
Act.
Sec. 3-4. - Political activity prohibited.
No officer or employee of the city, other than the mayor and councilmen, shall continue in the employment of the
city after becoming a candidate for nomination or election to any city office.
Sec. 3-5. - City planning commission.
The mayor and council may create and establish a planning commission pursuant to the provisions of general
law as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended.
ARTICLE IV. - FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 4-1. - Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of July and shall end on the thirtieth day of
June of each year, but a different fiscal year may be fixed by ordinance for the entire city government or for any
utility. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for fiscal accounting and reporting of every
office, department, agency and activity of the city government, unless otherwise prohibited by law.
Sec. 4-2. - Mayor to submit annual budget.
Not later than thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a
proposed operating budget for the next fiscal year, showing separately for the general funds, each utility, and
each other fund the following: (1) the revenue and expenditure during the preceding fiscal year; (2)
appropriations and estimated revenue and recommended expenditures for the next fiscal year; (3) a comparative
statement of assets, liabilities, reserves and surplus at the end of the preceding fiscal year; and estimated assets,
liabilities, reserves and surplus at the end of the current fiscal year; and (4) such other information and data, as
may be considered necessary by the mayor and council.
Sec. 4-3. - Action by mayor and council on budget.
Before the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year, the mayor and council shall adopt an appropriation ordinance,
based on the mayor's budget, with such modifications as the mayor and council considers necessary or desirable.
Appropriations need not be in more detail than a lump sum for each department, office, and agency unless
otherwise directed by the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall not make any appropriations in excess
of estimated revenue, except to provide for an actual emergency threatening the health, property, or lives, safety
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
14/393
or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, provided the mayor and council unanimously agree that there is
such an emergency.
If conditions prevent the adoption of an appropriation ordinance before the beginning of the new fiscal year, the
appropriations for the last fiscal year shall become the appropriations for the new fiscal year, subject to
amendment as provided by ordinance specifically passed for such purpose.
Sec. 4-4. - Additional appropriations.
The council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget, at any
regular or special meeting called for such purpose, but any such additional appropriations may be made for any
public purpose only from an existing unappropriated surplus.
Sec. 4-5. - Lapse of appropriations.
All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget at the end of the fiscal year shall
lapse into the unappropriated surplus or reserves of the fund or funds from which such appropriations were
made.
Sec. 4-6. - Capital improvements budget.
(1)
Not later than thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a
proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing such
improvements. The council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed
program and proposed means of financing. The council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of
any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such projects are included in the
capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening the lives, health or property of
inhabitants, when passed by an affirmative vote of four (4) councilmen. Such capital improvements budget may
be revised and extended each year with regard to the capital improvements still pending or in the process of
construction or acquisition.
(2)
Before the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year, the council shall adopt an appropriation ordinance based on the
proposed capital improvements budget, with such modifications as the council considers necessary or desirable.
No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the
appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, the mayor may submit
amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year. Any such amendments to the
capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a majority vote of the mayor and
council.
Sec. 4-7. - Sale of city property.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the mayor and council may sell any city property which is obsolete,
surplus, or unusable at public or private sale, with or without advertisement and for such consideration as the
mayor and council shall deem equitable and just to the city.
Sec. 4-8. - Annual audit.
The mayor and council shall employ a certified public accountant to make an annual audit of all financial books
and records of the city. The accountant shall file his report with the mayor and council and shall prepare a
summary of the report which shall be furnished or made available to the mayor and every councilman.
Sec. 4-9. - Publication of financial statement.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
15/393
As soon as practicable after the close of the fiscal year, but within six months after the close thereof, the mayor
and council shall cause to be published in a local newspaper, a statement of financial condition which shall
contain a statement of revenues and expenditures showing all municipal accounts as of the close of such
preceding fiscal year. Such statement of financial condition shall be prepared so as to fairly represent the general
financial condition of the city, as of the close of the preceding fiscal year.
Sec. 4-10. - Property taxes.
All property subject to taxation for State or county purposes, assessed as of January 1, in each year, shall be
returned for taxes each year on or before April 1. The mayor and council by ordinance may provide for an
independent city assessment as provided by law or may elect to use the county assessment for the year in which
city taxes are to be levied as provided by Georgia law. If an independent city assessment is made, a board of
equalization, consisting of three freeholders of the city appointed by the mayor and council, with compensation
fixed by ordinance, shall hear appeals of taxpayers taken within ten days after the city clerk has sent a notice, by
ordinary mail, of a new or increased assessment; provided that such notice shall not be required, nor may appeals
be taken, in the case of initial city assessments that are the same as county assessments. Except as otherwise
provided in this Section, appeals involving city property assessments may be taken as now or as may hereinafter
be provided by general law.
Sec. 4-11. - Tax levy.
The mayor and council shall make a tax levy, expressed as a fixed millage rate per $100.00 of assessed valuation.
Said city is hereby authorized to levy taxes in excess of the limitations prescribed by Georgia Code Sections 92-
4101 to 92-4104 and such limitations shall not be applicable to the City of Walthourville.
Editor's note—
The final sentence of this section is no longer valid, as Georgia Code 1933, §§ 92-4101 to 92-4104 were not
redesignated by the General Assembly in the 1981 Code.
Sec. 4-12. - Tax bills.
(1)
The city shall send tax bills to taxpayers, showing the assessed valuations, amount of taxes due, tax due dates
and information as to delinquency dates and penalties. Failure to send tax bills shall not, however, invalidate any
tax. Property taxes shall become delinquent if not paid on or before November 1 of each year which time may be
changed by ordinance, at which time a penalty of ten percent (10%) in addition to a fi. fa. charge shall be added
and thereafter such taxes shall be subject to interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum, from the due
date until paid. On and after the date when such taxes become delinquent, the tax records of the city shall have
the force and effect of a judgment of a court of record.
(2)
Said city shall have the right, power and authority to provide by ordinance for the return of all real and personal
property for taxation; to provide for the compelling of such return; and to provide penalties for failure to do so
after due notice and hearing to be prescribed by the mayor and council, for the current or any previous year, not
in any conflict with any limitation prescribed by the laws of Georgia; to prescribe the time or times at which said
returns are due; and to provide the time or times when said taxes shall be due and payable.
Sec. 4-13. - Collection of Delinquent Taxes.
The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi. fa. issued by the
city clerk and executed by the chief of police under the same procedure provided by laws governing execution of
such process from the Superior Court, or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
16/393
shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of
each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those for State or
county taxes.
Sec. 4-14. - Transfer of executions.
The city clerk shall be authorized to transfer and assign any fi. fa. or execution issued for street, sewer, or any
other assessment in the same manner, upon the same terms, and to the same effect, and thereby vest the
purchaser or transferee, with the same rights as in cases of sales or transfers of tax fi. fas. as now provided by
law; and in all sales of property hereafter made under execution in behalf of the city for the collection of street,
sewer and other assessments, the owner or owners, as the case may be, are authorized to redeem same within the
same time and on compliance with the same terms and payment of the same premium, interest and costs, as in
cases of redemption of property where sold under State or county ad valorem tax fi. fa., as the same now exists,
or as may from time to time be provided by law.
Sec. 4-15. - Special assessments.
The mayor and council may assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving
any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers or other utility mains and appurtenances, against the
abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special
assessments shall become delinquent thirty days after their due dates, and shall thereupon be subject, in addition
to fi. fa. charges, to a penalty of ten percent (10%) and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate of seven
percent (7%) per annum from due date until paid. A lien for such amount plus fi. fa. charges, interest and
penalties, shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens, except that it shall be of equal
dignity with liens for county and city property taxes, and said lien shall be enforceable by the same procedures
and under the same remedies as provided in this Article for city property taxes.
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(2) Editor's note— Sections 5-1 through 5-4, 5-6 through 5-7, and 5-9 have been superseded and made obsolete
by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. II, §§ I—III and the Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.
Sec. 5-1. - Time for holding elections.
The regular elections for mayor and councilmen shall be held on the first Wednesday in December 1974, and
every four years thereafter.
(1975 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 297), page 3639, § 1
Sec. 5-2. - Qualification of candidates.
Any person desiring to become a candidate in any regular election shall file written notice of his candidacy with
the municipal superintendent not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days, as provided by
ordinance, prior to the date fixed for the holding of any such election. Written notice of candidacy for any special
election shall be filed with said superintendent not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days, as provided
by ordinance, prior to the date fixed for the holding of any such election.
Sec. 5-3. - Qualification of electors.
Any person meeting the qualifications of an elector as prescribed by the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title
34A of the Code of Georgia, as amended, shall be qualified to register as an elector in any city election held
under this Act.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
17/393
Sec. 5-4. - Applicability of general laws.
Except as otherwise provided by this Act, the election of all officials of the City of Walthourville where
provision is made for election by the qualified voters thereof shall be conducted as to special or general elections
in conformity, so far as applicable, with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the
Code of Georgia, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. Whenever any time period established by said
Code is altered so as to change or supersede any time period provided herein, it shall be considered that said
periods herein shall be correspondingly changed so as to avoid any conflict between this Act and the general law.
Sec. 5-5. - Time of election; polls.
The polls shall be opened from 7 o'clock a.m. to 7 o'clock p.m.
Sec. 5-6. - Place of elections.
The polling place or places for holding elections shall be prescribed by the mayor and council and shall be
published in the election notice; provided, however, any change in a polling place shall be effected as provided
by Code Section 34A-604 of the Municipal Election Code, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended.
Sec. 5-7. - Voter registration.
In all elections held in the City of Walthourville, whether primary or general elections, the voters, in addition to
the qualifications already prescribed, shall be registered as may be prescribed by ordinance.
Sec. 5-8. - Rules.
The mayor and council are hereby authorized to enact by ordinance such additional rules consistent with this Act
and general laws as are deemed necessary for the conduct of elections.
Sec. 5-9. - Absentee ballots.
The mayor and council in its discretion is authorized to provide by ordinance for absentee ballots for any city
election
Sec. 5-10. - Call for election.
Any call for an election which is required to be made by the laws of this State shall be made by the mayor and
council, except as otherwise provided herein.
Sec. 5-11. - Organization.
The persons elected as mayor and councilmen shall attend on the second Monday in January at the council
chamber for the purpose of qualifying and taking the oath of office. The mayor and each councilman so elected
shall take and subscribe before some officer authorized to administer same the following oath: "I do solemnly
swear that I will well and truly perform the duties of mayor (or councilman, as the case may be), by adopting
such measures as in my judgment shall be best calculated to promote the general welfare of the inhabitants of the
City of Walthourville, and the common interest thereof; so help me God." They shall then immediately enter
upon the discharge of the duties of their respective offices.
ARTICLE VI. - RECORDER'S COURT
FOOTNOTE(S):
(3) Editor's note— All courts in the state which have jurisdiction over the violation of municipal ordinances
shall be deemed to mean "a municipal court and when such terms [recorder's court] refer to a court of a
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
18/393
municipal corporation, the term `municipal court' is inserted in lieu thereof" per O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1.
Sec. 6-1. - Creation.
There is hereby established a court to be known as the "Recorder's Court, City of Walthourville," which shall
have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a
violation of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such
penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance, and to punish also any person who
may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any
proceeding before said court, to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses
within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are placed within
the jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws
and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof; to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence
of those charged with violations and to prescribe the condition of forfeiture of the same; and to administer oaths
and to perform all other acts necessary and proper to the conduct of said court. The presiding officer of such
court shall be known as the recorder. Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at
such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. The court shall sit at a place designated by
the mayor and council.
Sec. 6-2. - Recorder.
(1)
No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as recorder, unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years,
shall not have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude and shall be qualified to vote in Liberty
County. Until such time that the mayor and council shall appoint a recorder, the mayor, or in his absence the
mayor pro tem, shall act as recorder. The compensation of the recorder shall be fixed by the mayor and council.
(2)
The mayor and council may appoint a recorder pro tem to serve in the absence of the recorder. Said recorder pro
tem shall have the same qualifications as the recorder. If the mayor is the recorder, the mayor pro tem shall act as
the recorder pro tem.
(3)
Before entering on duties of his office, the recorder or recorder pro tem shall take an oath before an officer duly
authorized to administer oaths in this State, that he will truly, honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his
office to the best of his ability without fear, favor, or partiality. This oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the
meeting of the mayor and council.
Sec. 6-3. - Jurisdiction.
The recorder shall have power to impose fines, costs and forfeitures for the violation of any law or ordinance of
the city passed in accordance with this Act. Said recorder shall have the authority to punish for contempt by
imposing a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or any combination of
the two. He shall be to all intents and purposes a justice of the peace, so far as to enable him to issue warrants for
offenses committed within the limits of the city, which warrants may be executed by an officer of said city, and
to commit the offenders to jail or admit them to bail in bailable cases for their appearance at the next term of
court of competent jurisdiction to be held in said city. The recorder's court shall also have concurrent jurisdiction
with that of a justice of the peace over offenses against the criminal laws of the State committed within the
corporate limits. Except as may be herein otherwise specified, the court is specifically invested with all
jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area within the corporate limits granted by State laws generally to
mayors', recorders', and police courts, and particularly such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. Said
recorder is hereby authorized to administer oaths.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
19/393
Sec. 6-4. - Right of appeal.
The right of appeal and procedures pertaining to appeal bonds to the Superior Court of Liberty County from the
recorder's court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals
and appeals bonds from the Court of Ordinary. An appeal to the Superior Court shall be a de novo proceeding,
and the city shall be entitled to reimbursement of its costs therefor.
Sec. 6-5. - Court costs.
In all cases in the recorder's court, the costs incurred and allowable herein may be computed under the provisions
of the laws of the State of Georgia fixing costs in the justice of the peace courts of said State, or the mayor and
council may establish a schedule of fees to defray costs of operation and the city shall be entitled to
reimbursement of the costs, meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to the Superior Court
for violations of State law. The mayor and council may also provide a uniform scale of costs of the clerk and
police officers of said city for all services in the arrest and prosecution of offenders in the recorder's court and in
the issuance and collection of tax and other executions; and for their collections and payment into the city
treasury. The recorder is hereby authorized to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses to said
recorder's court, and to issue such other processes as may be necessary for the proper administration of said
court.
Sec. 6-6. - Rules for court.
With the approval of the mayor and council, the recorder shall have full power and authority to make reasonable
rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the business of
said court; provided, however, that the mayor and council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations
relative to the procedures of the operation of the superior courts under the general laws of the State of Georgia or
other rules and regulations deemed desirable thereby. The recorder shall have the powers of a superior court
judge to control the proceedings in said court.
ARTICLE VII. - SEVERABILITY
Sec. 7-1. - Severability.
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid
or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses
or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause
or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part hereof. The General
Assembly hereby declared that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such
part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
ARTICLE VIII. - REPEALER
Sec. 8-1. - Repealer.
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed.
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS
JOINT LIBERTY COUNTY, CITY OF GUM BRANCH, CITY OF MIDWAY, CITY OF RICEBORO, AND
CITY OF WALTHOURVILLE FIRE PROTECTION FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT AUTHORITY —
CREATION
To create the Joint Liberty County, City of Gum Branch, City of Midway, City of Riceboro, and City of
Walthourville Fire Protection Facilities and Equipment Authority; to provide for a definition; to provide for the
purpose and powers of the authority; to provide for appointment, eligibility, and terms of the members of the
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
20/393
authority; to provide for organization, quorum, and meetings of the authority; to provide for rules and
regulations; to provide for accountability and for financial and other records and for audits; to limit the powers of
the authority; to provide for judicial jurisdiction; to provide that the powers of the authority are supplemental and
provide for liberal construction; to provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA:
FOOTNOTE(S):
(4) Editor's note— Printed herein is the act creating the Joint Liberty County, City of Gum Branch, City of
Midway, City of Riceboro, and City of Walthourville Fire Protection Facilities and Equipment Authority, as
enacted by 1994 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 246), page 4826. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical
history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains
unchanged from the original act. Any provisions regarding the title, publication date, approval date, notice to
introduce legislation, and jurat have been omitted. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation.
For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used.
Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Sec. 1. - [Definitions.]
As used in this Act, the term "project" means a capital outlay project or projects as defined and authorized under
subparagraph (a)(1)(C) of Code Section 48-8-111 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-8-111] consisting of fire
protection facilities and equipment.
Sec. 2. - [Body politic created; authority.]
(a)
There is created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Joint Liberty County, City of Gum Branch, City
of Midway, City of Riceboro, and City of Walthourville Fire Protection Facilities and Equipment Authority
which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and, by that
name, style, and title, such body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be
impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The authority shall have perpetual existence.
(b)
The authority shall consist of 11 members, who shall be appointed as follows:
(1)
The governing authority of Liberty County shall appoint seven members;
(2)
The governing authority of the City of Gum Branch shall appoint one member;
(3)
The governing authority of the City of Midway shall appoint one member;
(4)
The governing authority of the City of Riceboro shall appoint one member; and
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
21/393
(5)
The governing authority of the City of Walthourville shall appoint one member.
(c)
No person shall be eligible to serve as a member of the authority unless that person:
(1)
Is a resident of Liberty County at the time of appointment;
(2)
Continues to reside within Liberty County during that person's term of office; and
(3)
Is a registered and qualified elector of Liberty County.
(d)
Members of the authority shall be appointed by a majority vote of the members of the governing authority
authorized to make such appointment.
(e)
The initial members of the authority shall be appointed as soon as practicable after July 1, 1994, and serve for a
term of office of one year and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.
(f)
Successors to initial members of the authority whose terms of office expire in 1995 and all future successors to
members of the authority whose terms of office are to expire shall be appointed immediately preceding the
expiration of such terms and shall serve for terms of office of one year each and until the appointment and
qualification of their respective successors.
(g)
There shall be no limit to the number of terms of office to which a person may be appointed to serve as a
member of the authority.
(h)
In the event a vacancy occurs for any reason, such vacancy shall be filled by the applicable appointing authority.
Any person appointed to fill such vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of office and until
the appointment and qualification of such person's successor.
(i)
The members of the authority shall receive no salary for their services.
(j)
The authority shall have full power to organize, adopt rules for its government, and generally to direct the affairs
of the authority. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the power of the authority to exercise all of the rights
and powers of and perform all of the duties and obligations of the authority.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
22/393
(k)
The chairperson of the authority shall be a member elected annually by the membership of the authority. Such
person shall serve as chairperson during that person's term of office.
(l)
A majority of the members in office shall constitute a quorum. The authority shall have perpetual existence;
provided, however, that nothing contained in this Act shall preclude the General Assembly of Georgia from
amending this Act.
Sec. 3. - [Accountability of authority.]
The members of the authority shall be accountable in all respects as trustees, and the authority shall keep suitable
books and records of all its obligations, contracts, transactions, undertakings, income, receipts of every nature,
and expenditures of every kind. The financial books and records of the authority shall be audited annually by the
same auditor employed to audit the books and records of the Liberty County government. Said audit shall be
paid for by the authority, and copies shall be furnished to the Board of Commissioners of Liberty County. Said
audit shall be a public record.
Sec. 4. - [Purpose; power.]
(a)
The purpose of the authority shall be for the acquiring, constructing, equipping, or any combination thereof, in
accordance with subparagraph (a)(1)(C) of Code Section 48-8-111 of the O.C.G.A., of a capital outlay project or
projects consisting of fire protection facilities and equipment for the use and benefit of the citizens of Liberty
County, the City of Gum Branch, the City of Midway, the City of Riceboro, and the City of Walthourville. The
proceeds collected pursuant to the levy of the special county 1 percent sales and use tax pursuant to Article 3 of
Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. art. 3, ch. 8 tit. 48] shall only be expended for such capital
outlay project purposes and shall not be expended for maintenance and operation purposes. Without limiting the
generality of any provisions of this Act, the further purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring,
constructing, equipping, maintaining, and operating adequate fire protection services, facilities, and equipment;
making such facilities and the services thereof available to public and private consumers and users located in
Liberty County and its environs, including municipalities inside the county; extending and improving such
facilities; acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, with the right to contract for the use
of or to lease or sell any or all of such facilities, including real property, to any persons, firms, or corporations,
whether public or private, if in the sole judgment of the authority such use, lease, or sale supports the general
purposes of the authority; and, doing all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient, and desirable for
and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such type of undertakings.
(b)
The authority shall have the power to:
(1)
Adopt and alter a corporate seal;
(2)
Make contracts and execute all instruments necessary or convenient in connection with its purposes; and
(3)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
23/393
Adopt, alter, or repeal its own bylaws, rules, and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be
transacted and in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the authority may deem necessary or
expedient in facilitating its business.
Sec. 5. - [Areas which authority has no power.]
The authority shall not have the power of eminent domain. The authority shall not have the power to issue
revenue bonds or certificates of participation. The authority shall not have the power to incur any indebtedness in
or for the purpose of the acquisition of real or personal property.
Sec. 6. - [Action brought against authority.]
Any action brought against the authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Liberty County and such court
shall have exclusive jurisdiction of such action.
Sec. 7. - [Supplemental and additional powers.]
The provisions of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the
things authorized by this Act and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other
laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing.
Sec. 8. - [Construed to effect purpose of Act.]
This Act, being for the welfare of Liberty County and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the
purposes of this Act.
Sec. 9. - [Effective date.]
This Act shall become effective on July 1, 1994.
Sec. 10. - [Repealer.]
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and Related Laws and any amendments thereto.
Ga. Laws
Year
Act No. Page Section
this
Charter
or
Related
Laws
1974 1056 2704 Char.
1994 246 4826 R.L.
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. - Code designation and citation.
The provisions embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The
Code of the City of Walthourville, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the
"Walthourville City Code."
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
24/393
State law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19.
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and city council or unless the context
clearly requires otherwise:
(1)
General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved
usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate
meaning. In all interpretations, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in
view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition
of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands.
(2)
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the
city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject
matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be
deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general.
(3)
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders.
(4)
Singular and plural. Every word importing the singular number only shall extend and be applied to several
persons or things as well as to one person or thing; and every word importing the plural number only shall
extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things.
(5)
Tenses. The use of any verb in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
(6)
Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more city officers or other persons shall
be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise
expressly declared in the law giving the authority.
(7)
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or other officer of the city to do
some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate,
delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty, unless the terms of the
provision designate otherwise.
(8)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
25/393
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in any code provision or ordinance,
or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the
first day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be
excluded. When any such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday, from midnight to midnight, shall be
excluded. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
(9)
Shall and may. The term "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory. The term "may" is permissive.
(10)
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the
conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate
cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable:
a.
The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply.
b.
The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any
combination.
c.
The term "either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but
not in combination.
(11)
Statutory references. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as now or
hereafter amended. Any reference to a state act, whether by short title or year, page number and/or act number, is
a reference to such act, as amended.
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions.
Words and phrases used in this Code shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified:
Advice and consent. Whenever the term "advice and consent" of the city council is used in this Code it shall be
construed to mean an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire city council.
City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Walthourville, Georgia.
City council, council. The term "city council" or "the council" means the city council of the City of
Walthourville, Georgia.
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of the City of Walthourville, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. This
Code consists of subparts A and B.
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Liberty County, Georgia.
Court. The term "court" means the municipal court of the city.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
26/393
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours.
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the mayor and
city council of the City of Walthourville, Georgia.
Judge or recorder. The term "judge" or "recorder" means the judge of the municipal court of the city.
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the City of Walthourville, Georgia.
Mayor and city council. The term "mayor and city council" means the mayor and city council of the City of
Walthourville, Georgia.
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.
Municipality. The term "municipality" shall be construed as synonymous with the term "city," "town," or
"municipal corporation."
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for
an oath, and in such cases the terms "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the term "swear" or "sworn."
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or to land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, agency, partnership, association, organization,
government, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as
hereinafter defined.
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The term "property" includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests.
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard, or open space
adjacent thereto, or any area available accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly
owned, and any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or to congregate.
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
Reasonable time or notice. The term "reasonable time or notice" means only such time as may be necessary for
the prompt performance of the act required.
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the mayor and city council of a special or temporary
character.
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and
improved walkways.
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when the
person cannot write.
State. The term "state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia.
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway,
alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approach thereto, within the city.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
27/393
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or to land, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or
with others.
Week. The term "week" means seven calendar days.
Writing or written. The term "writing" or "written" includes printing and any other mode of representing words
and letters.
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year.
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes.
(a)
The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere captions to indicate the
contents of the section or subsection and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any
part of the section or subsection, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections or subsections, including the headings and catchlines, is amended or re-enacted.
(b)
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect
and are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes and state law
references which appear after sections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for
the convenience of the user and have no legal effect.
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section or ordinance.
(a)
The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not
affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding
commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
(b)
When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed,
such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it
shall be expressly so provided.
Sec. 1-6. - Amending Code.
(a)
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code shall be
numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of
repealed chapters, sections, and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed
portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until such time as the Code and subsequent ordinances omitted are readopted as a new
Code by the city council.
(b)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
28/393
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by specific reference to the section number of
this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of the Code of the City of Walthourville, Georgia,
is hereby amended to read as follows …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired.
(c)
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be
used. "The Code of the City of Walthourville, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter,
article, division, or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered ____________, that reads as follows: …." The
new provision shall then be set out in full as desired.
(d)
All sections, chapters, or provisions sought to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or
chapter number, with reference to the subject matter, as the case may be.
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code,
or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever
which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, except by ordinance or resolution or other
official act of the mayor and city council.
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty.
(a)
In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means:
(1)
Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by
rule or regulation authorized by ordinance;
(2)
Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by
ordinance; or
(3)
Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by
rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(b)
In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to
perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this
section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon
the officer or employee.
(c)
Except as otherwise provided:
(1)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
29/393
A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or compulsory labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks,
squares, or other public places for a period not exceeding 30 days, or any combination thereof.
(2)
With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues
is a separate offense.
(3)
With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation
continues is a separate offense.
(d)
The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other
administrative sanctions.
(e)
Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by
injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty
does not prevent equitable relief.
State law reference— Limits on general penalty, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); authority to punish ordinance
violations by requiring labor, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8.
Sec. 1-9. - Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this Code is, for any reason, declared
invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect.
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code.
(a)
By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared whenever authorized or directed by
the mayor and city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts
of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement, and all changes made
thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code
and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages
shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption
of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b)
In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded
from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c)
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the
supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
30/393
supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier
may:
(1)
Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
(2)
Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the
supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles.
(3)
Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to
accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers.
(4)
Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division,"
etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________," inserting section numbers to indicate
the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code.
(5)
Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted
into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material
included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances not affected by the Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the
validity of any of the following:
(1)
Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or
accruing before the effective date of this Code;
(2)
Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the
issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness;
(3)
Any contract or obligation assumed by the city;
(4)
Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless superseded;
(5)
Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing employment and personnel policies and procedures;
(6)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
31/393
Any right of franchise granted by the city to any person, firm, or corporation;
(7)
Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, widening,
paving, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city;
(8)
Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city;
(9)
Any appropriation ordinance;
(10)
Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term;
(11)
Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
(12)
Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a board of zoning appeals or
planning commission, including joint commissions;
(13)
Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision
regulations;
(14)
Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city or annexing property to the city;
(15)
The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this
Code;
(16)
Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code;
(17)
Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets,
parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not
in conflict or inconsistent with this Code;
(18)
Any ordinance or resolution establishing or amending the comprehensive water conservation plan;
(19)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
32/393
Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; and
(20)
Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is
referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect.
Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part
thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or
superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the
same extent as if set out at length in this Code.
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. - Fiscal year.
The city shall observe a fiscal year beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
(Ord. No. 75-3-1, 3-11-1975)
Sec. 2-2. - Meetings.
Regular meetings shall be held on the second and fourth Thursday of each month.
(Ord. No. 08-02-01(A), 2-12-2008)
Secs. 2-3—2-22. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS
Sec. 2-23. - Liberty County Board of Elections to conduct municipal elections.
Pursuant to state law, the county board of elections is hereby authorized to conduct any and all municipal
elections until such time as the city shall otherwise declare.
(Ord. No. 03-08-01, § 1 , 8-12-2003)
State law reference— Authorization for county to conduct municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-45(c).
Secs. 2-24—2-42. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - ETHICS
Sec. 2-43. - Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
(1)
Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials;
(2)
Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions
that are incompatible with the interest of the city;
(3)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
33/393
Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and
(4)
Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms.
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § I(1))
Sec. 2-44. - Scope.
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. Notwithstanding
anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual
conflict with the provisions of this article. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said
provisions of state law and the Charter.
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § I(2))
Sec. 2-45. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean the
mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city
clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as amended. The term
"city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council
as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or
may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council.
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city
council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or
commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body.
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city.
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city
official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws.
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined
herein and which has insignificant value.
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the
same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees,
city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that
the official would be affected in common with the general public.
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another
person or entity, where:
(1)
The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership
of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or
(2)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
34/393
The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or
exceed:
a.
$5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or
services; or
b.
Ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; or
(3)
The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a forprofit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or
(4)
The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more.
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § I(3))
Sec. 2-46. - Prohibitions.
(a)
No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others,
or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city.
(b)
No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the
official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote
or fail to recuse himself from such discussion or vote as applicable.
(c)
No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city
body.
(d)
No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity
in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by
law.
(e)
No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city
except as authorized by state law.
(1)
This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his work as an
independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
35/393
(2)
This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city
official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police).
(3)
Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest
known in writing to the city council and the city clerk.
(f)
All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain.
(g)
Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law.
(h)
No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while
still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's
judgment or performance of city duties.
(i)
If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a
substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the
official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall
disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself and take no further action on matters regarding the
potential future employer.
(j)
No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the
extent such are lawfully available to the public.
(k)
No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor
beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large.
(l)
A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information
not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest.
(m)
A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another
person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those
with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest.
(n)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
36/393
A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an
expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city
without proper prior authorization.
(o)
No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or
other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefor.
(p)
No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the municipal court of the city nor
shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the city on any matter
pending before the municipal court of the city.
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § I(4))
Sec. 2-47. - Conflict of interest.
(a)
A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any
person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest.
(b)
A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must
disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding
funding of the entity by or through the city.
(c)
Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city
official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest.
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § I(5))
Sec. 2-48. - Board of ethics.
(a)
The board of ethics of the city shall consist of three residents of the city, one appointed by the mayor, one
appointed by the city council, and the third appointed by the mayor and approved by a majority of the city
council.
(b)
All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the
date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board.
(c)
All members of the board of ethics shall serve a two-year term.
(d)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
37/393
No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding oneyear period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the
city.
(e)
Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending
or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from
serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in
the same manner as the disqualified individual.
(f)
The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide meeting
space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and
equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities.
(g)
No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this
state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed
from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving
moral turpitude.
(h)
No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office,
who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not
qualified to be a registered voter in the city.
(i)
Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve
as a member of the board of ethics.
(j)
Members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of the city governing authority.
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § I(6))
Sec. 2-49. - Receipt of complaints.
(a)
All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the board of ethics, which may require that oral
complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such
form as may be prescribed by the city council or the board of ethics. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form,
the chair of the board of ethics shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the
complaint within no more than seven calendar days.
(b)
All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters
within the scope of this ordinance.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
38/393
(c)
Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board shall review it to determine whether the complaint is
unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of
the city council. The board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are
unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of
the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the
complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For
complaints that are not dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to collect evidence and information
concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such
complaint.
(d)
Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing those
complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts
sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such
complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might
otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official.
(e)
The board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the
subject matter of a complaint.
(f)
The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or
desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms.
(g)
Findings of the board of ethics shall be submitted to the city council for action.
(h)
To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted
against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, from the
date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are
certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be
accepted and processed after the election results have been certified.
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § I(7))
Sec. 2-50. - Service of complaint.
The city clerk or board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the city
official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a proper,
verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory
overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The board of
ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all
circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross examination of available
witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within seven calendar days
after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the
subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar
days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and,
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
39/393
to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not
the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this
section of the ordinance shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or
jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the city council to act upon any complaint.
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § I(8))
Sec. 2-51. - Right to appeal.
(a)
Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics
may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this Section.
(b)
An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior
court of Liberty County within 30 days after the decision of the board or ethics. The filing of such application
shall act as supersedeas.
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § I(9))
Sec. 2-52. - Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to:
(1)
Public reprimand or censure by the city council; or
(2)
Request for resignation by the city council.
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § I(10))
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. - Excise taxation.
The following excise tax on alcoholic beverages shall be assessed:
(1)
Malt beverages.
a.
Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax
of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on
all fractional parts of 15½ gallons.
b.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
40/393
Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of
$0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces.
(2)
Wine. Wine, $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter.
(3)
Distilled spirits. Distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine, $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate
on all fractional parts of a liter.
The tax will be collected by the various wholesalers and distributors who will account to the city once a month
for the tax collected together with copies of all invoices for said month.
(Ord. No. 74-05-01, 5-14-1974)
State law reference— Excise tax on distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A.
§ 3-5-80; excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60.
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Alcoholic beverages includes, but is not limited to, beer, wine, distilled spirits and all beverages of a similar
nature and a similar alcoholic content.
Licensee means an establishment holding a license to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages.
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic
beverages are sold.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 101, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-3. - Premises maintained in sanitary condition; unlawful to permit disturbance of the peace, obscenity, etc.
All premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and
regulations governing the conditions of premises used for storage and sale of food for human consumption. It
shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper
entertainment, conduct, or practices.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 102, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-4. - Premises.
No consumption on the premises license shall be issued, unless:
(1)
The building in which the premises will be located is complete; and
(2)
The detailed plans of said buildings are attached to the application; or
(3)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
41/393
Unless proposed plans and specification and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to
the application.
The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, regulations of the
state revenue commissioner, and the laws of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final
inspection and approval, when completed, by the code enforcement inspector. Each building in which the
business will be located shall provide sufficient lighting so that the building itself and all sides of the building are
readily visible at all times so as to reveal all of the outside of said building. Each applicant for a consumption on
the premises license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or
a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. All premises within a building for which a
consumption on the premises license shall be issued, shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and
shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by
customers therein.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 103, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-5. - Inspection of premises.
The business premises of the holder of consumption on the premises license shall be open to inspection at any
time, and all times, by officers or officials charged to conduct such inspections.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 104, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-6. - Scope of license.
(a)
A licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall have the right to serve beer
or wine, provided he shall secure a business license therefor and pay the license fee as specified by the current
business license ordinance.
(b)
No licensee shall set or give away, or permit the sale or gift to, or the procuring for, any such alcoholic beverages
to any minor, to any person who is mentally incompetent, or to any person who is physically or mentally
incapacitated due to the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 105, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-7. - Possession, consumption by minors; suspension or revocation of license for chapter violations.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any minor to drink or possess any alcoholic beverages, except:
(1)
For medical purposes pursuant to the prescription of a physician duly licensed to practice medicine in this state;
(2)
In connection with a religious ceremony; or
(3)
In the home with the consent of a parent or guardian.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
42/393
(b)
For violation of any section of this chapter, the licenses shall be subject to suspension or revocation.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 106, 9-11-2001)
State law reference— Possession of alcoholic beverages by persons under 21 years of age prohibited, O.C.G.A.
§ 3-3-23.
Sec. 4-8. - Factors considered in issuing licenses or in renewing licenses.
In determining whether or not any license applied for hereunder or any renewal or any license shall be granted in
addition to all provisions of this chapter and any other provisions of this Code not inconsistent herewith, the
following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare:
(1)
The applicant's status as a convicted person, as defined in section 4-9.
(2)
If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, whether or not he has violated any
law, regulation, or ordinances relating to such business.
(3)
If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, the manner in which he conducted
the business hereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the
violation of any law, regulation or ordinances relating to such business.
(4)
The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character or neighborhood, and the
effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values.
(5)
The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the
license is sought.
(6)
A person whose license issued under the police powers of any governmental entity has been previously
suspended or revoked.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 107, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-9. - No licenses issued to convicted persons.
No original license shall be issued to any person organized for pecuniary gain where any individual having any
interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, or his spouse,
shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the
filing of said application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal
ordinance or county resolution (except traffic violations). The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of
guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; where the
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
43/393
violation is for a misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, or municipal ordinance or county resolution, the city council
after investigation, may waive same as a disqualification.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 108, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-10. - No license granted to applicants not a U.S. citizen and state resident.
No license shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States and a resident of the state.
Where the applicant is a corporation, the principal stockholder must meet the requirements of this section and a
license shall be issued to the corporation and the principal stockholder. If the applicant is a partnership, the
requirements of this section shall apply to all partners.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 109, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-11. - Sale from residence or home prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense or sell alcoholic beverages to any person from any private home
or residence.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 110, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-12. - Hours of sale.
It shall be unlawful for any establishment other than grocery and convenience-type stores engaged in the sale of
alcoholic beverages to remain open or sell, barter, trade, or give away any such beverages from and after the
hour of 2:55 a.m. on Monday through Friday, or to sell, barter, trade or give away such beverages after the hour
of 2:55 a.m. on Saturday or to remain open after the hour of 4:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday. Said
premises shall be cleared by 4:00 a.m. to include the parking lot. Such establishments are to remain closed and
are prohibited from engaging in the sale of such beverage before the hour of 8:00 a.m. the following day.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 111, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-13. - Sunday, holidays and election day closing.
It shall be unlawful for any establishment engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages to remain open on Sunday
after 2:55 a.m. or on Christmas day. Pursuant to state law, the sale of alcoholic beverages is allowed on statewide
and local election days; provided, however, that the person or establishment engaged in the sale of alcoholic
beverages has a current city and state alcoholic beverage license.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 112, 9-11-2001)
State law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days and Christmas day, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20.
Sec. 4-14. - Operation on Sunday.
(a)
It shall be lawful for any establishment engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages by drink, other than grocery
and convenience-type stores, to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages by drink and to remain open to sell,
barter, trade, or give away any such beverages up and until the hour of 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. It shall be lawful for
such establishments to remain open until the hour of 4:00 a.m.; although between the hours of 2:55 a.m. and 4:00
a.m. on Sunday, they are prohibited from engaging in the sale of such alcoholic beverages, and the premises are
to be cleared by 4:00 a.m. Furthermore, it shall be lawful for any establishment engaged in the sale of alcoholic
beverages by drink, other than grocery and convenience-type stores, to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages
by drink and to remain open to sell, barter, trade, or give away any such beverages on Sundays from 12:30 p.m.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
44/393
until 12:00 midnight, per state law. The licensing fee for operation on Sundays shall be $100.00 and must have
50 percent food sales to obtain a license.
(b)
Establishments licensed to purchase and sell beer and/or wine are permitted to remain open until 4:00 a.m. each
Sunday morning at which time the premises of said establishments shall be cleared including the parking lot. The
licensee is reminded of the city ordinance forbidding the sale of any form of alcoholic beverages after 2:55 a.m.
Said establishments shall be permitted to purchase and sell beer and/or wine from Sunday afternoon at 12:30
p.m. until Sunday at 12:00 midnight, per state law. The licensee is warned that the first violation of said laws and
ordinances witnessed by state, county, city or other law enforcement officers or determined to have occurred by a
court of competent jurisdiction shall be sufficient reason for an immediate 30-day suspension of said alcohol
licenses by the city. Within the 30-day suspension period, a public hearing shall be held by the mayor and city
council at which time the licensee shall have the opportunity to show why such license should not be
permanently revoked by the mayor and city council.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 113, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-15. - Sale to minor prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense, sell, or give to any person under the legal drinking age, as defined
by state law, any alcoholic beverage, except for medical purposes pursuant to the prescription of a physician duly
licensed to practice medicine in this state, or in connection with a religious ceremony, or in the home with the
consent of a parent or guardian.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 114, 9-11-2001)
State law reference— Possession of alcoholic beverages by persons under 21 years of age prohibited, O.C.G.A.
§ 3-3-23.
Sec. 4-16. - Sale or dispensing by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age required by state law, to dispense or sell to any other person,
any alcoholic beverage of any kind or character; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not
prohibit persons under the age required by state law who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores,
breweries or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the
premises.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 115, 9-11-2001)
State law reference— Persons under 18 years of age not allowed to serve or sell alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A.
§ 3-3-24.
Sec. 4-17. - Misrepresentation of age.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal drinking age, as defined by state law, to willfully misrepresent
his age to any other person for the purpose of inducing such other person to dispense, sell, or give to the person
making such false representation, any alcoholic beverage of any kind or description.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 116, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-18. - Compliance with health standards.
All persons operating establishments for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city shall comply with the
health standards of the city as prescribed by the mayor and city council.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
45/393
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 117, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-19. - Distance from libraries, churches, schools, etc.
(a)
License for on-premises consumption. No original license for consumption on premises shall be issued for any
location in the city unless the building in which the business of the proposed location is situated more than 300
feet from any property line of any library, church, shrine, chapel, or a mortuary, or other place used exclusively
for religious services, and more than 300 feet from any property line of any school or college campus, and more
than 150 feet from any area zoned residential. The distance set out shall be measured in a straight line and shall
be computed from the property line of the aforesaid library, church, school, or residential area to the building of
the location in which is located the business for which the license is being sought.
(b)
License for off-premises consumption. Licenses for consumption off the premises only may be issued provided
the building in which the business of the proposed location is situated more than 150 feet from any area zoned
residential or 300 feet from any church when measured from the portal or public entrance of such building where
the license is sought to the nearest portal of any church. Such measurement shall be made by following the
public streets or roads of the city from such portal or public entrance of the building in which the proposed
location is situated to the portal of the said nearest dwelling in an area zoned residential or to the portal of any
church, whichever the case may be.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 118, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-20. - Term of license.
No license shall be issued for less than a calendar-year period, or the remainder thereof, and in case of the
revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar-year period, the holder thereof
shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 119, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-21. - Requirements after approval of application.
All licenses must be obtained and fees paid not later than 30 days from the date of approval of the application
and if not so obtained, the permit shall be void.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 120, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-22. - Suspension or revocation for due cause.
No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city hereunder shall be suspended or
revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing and upon the prior three-day written
notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge
upon which such hearing shall be held. Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist
of the violation of any laws, ordinances, or resolution regulating such businesses, or violation of regulations
made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business, or for the violation of any state
or federal law, or for the violation of any municipal ordinance or county resolution other than traffic ordinances.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 121, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-23. - Renewal.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
46/393
All licensees hereunder shall be required to apply for renewal of licenses annually on forms prescribed by the
mayor and city council and must comply with all the provisions.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 122, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-24. - License a grant or privilege; authority of city to deny application.
Licenses hereunder shall be mere grants or privileges and the mayor and city council shall have the discretion to
approve or deny any application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 123, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-25. - Licenses not transferable: exceptions for partnerships.
(a)
Licenses hereunder shall not be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. In case of the death of any
person holding such a license, or any interest therein, the same may be transferred to the administrator, executor,
or the lawful heirs of the deceased person, if otherwise qualified.
(b)
Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to
withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the
issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the
partnership.
(c)
Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee and the new
location shall be considered as a new license hereunder.
(d)
However, a licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that the additional
capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or
for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee himself receives directly none of the additional
capital invested. Under this section, an additional partner or new principal stockholder must be approved by the
mayor and city council.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 124, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-26. - Opening of establishment.
(a)
All applicants for licenses hereunder must, within six months after the approval of said license, open for business
the establishment referred to in the license and begin the sale of the product authorized by the said license.
(b)
Failure to open the establishment and begin the sale as referred to above within the six-month period shall serve
as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the
license holder.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 125, 9-11-2001)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
47/393
Sec. 4-27. - Forfeiture of license for nonoperative businesses.
Any holder of a license hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business and sale of the product as
authorized in the said license, but who shall, for a period of three consecutive months thereafter, cease to operate
the business and sale of the product authorized in said license shall, after said three-month period, automatically
forfeit his license; which license shall, by virtue of said failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of
any further action.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 126, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-28. - Mayor and city council to prescribe application forms and request information; failure of applicant to
provide persons for interrogation.
The mayor and city council shall prescribe forms for new or renewal applicants hereunder. All applicants shall
furnish all data, information, and records requested of them by the mayor and city council and failure to furnish
such data, information, and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to
dismiss, with prejudice, the application. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral
interrogation any person requested by the mayor and city council. Failure to produce such person within 30 days
after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of such application.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 127, 9-11-2001)
Secs. 4-29—4-59. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SALE FOR ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION
Sec. 4-60. - License for sale for consumption on premises authorized.
With the approval of the city council, a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverage for consumption on the
premises, may be issued. Licenses shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which the same
was issued.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 201, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-61. - Registration cards pertaining to on-premises consumption establishments.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any retail license hereunder for consumption on the premises of alcoholic
beverages to operate a business without having a dealer registration card signed by an official designated by the
city.
(b)
Every person working or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in a place of business
shall have an employee registration card setting forth thereon the name of the employer and the location of the
place of employment. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any retail license hereunder for consumption on the
premises of alcoholic beverages to permit any person to work or serve in or about such place of business, unless
such person has such a registration card.
(c)
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any retail license hereunder for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the
premises to fail to notify the representative, within five days after the termination of employment of any
employee working in any place where alcoholic beverages are served.
(d)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
48/393
Applications for registration cards will be made at the city police department, and a fee is required to cover the
cost of laminating the permanent card. Applicants are required to have three 1½-inch by 1½-inch black and white
photographs when applying for such registration card. All applicants will be fingerprinted and a copy of these
prints will be forwarded to the FBI. A temporary letter will be issued upon application, same being valid for 30
days only. The permanent registration card will be issued within 30 days from the date of application.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 202, 9-11-2001)
State law reference— Fingerprinting required for issuance of a permit or license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(c).
Sec. 4-62. - Misrepresentation of quality, quantity, etc., of alcoholic beverages.
It shall be illegal for licensees hereunder to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other
manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality, or brand name of any alcoholic beverage.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 203, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-63. - Display of prices.
All licensees hereunder shall display in prominent places on the premises the current prices of wines,
champagnes, or malt beverages by the drink.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 204, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-64. - No sales outside of licensed premises.
It shall be unlawful for any sales to be made outside of the building, premises, or place of business licensed for
such sale.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 205, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-65. - Advertising.
No licensee hereunder shall advertise in any manner, except as provided by state law.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 206, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-66. - Violations by licensee.
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by the holder of a license hereunder shall subject the holder of
such license to revocation of said license.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 207, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-67. - Duty of management to keep copy of chapter on premises.
It shall be the duty of the management of premises licensed hereunder to maintain a copy of this chapter on such
premises and to instruct each and every employee of the terms thereof.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 208, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-68. - Sale without license unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages for use or consumption on the premises without
the license required herein.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 209, 9-11-2001)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
49/393
Sec. 4-69. - License fee; refunds.
Each original application for license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check or cash or for
the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate certified check or cash, in an amount to be determined
from time to time by the mayor and city council, to defray the cost of investigation and report. If the application
is denied and the license refused, the deposit representing payment shall be retained as the cost of filing and
processing the application.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 210, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-70. - Compliance with applicable rules.
All applicable state laws, rules and regulations governing the sale of alcoholic beverages must be complied with
by any applicant for a license hereunder.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 211, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-71. - Certification by applicant of knowledge of regulations.
No person shall be approved for a license hereunder, or approved for employment by a licensee, unless such
person shall have read these regulations in full text and certify in writing the fact of such reading and knowledge
thereof.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 212, 9-11-2001)
Secs. 4-72—4-100. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - SALE FOR OFF-PREMISES CONSUMPTION
Sec. 4-101. - License of sale for consumption off-premises authorization.
With the approval of the mayor and city council, a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption off the premises may be issued.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 301, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-102. - Sale of beer and wine in grocery stores.
Grocery stores shall be allowed to sell beer and wine by the carton (not for consumption on premises), provided
they have the required beer and wine license.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 302, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-103. - License fee—Refunds.
Each original application for license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check or cash or for
full amount of the license fee, together with a separate certified check or cash, in an amount to be determined
from time to time by the mayor and city council, to defray the cost of investigation and report. If the application
is denied and the license refused, the deposit representing payment shall be retained as the cost of filing and
processing the application.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 303, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-104. - Same—Initial license, renewal; payment.
An annual license fee shall be charged for the initial license issued to any licensee hereunder, and a like amount
for each renewal license. All license fees hereunder shall be paid in advance on or before December 31 of each
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
50/393
year and any new license granted hereunder during the calendar year shall pay the full license fee without
proration.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 304, 9-11-2001)
Sec. 4-105. - Sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink not permitted.
Licenses hereunder shall not permit the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink.
(Ord. No. 01-09-01A, § 305, 9-11-2001)
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Animal means and includes all animals customarily vaccinated against the disease of rabies. This includes but is
not limited to dogs and cats.
At large means off the premises of the owner and not under restraint.
Court means the magistrate or recorder's court of the county.
Humane manner means the care of an animal to include protection from injury, adequate coolness and heat,
ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water which are consistent with the normal requirements and
breeding habits of the animal's size, species, and breed.
Kennel means an establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling, or boarding animals or those engaged
in training animals.
Licensing authority means the county board of commissioners, or any designated representative thereof, which
has been charged with administering the issuance and/or revocation of the permits and licenses under the
provisions of this chapter.
Nuisance. An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it:
(1)
Damages, defiles, or defecates on private property, on public walks, and recreational areas (unless such waste is
immediately removed and properly disposed of by the animal owner);
(2)
Causes an unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive condition;
(3)
Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking;
(4)
Chases vehicles; or
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
51/393
(5)
Molests, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public property.
Owner, caretaker or possessor means any person having a right of property of an animal, or who keeps or
harbors an animal or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian or who permits an animal to remain on or
about his premises.
Under restraint means secured by a leash or lead held by an able-bodied person.
Vicious animal means one that constitutes a physical threat to humans or other domestic animals.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (1); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-1, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-2. - Livestock on public ways.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any horse, cattle, sheep, goat, or other livestock to run at
large on the streets or to be staked so they can go upon the streets; or to drive or lead any such animals along or
on the sidewalks unless fastened to a rope, chain, or other substantial leading device, which rope, chain, or other
substantial leading device is securely held by a responsible person during all the time that such animals are being
led or driven along and over the streets.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (8); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-2, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-3. - Vicious animals.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person to maintain or harbor within the county a manifestly vicious
dog or other animal, unless the same is validly registered, securely but humanely confined, or restrained in such
manner as to prevent such dog or other animal from attacking or biting a person or another animal. It shall be
prima facie evidence of viciousness if a dog or other animal, without provocation, fiercely attacks or bites
persons or other animals not on the owner's premises. Clearly visible signs (including a symbol designed to
inform children) should be posted warning there is a dangerous dog on the property by the owner.
(b)
An animal shall be deemed vicious that has a verified record with the county animal control as having bitten any
person. No owner or custodian of a vicious animal kept in the county, who, when notified in writing by certified
mail by the county animal control of the animal's viciousness or who has knowledge of same, shall permit the
animal to leave his property, unless such animal is muzzled and leashed so as to make it impossible for it to bite.
(c)
An animal may be classified vicious and a threat to the general public when it has been involved in one or more
unprovoked attacks where bodily injury resulted. Such classification shall be determined by an animal control
officer and licensed veterinarian. In the discretion of such animal control officer and veterinarian, classified
animals shall be surrendered to and put to death by the animal control officer to prevent further injury to the
public. Any fees/costs will be payable by the owner.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (2); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-3, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-4. - Cruelty to animals and fowl.
(a)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
52/393
No person shall perform a cruel act on any animal, nor maim or kill any domestic animal or attempt to do so.
(b)
Fresh food and fresh water, according to the size and weight of the animal, must be provided on a daily basis.
The shelter of the animal must be large enough, well constructed, and have a complete roof, and must provide for
protection from inclement weather. The sheltered area must be kept in a clean, sanitary condition free of
excrement and unreasonable objectionable odors. All animals must have access to shade in hot weather. Animal
owners are required to provide the needed medical care, to include vaccinations mandatory by law. Enclosures
must provide adequate room for sufficient housing of animals including living space and running area.
(c)
When harnessed, all animals and fowl shall be harnessed in such a manner that will not cause injury to the
animal and the animal shall be given plenty of room on a harness to exercise.
(d)
Female animals in heat shall be confined in a building or securely enclosed in a manner that shall not allow
contact with a male animal, except for planned breeding.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (5); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-4, 9-11-2007)
State law reference— Local authority to adopt and enforce ordinances for animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-
18.
Sec. 6-5. - Poisoning animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to put out or cause to be put out any poison within the county for the killing
of any dog or other domestic animal.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (3); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-5, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-6. - Removal of dead animals.
(a)
From public ways. The owner of a dead animal upon the public streets and ways shall remove the same so as not
to constitute a nuisance. If the owner fails to do so the county shall remove and dispose of such carcass, and
charge the cost of such removal and disposal to the owner of the carcass, if known.
(b)
From private property. When any animal is found on private property, the owner of the dead animal or the owner
of the premises upon which such animal is located shall remove the same immediately at his own cost. Upon
failure to do so within a reasonable time the county shall remove the same, the cost to be collected from the
owner of the dead animal and/or the property.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (6, 7); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-6, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-7. - Mobile home parks, apartments and condominiums or townhouses.
The allowance of animals inside mobile home parks, apartments, and condominiums or townhouses is
discouraged by this chapter. Where those property owners have not taken action to prohibit pets, they shall be
charged a stray pickup fee when it is ascertained that the animal belongs to a tenant or occupant in the park,
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
53/393
apartment, condominium or townhouse, especially when pet ownership by a tenant or occupant was known by
the landlord.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (25); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-7, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-8. - Prohibited conditions.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal or fowl in the county in such manner as to
create an unsanitary or obnoxious condition, or to become noisy, offensive or a nuisance to the neighbors or
citizens of the county, or to disturb the peace of the county.
(b)
Should a complaint arise from the causes referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the person involved will be
properly notified of a hearing to be held on said complaint before the magistrate's court.
(c)
In county subdivisions, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pen, coop, or enclosure for
animals or fowl, or to permit any animal or fowl to be kept, maintained or grazed, within 300 feet of any house
or building where people reside or work. This section shall not apply to household pets such as dogs and cats,
but it shall apply to dog kennels, where more than one dog is kept.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (4))
Sec. 6-9. - Tethering prohibited.
(a)
The term "tethered" means an animal attached to a stationary object by a chain, cable or similar device
commonly used for the size and type of animal involved. An animal is not considered tethered when the animal
is attached to a stationary object, as long as the owner or custodian is physically within reach of the animal. Any
tethering device used to tether an animal must be at least ten feet in length.
(b)
Tethering of an animal is prohibited.
(c)
As a secondary means of restraint to a proper enclosure, an animal may be attached to a running cable line or
trolley system providing that:
(1)
Only one animal may be attached to each running cable line or trolley system.
(2)
A running cable line or trolley system must have a swivel installed at each end and be attached to a stationary
object that cannot be moved by the animal.
(3)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
54/393
The running cable line or trolley system must be at least ten feet in length and mounted at least four feet and no
more than seven feet above ground level.
(4)
The length of the tether from the running cable line or trolley system to the animal's collar should allow access to
the maximum available exercise area and allow the animal free access to food, water, and shelter.
(5)
The animal is attached to a properly fitted harness or collar not used for the display of a current rabies tag and
other identification; and with enough room between the collar and the dog's throat through which two fingers
may fit. Choke collars and pinch collars are prohibited for the purpose of tethering an animal to a running cable
line or trolley system.
(6)
The animal is tethered at sufficient distance from any other objects to prevent the tangling of the cable, from
extending over an object or an edge that could result in injury or strangulation of the animal and be of sufficient
distance from any fence so as to prohibit the animal access to the fence.
(7)
The animal has proper food, water, and shelter. Refer to section 6-4.
(d)
Secondary means of restraint (such as, proper enclosures) may also be engaged (such as, a properly installed
fence or kennel).
(Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-8, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-10. - Nuisances.
No person shall allow any animal or fowl over which he has custody or control to remain on his property or
premises if the same shall constitute a nuisance as the term is defined in section 6-1 and this section. For
purposes of this section it shall constitute a nuisance for an animal or fowl to bark, howl, whine, or emit any
noises whatsoever in a continuous manner for a period of one hour or longer so as to disturb any occupant of any
adjoining or adjacent property within hearing distance of such property, or for a condition to result from the
keeping of such animal or fowl whereby an obnoxious odor emits there from, detectable beyond the limits of the
property of such owner or keeper.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (23); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-9, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-11. - Animals running at large—Impoundment.
(a)
It shall be the duty of the county animal control officer to apprehend any animal found running at large contrary
to the provisions of this chapter and to impound such animal in the animal shelter.
(b)
The owner of an impounded registered animal shall be notified to appear within seven days from the date of the
notice to the owner, to redeem the animal by payment of the required fees. Unregistered animals shall be held for
a period of three working days. (Days are defined as days the animal shelter is open.)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
55/393
(c)
Any animal not claimed within the times provided may be either destroyed or sold.
(d)
In addition to, or in lieu of, apprehending and impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer,
upon determining the owner, may return the animal to the owner and issue a summons requiring the owner to
appear in the magistrate's court for determination of whether there has been a violation within the meaning of
this chapter.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (9); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-10, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-12. - Same—Authority to kill.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 6-11, if any animal found at large in violation of this chapter cannot be
safely taken and impounded, such animal may be slain by any police officer, or animal control officer when
placed in danger, or animal control officer when in the presence of and having had permission given by a police
officer.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (11); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-11, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-13. - Impounding and other fees in connection with animal shelter.
(a)
The county board of commissioners is directed to establish fees for the apprehension of any animals running at
large, for the impoundment of animals at the county animal shelter, for the redemption of animals impounded
under the provisions of this chapter, and for the disposal of animals which are to be adopted by new owners. The
county board of commission may set different fees for different sizes, sexes, and kinds of animals and different
fees for registered and unregistered animals. Such fees, in all events, shall be sufficient for the county to recover
its costs incurred in the administration of this chapter.
(b)
Before any fee authorized by this section shall be levied or amended, it must be published in a local newspaper
of general circulation at least five days before it shall become effective.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (10); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-12, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-14. - Enforcement—Generally.
(a)
Violation and penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter,
and any person who violates the provisions contained herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall, unless otherwise specifically provided herein, be punished by a fine of not less than
$25.00 nor more than $500.00.
(b)
Enforcement. The magistrate court of the county shall have jurisdiction over violations of this chapter and all
procedures for enforcement hereof shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq., as amended. Complaints
of violations of any provision contained herein shall be brought before the magistrate court on a citation issued
by the:
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
56/393
(1)
County administrator or his designee;
(2)
Any animal control officer or law enforcement officer within the county;
(3)
The chief magistrate of the county; or
(4)
Any other person specifically authorized by law, and shall be prosecuted through that court.
Violations of this chapter will be tried upon citations either with or without a prosecuting attorney as determined
by the said county administrator or his designee. Service of citation shall be performed by the constable of the
magistrate court of the county. Citations shall meet all the official requirements as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-
63, as amended.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (26); Ord. No. 2001-002, § I, 11-6-2001; Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-13, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-15. - Same—Dog control officers.
Two rabies control officers for the county board of health, appointed under O.C.G.A. § 31-19-7, are each hereby
assigned the additional duties of dog control officer to carry out the duties of a dog control officer as provided in
O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.
(Res. of 12-6-1988; Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-14, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-16. - Certain animals prohibited from entering city recreational land or facilities.
(a)
No person shall cause or permit a dog or other domestic animal, except seeing-eye dogs and other animals
participating in county-approved recreational events (e.g., dog shows, fairs, etc.) or engaged in law enforcement
duties, to enter any land or facility owned, operated, or controlled by the city for public recreational purposes.
(b)
The magistrate's court of the county shall have jurisdiction over violations of this section and all procedures for
enforcement of this section shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. Complaints of violations of any
provision contained herein shall be brought before the magistrate's court on a citation issued by an animal control
officer of the county or the chief magistrate of the county and shall be prosecuted through that court. Violations
of this section will be tried upon citations either with or without a prosecuting attorney as determined by the
recreation director of the county. Service of citation shall be performed by the constable of the magistrate's court
of the county. Citations shall meet all the official requirements as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, as amended.
(Res. of 6-18-1996; Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-15, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-04-01, § I, 5-8-2008)
Secs. 6-17—6-33. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - RABIES CONTROL
Sec. 6-34. - Confinement or leashing required.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
57/393
Except for hunting dogs that are in designated hunting areas and with licensed hunters for the specific prey
sought, any person owning or having custody of a dog within the county shall confine such dog on the premises
of the owner of the dog, or on the premises of some responsible person authorized by the owner. Dogs shall not
be permitted to run at large on any streets, alleys, or any other place in the county other than the premises of the
guardian or owner of the dog, except on a leash not more than six feet in length or in the care of a competent
person to whom the dog will respond through voice command.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (12); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-21, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-35. - Vaccination of animals.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any animal which has not been vaccinated against
rabies as required by the rules and regulations established in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5. Evidence of
such vaccination shall consist of a certificate bearing:
(1)
The owner's name and address;
(2)
The number of the vaccination tag issued;
(3)
The date of vaccination;
(4)
The date the animal shall be revaccinated;
(5)
The description, name, age and sex of the animal vaccinated;
(6)
The type and lot number of the vaccine administered; and
(7)
The signature of the person administering the vaccine.
(b)
The certificate shall be prepared in triplicate, the original to be given to the owner, the first copy filed in the
office of the county board of health, and the second copy retained by the person administering the vaccine.
(c)
All vaccinations shall be administered by or under the supervision of a veterinarian licensed by the state board of
veterinary medical examiners to practice veterinary medicine in the state or by other persons qualified under state
law for that purpose.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (16); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-22, 9-11-2007)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
58/393
Sec. 6-36. - Registration of cats and dogs—Fee.
All residents owning, keeping or harboring any cat or dog over three months of age shall pay to the county board
of health, or their designated representative, a yearly registration fee as determined by the mayor and city
council. Registration fees are due upon receiving rabies vaccinations of the animal, provided no fee will be
levied for:
(1)
Animals that have expired within 30 days of their annual vaccination anniversary;
(2)
Animals specifically trained, certified, and actively engaged as government services dogs (e.g., patrol, narcotics,
explosive detection, search and rescue, etc.); or
(3)
Guide/medical animals for owners medically declared in need of said service.
(Ord. of 10-8-2002, § 1 ; Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-23, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-37. - Same—Certificate.
Upon receipt of the registration fee required by section 6-36 and the exhibition of any unexpired certificate of
rabies vaccination, the animal control officer or his representative shall affix a stamp, which states "Liberty
County License Fee Paid" to the rabies certificate.
(Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-24, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-38. - Quarantine of animal inflicting bite, suspected of biting, or suspected of being rabid.
When any warm blooded animal capable of being infected with rabies has bitten any person, or is suspected of
having bitten any person, or is suspected of being infected with rabies, the county board of health shall cause
such animal to be quarantined for such time as may be deemed necessary, but not less than ten days from the day
the person was bitten. No such animal shall be killed or destroyed or removed from the county, except upon
authorization of the county board of health or its duly authorized representative. Only dogs and other animals
which appear well shall be released from quarantine or impoundment. No person shall hide, kill, conceal, or aid
or assist in hiding, killing, or concealing any such animal defined in this section or shall conceal or permit the
same to be removed from the county for the purpose of preventing its quarantine as provided herein.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (17); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-26, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-39. - Destruction or quarantine of animals in contact with a rabid animal.
(a)
All warm-blooded animals capable of being infected with rabies that have come in contact with a rabid animal
shall be destroyed by a humane method or shall be quarantined and/or vaccinated as follows:
(1)
If no vaccination has been given within the previous period of 12 months, the dog or other domestic animal may
be vaccinated and then quarantined for 90 days.
(2)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
59/393
If vaccinated within the previous 12 months, the dog or other domestic animal shall be revaccinated and then
quarantined for 30 days.
(b)
There shall be placed in a conspicuous place in plain view of all entrances to the place of quarantine under this
section a placard on which shall be printed, in letters not less than two inches high, the words "RabiesQuarantine." Such quarantine shall be at the expense of the owner. The place of quarantine shall be cleaned and
disinfected to the satisfaction of the animal control officer.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (18); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-27, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-40. - Report required when any person is bitten by an animal.
Whenever a person is bitten by a dog or other animal capable of being infected with rabies, prompt report of
such bite shall be made to the appropriate police department. Such report shall be made by any physician
attending the person bitten or, if such person is received at a hospital or dispensary for treatment, the report shall
be made by the person in charge of the hospital or dispensary. The report shall contain information required by
the county board of health. When a physician was not consulted or the person was not taken to a hospital or
dispensary, the report shall be made by the person bitten or any other person who has knowledge of the facts.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (19); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-28, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-41. - Veterinarians to report results of examination of animal which has bitten person.
Whenever a veterinarian is called upon to examine a dog or other animal capable of transmitting rabies and that
has bitten a person, he shall promptly report the results of his examination to the county board of health.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (20); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-29, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-42. - Forwarding head of rabid or suspected rabid animal to state-approved laboratory.
When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as
being rabid, and dies while under quarantine, the county board of health shall send the head of such animal to the
state-approved laboratory for pathological examination.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (21); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-30, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-43. - Surrender and examination of carcasses of animals.
The carcass of any dead animal found within the county shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the county board
of health for examination if, in the opinion of the county board of health, such examination is necessary or
advisable.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (22); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-31, 9-11-2007)
Sec. 6-44. - Reporting violations and giving testimony in court.
Any person who has personal knowledge of the violation of any portion of this regulation shall notify the police
department and shall also make known his willingness to appear and give testimony concerning any such
violation in the magistrate's court upon being summoned thereto, at the time and place specified in such
summons.
(Ord. of 12-6-1988, § 1 (24); Ord. No. 07-09-01, § 4.5-32, 9-11-2007)
Chapter 8 - EMERGENCY SERVICES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
60/393
FOOTNOTE(S):
(5) State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 8-1. - National incident management system adopted.
The mayor and city council hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established
under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System, as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57, as its system of
preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in
the county to train and exercise and use these systems in response operations.
(Ord. No. 05-11-01, 11-8-2005)
Sec. 8-2. - State minimum fire safety standards.
(a)
It is hereby resolved by the mayor and city council, that the mayor and city council hereby deem necessary, and
it is declared to be the intention of the mayor and city council to adopt and enforce the state minimum fire safety
standards pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12.
(b)
This section is declared to be a measure to promote the peace, health, and safety of the city, for the city and its
inhabitants, merchants, and patrons, wherefore, it shall take effect and be in force upon its passage and the
amendment of the intergovernmental agreement to furnish services between the city and the county.
(Res. No. 08-02-01R, 2-26-2008)
Sec. 8-3. - Overcharging prohibited.
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful
during the duration of a state of emergency, or subsequent recovery period in which the city has been designated
as a disaster area, for any person located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials,
services, or housing sold within the city.
(Ord. No. 07-05-02, § 1 , 5-8-2007)
Sec. 8-4. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Fee means any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning
applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction,
repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" shall not include those fees
collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant
to a federal or state statute or regulation.
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess
of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for
such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial
increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
61/393
business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier
directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency.
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his
judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity
and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or
suffering threatened or caused thereby.
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions
in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The subsequent recovery period shall not exceed six months past
the time when the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action
of the mayor and city council.
Temporary dwelling means any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not
otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district.
(Ord. No. 07-05-02, § 2 , 5-8-2007; Ord. No. 07-05-03, § 2 , 5-8-2007)
Sec. 8-5. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures.
(a)
Meetings. Upon proclamation, by the appropriate state official, of an emergency or disaster of manmade or
natural causes, or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business
of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the city,
when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings
occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the mayor and city council shall be as valid and binding as if
performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the
governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise
required by law.
(b)
Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon
the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster,
the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works
without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting
notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into
pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the
emergency described therein.
(c)
Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor or upon the determination by
the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county
governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement
of the Code of Ordinances of the county, or any portion thereof, where:
(1)
The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code of Ordinances of the county
is required;
(2)
Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare; and
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
62/393
(3)
Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations.
(d)
Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county
governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority,
its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application
fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or
emergency.
(e)
Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination
by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county
governing authority, its designee, or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile homes,
trailers, recreational vehicles or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the
primary dwelling is being repaired; provided, such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and
the plans are approved by the county health department and county building and inspections department. The
temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion
of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months.
Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed.
(Ord. No. 07-05-03, § 1 , 5-8-2007)
Secs. 8-6—8-28. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES
Sec. 8-29. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Building contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity engaging in, undertaking, or
carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making
improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto.
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be doing business subject to the requirements of this
article if:
(1)
He has or operates an office, agency, project site, or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the
county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the
unincorporated areas of the county, expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation, or repair
of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or
(2)
He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county, expressly including
but not limited to the construction, renovation, or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of
improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto, regardless of the location of the principal office.
State of emergency means, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his
judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
63/393
extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused
thereby.
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the
disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the
governor.
(Ord. No. 07-05-01, § 2 , 5-8-2007)
Sec. 8-30. - Building contractor registration required.
No person or other entity shall engage in, undertake, or carry on any business, in whole or in part, within the
incorporated areas of the city, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating, or making
improvements to real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto
without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid
fees as provided by this article.
(Ord. No. 07-05-01, § 1 , 5-8-2007)
Sec. 8-31. - Registration; certification.
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the incorporated areas of the city during a
state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the
governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority at the county
courthouse or such other place designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the
county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and
give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided
by the county or authority.
(Ord. No. 07-05-01, § 3 , 5-8-2007)
Sec. 8-32. - Registration fees.
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this article as determined
by the governing authority. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration
certification.
(Ord. No. 07-05-01, § 4 , 5-8-2007)
Secs. 8-33—8-52. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - CURFEWS DURING TIMES OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER
Sec. 8-53. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this article
from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours.
Exempt individual, unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, includes those
individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as, fire, law enforcement, emergency
medical services, and hospital services, military services, news media employees, utility emergency repairs. The
resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries
traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, building and repair contractors, properly
registered according to the county ordinances (Ordinance to Require Registration and Licensing of Building and
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
64/393
Repair Services During a State of Emergency), performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or
improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency.
State of emergency means, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his
judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity
and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or
suffering threatened or caused thereby.
(Ord. No. 07-05-04, § 2 , 5-8-2007)
Sec. 8-54. - Institution of curfew.
(a)
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing
authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its
designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined
necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the city.
(b)
All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise
specified in the resolution.
(c)
The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect.
(Ord. No. 07-05-04, § 1 , 5-8-2007)
Sec. 8-55. - Prohibition.
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to
the curfew, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings,
or any other public places in all or a delineated part of the city during the stated hours of the curfew.
(Ord. No. 07-05-04, § 3 , 5-8-2007)
Chapter 10 - LAW ENFORCEMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
(6) State Law reference— Authority to provide police protection, Georgia Constitution art. IX § II.
Sec. 10-1. - Composition of police department.
The police department shall be composed of the chief of police and police officers or employees as may be
necessary. The supervision and control of the department is vested in the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 97-06-01, § 1 , 6-24-1997)
Sec. 10-2. - Chief of police.
The chief of police or police department personnel under the chief's direction shall:
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
65/393
(1)
Maintain the peace and good order and tranquility of the city by arrest and prosecution for the violation of any
city ordinance or state or federal law.
(2)
Enforce all regulations of the police department and administrative directives of the mayor.
(3)
Enforce all laws and regulations pertaining to traffic.
(4)
Protect the rights of persons and property.
(5)
Guard the public health.
(6)
Provide police assistance at fires in the city and protect the city firefighters at the scene of a fire under the
supervision of the fire chief or other proper officer of the fire department.
(7)
Issue and serve summons for violations of any laws or ordinances and serve all processes, executions,
attachments and the like of the chief of police, city clerk, the municipal court, and the mayor and city council.
(8)
Maintain records of the name, date of arrest, offense, and name of the arresting officer or other arresting persons
of each person arrested and taken into custody.
(9)
Maintain records of the name, assignments, resident, telephone number, date of appointment, and general
conduct record of each police officer.
(Ord. No. 97-06-01, § 2 , 6-24-1997)
Sec. 10-3. - Oath of office.
Before any police officers shall assume the duties of office, each shall take substantially the following oath:
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully perform all duties of my office, and I will faithfully observe
all the rules, orders and regulations of the department. I further swear or affirm that I will obey all laws of the
City of Walthourville, State of Georgia, and any other law or laws of the United States of America."
This oath shall be administered by the chief of police or deputy chief or the mayor.
(Ord. No. 97-06-01, § 3 , 6-24-1997)
Sec. 10-4. - Abuse of position.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
66/393
(a)
No police officer shall use his official position or official identification card or badge for:
(1)
Personal or financial gain;
(2)
Obtaining privileges not otherwise available to the officer, except in the performance of duty;
(3)
Avoiding consequences of illegal acts.
(b)
Police officers may not lend their identification cards or badges to another person or permit them to be
photographed or reproduced without approval of the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 97-06-01, § 4 , 6-24-1997)
Sec. 10-5. - Department reports.
Police officers shall submit all necessary reports on time and in accordance with established departmental
procedures. Reports of any officers shall be truthful and complete and no officer shall knowingly enter or cause
to be entered any inaccurate, false, misleading, or improper information.
(Ord. No. 97-06-01, § 5 , 6-24-1997)
Sec. 10-6. - Endorsements or referrals.
Police officers shall not recommend or suggest in any manner, except in the transaction of personal business, the
employment or procurement of a particular product, professional service or commercial service such as an
attorney, ambulance, towing service, bondsmen, mortician, or the like. In the case of ambulance or towing
service, when such service is necessary and the person needing service is unable or unwilling to procure it or
request assistance, the officer shall proceed in accordance with established departmental procedures.
(Ord. No. 97-06-01, § 6 , 6-24-1997)
Chapter 12 - NUISANCES
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 12-1. - Authority, scope and applicability.
(a)
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 to 41-2-17. O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 specifies
the scope and purpose of this chapter. All powers and authorities granted to public officers and public authorities
by the statute are hereby incorporated by reference so as to be assumed, delegated and granted pursuant to this
chapter. The mayor and city council specifically finds that conditions of the character described in O.C.G.A. §
41-2-7 exist within the city due to dwellings, buildings, structures or properties:
(1)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
67/393
Which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not
in compliance with applicable codes;
(2)
Which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities;
(3)
Which lack adequate ventilation, light or sanitary features; or where other conditions exist rendering such
dwellings, buildings, structures or properties unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health,
safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; or
(4)
Which are vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes.
Such dwellings, buildings, structures, or properties are declared to be a public nuisance. Power is conferred upon
the city to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings, structures or
properties as provided in this chapter.
(b)
All the provisions of this chapter may also be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to
the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in
the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or the county building inspector
that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said property is in
violation of this chapter.
(c)
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to both residential and nonresidential property within the city whether
being occupied or not and whether being developed or not.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(1), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions.
(a)
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Applicable code means:
(1)
Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq., as adopted by ordinance or
operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or
general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property;
(2)
Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; and
(3)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
68/393
Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes
provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq., after October 1; provided that such building or minimum standard codes
for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence
at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law.
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry.
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq., known as the Georgia Controlled
Substances Act.
Dwelling, building or structure means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human
habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes:
(1)
Any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith; and
(2)
Any building or structure of any design.
The term "dwelling," "building," or "structure" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure
located on a farm, or any agricultural facility, or other building or structure used for the production, growing,
raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products.
Interested party means:
(1)
Owner;
(2)
Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in
accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia;
(3)
Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9;
(4)
Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from
the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court; and
(5)
Persons in possession of said property and premises.
The term "interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way
whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected.
Municipal court means a court of competent jurisdiction having the authority to hear cases and impose fines
arising out of violations of city ordinances.
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
69/393
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is
in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, or state relating to health, fire, or building
regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city.
Public officer means the officer who is authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this chapter to
exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter or any agent of such officer. The chief building official of the
county, or his designees, is hereby designated as the public officer as defined herein.
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance
with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris,
trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any
dwelling, building, or structure.
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which
the alleged nuisance arose.
Undesirable vegetation means plants, which due to natural growth characteristics, constitute a negative effect on
public safety, public health or public welfare.
(b)
Definitions incorporated by reference. To the extent not stated in subsection (a) of this section, the definitions set
forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 are incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(2), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-3. - Unsafe dwellings, buildings, structures, or properties.
(a)
Duty of the owner of dwellings, buildings, structures, or properties. It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling,
building, structure, or property within the city to construct and to maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or
property in conformance with applicable codes in force in the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and
prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling,
building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances.
(b)
Standards for determining unfitness for habitation of unsafe dwellings, buildings, or structures. The public
officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human
habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such
building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants
of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of
other residents of the city. Such building, dwelling, or structure is illegal and shall be abated by repair,
demolition, or qualify for a secured building status in accordance with this chapter. Such conditions may include
the following without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
(1)
Any means of egress or portion thereof is not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel
in case of fire or panic.
(2)
Any means of egress or portion thereof, such as, but not limited to, fire doors, closing devices, and fire-resistive
ratings, which is in disrepair or in a dilapidated or nonworking condition such that the means of egress could be
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
70/393
rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic.
(3)
The stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads including dead load, exceeds the
stresses allowed in the state building code for new buildings.
(4)
The building, dwelling, or structure or portion thereof has been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, wind or other
cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to damage and
is less than the minimum requirement established by the state building code for new buildings.
(5)
Any exterior appendage or portion of the building, dwelling, or structure that is not securely fastened, attached,
or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by the state building
code for new buildings.
(6)
If for any reason the building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the
purpose for which it is being used.
(7)
The building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof as a result of decay, deterioration or dilapidation is likely to
fully or partially collapse.
(8)
The building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific
requirement of the standard codes or of a city, county or state law.
(9)
Any building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof that is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance.
(10)
Any building, dwelling, structure or portion thereof that is unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate
egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise a danger to human life, or which in relation to existing
use constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, disrepair, uncleanliness,
structural defects, dilapidation, obsolescence, abandonment, or any defects to any building, structure or dwelling
or portion thereof increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities.
(c)
Standards for determining unfitness for habitation of dwellings, buildings or structure being used in connection
with drug crimes. The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or
structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal
observation or upon report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed.
(d)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
71/393
Property endangering the public health or safety. Any property where there exists an endangerment to the public
health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity
is illegal and in violation of this chapter. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or city
building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that said
property is in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(3), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-4. - Procedures and requirements to secure buildings and structures.
The following procedures and requirements must be met in order to secure buildings and structures:
(1)
The owner must apply for a secured building/structure permit and pay the required fees, and the public officer
and/or building official shall then inspect such structure.
(2)
To qualify for secured building status, the building must be structurally sound (walls and roof); otherwise, the
secured building permit will be denied.
(3)
If the building is structurally sound, nonstructural interior portions (electrical wiring, plumbing, etc.) need not
comply with appropriate codes while in secured status.
(4)
Building structure must remain vacant while in secured status.
(5)
All utilities must remain turned off while in secured status.
(6)
Building must be secured, windows and doors covered and secured.
(7)
Structures (referenced in the state minimum standard building code) other than buildings must be repaired,
rehabilitated, secured or demolished.
(8)
Buildings or structures on secured status shall be placed on a special routing slip for fire and police departments.
(9)
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be inside a secured building or structure, except for the owner or
duly authorized agent.
(10)
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove securing material on a secured building or structure.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
72/393
(11)
It shall be unlawful for the holder of the secured building/structure permit during the permit year to violate the
provisions of subsections (4) and (5) of this section. In addition, it shall unlawful for the holder of a secured
building/structure permit during the permit year to fail to keep the building, dwelling or structure secured as
required under subsection (6) of this section.
(12)
A secured building permit may be renewed annually on payment of fee by owner. An annual inspection of the
building or structure will be performed by a code enforcement officer and/or building official. A report detailing
the inspector's findings shall be included in the case file. If compliance with all of the requirements of this
chapter is not present at the time of the annual inspection, renewal of the secured building/structure permit will
be forfeited and abatement of the nuisance will be referred to the public officer or designees for necessary action.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(4), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-5. - Reoccupying a secured building or structure.
Before a building or structure can be reoccupied:
(1)
The building or structure must be fully returned to compliance with building/fire codes;
(2)
The building or structure must be reinspected by the public officer and/or building official;
(3)
Approval of required plans, if applicable; historic preservation, if applicable; request and purchase of all required
building permits, subtrade permits, etc., as may be required, for compliance with construction codes;
(4)
No utilities shall be turned on until full compliance with construction codes (temporary service is permitted if
necessary for construction work to bring building back in to compliance with construction codes).
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(5), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-6. - Inspection, complaint, hearing and order.
(a)
Whenever a request is filed with the director of building inspections by any public authority or by at least five
residents of the city or by the director of building inspections on his own information charging that any dwelling,
building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and
not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug
crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe
conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building,
structure, or property.
(b)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
73/393
If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is
unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable
codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an
endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may
issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or
structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a
copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, structure or property.
The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map
reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a
statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the
interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court, at a date and time certain and at a place
within the county. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said
complaint in the municipal court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and
to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing.
(c)
If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, structure, or property in
question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in
compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes;
or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the
court shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order:
(1)
If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, structure or property can be made at a
reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property requiring the
owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, structure or
property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if
applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or
(2)
If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, structure or property in order to bring it
into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in
relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property requiring the owner, within the time
specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and/or all debris from the
property. For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the
present value of the dwelling, building, structure or property without consideration of the value of the land on
which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or
improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factors in the
court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may
be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in
O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual
testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure or property shall be the cost
necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force
in the jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(6), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-7. - Undesirable vegetation declared nuisance; exemptions.
(a)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
74/393
Any weeds such as jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, or other weeds of a like kind found
growing in any lot or tract of land in the city and any weeds, grasses or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers
or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding eight inches anywhere in the city are hereby declared
to be a nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this chapter.
(b)
Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered
weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section.
(c)
This chapter shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the
superior court of the county. It shall not apply to undeveloped areas of unsubdivided land within the city.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(7), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-8. - Notice to abate.
(a)
For a violation of this chapter, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove such excess growth
within seven days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally or may be served by
registered or certified mail or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling and shall
contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists.
(b)
Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States mail by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown
on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such
notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the
premises or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice
was refused or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address
could not be made.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(8), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-9. - Compliance with order to repair, demolish, or abate.
(a)
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or property, the
public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be
vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of
time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a
court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent
jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The
public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with
the following words:
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with
the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes
an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation
of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
75/393
(b)
In addition, the placard shall bear the date posted, street address and number of the building involved and the
signature of the director of the building inspection department. It shall thereafter be unlawful for any person to
mutilate or remove such placard or for such building to be occupied until the required corrective action is taken.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(9), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-10. - Demolition.
No person shall begin demolition until a permit for demolition has been obtained and all utilities have been cut
off and capped at the street. The person who has secured the permit shall:
(1)
Remove from the property all debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble, and foundation exposed above the ground
level;
(2)
Fill any excavation or other depressions to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than 25 percent
stone or masonry; and
(3)
Adequately slope and drain all filled areas as determined by the director of the building inspection department.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(10), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-11. - Lien on property.
(a)
If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials
for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged
materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper
records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made
without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the mayor and city council are
relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials,
including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials.
(b)
The amount of the costs of repair or demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs
incurred by the county tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action,
including but not limited to restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the
real property upon which such cost was incurred.
(c)
The lien provided for in subsection (b) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified
copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county
where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required
under this chapter. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed
records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
76/393
liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until
paid.
(d)
Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer
responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this chapter shall transmit to the county tax
commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices
provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of
completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect
the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including
specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which
requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax
commissioner shall collect and enforce liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-
5-359.1. The county tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the mayor and city council.
(e)
Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax
commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this chapter. The unpaid lien amount shall
bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as
applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding
pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter.
(f)
The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of the
costs as finally determined in accordance with this section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by
the mayor and city council and/or county tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of
property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81.
(g)
The mayor and city council may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such
property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the
dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such
rehabilitation.
(h)
Where the abatement action does not commence in superior court, review of the court order requiring the repair,
alteration, improvement, or demolition of a building, dwelling or structure shall be by direct appeal to the
superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29.
(i)
In addition to the procedures and remedies in this chapter, the public officer may issue citations for violations of
state minimum codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions
creating a public health hazard and general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent
jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this chapter.
(j)
Nothing is this chapter shall impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and
to cause the removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
77/393
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(11), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-12. - Remedies.
The remedies provided in this chapter are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishment of
the objectives set forth herein. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as relieving any person from the
obligation to comply with this Code and all city ordinances, laws or regulations or to permit the maintenance by
any person of a nuisance, and any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(12), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-13. - Service of complaints, notices, orders and other filings.
(a)
Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served in the following manner: At least
14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or
statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are
reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address
to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business
days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing.
(b)
For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing
shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for
two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing.
(c)
A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the
dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice
shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law.
(d)
Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner
provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any
interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in
the proceedings.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(13), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-14. - Nuisance conditions on property.
Without limiting the generality of the provisions of section 12-3(d), conditions constituting an endangerment to
the health or safety of persons residing or working in the vicinity may include but are not limited to the
following:
(1)
The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city.
(2)
Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
78/393
(3)
The external or outdoor storage or use of refrigerators, freezers, stoves, air conditioners, and any other appliances
shall be unlawful, except for those appliances held in connection with a licensed commercial establishment
operated in an appropriately zoned district, or the residential use of one such appliance operated externally by the
residents of the premises. All such appliances permitted to be stored externally shall be of the type that does not
close or lock automatically.
(4)
Stagnant water on premises.
(5)
An accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary and unsafe conditions that create a public health
hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity.
(6)
Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(14), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-15. - Eminent domain.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of any property from receiving just compensation
for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the state or to permit any
property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. Procedures
under this chapter shall not constitute the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the city.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(15), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-16. - Right to enter and inspect.
The public officer, or his designee, or any person authorized to enforce this chapter, and any sworn officer of the
police department shall be empowered to enter any property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the
condition or work being performed thereon or therein.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(16), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-17. - Powers of public officer.
The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise the following powers in addition to the other powers granted
and set forth in this chapter:
(1)
To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures
therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are
vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes;
(2)
To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence;
(3)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
79/393
To enter upon premises for the purposes of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be
made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
(4)
To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the
purposes of this chapter; and
(5)
To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such officers and agents as he may designate.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(17), 9-25-2008)
Sec. 12-18. - Injunctions.
Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court for an injunction
restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the court may, upon such petition,
issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided,
however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the
order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be heard by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court
shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may
require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file a bond in any amount before obtaining a
temporary injunction pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13.
(Ord. No. 08-09-01, § I(19), 9-25-2008)
Secs. 12-19—12-39. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - NOISE ABATEMENT
Sec. 12-40. - Purpose.
This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city
through the control of noise. It is the intent of this section to establish standards that will reduce excessive
community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the
enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business.
(Ord. No. 08-05-01, § I(a), 5-8-2008)
Sec. 12-41. - Sound measurement standards for law enforcement personnel.
The term "plainly audible" means any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth in
this section which can be heard from the distances set forth in section 12-42, using the following sound
measurement standards: Measurement shall be by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less
than the required minimum distance from the source of the sound. For music and other noise, words and phrases
need not be discernable. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included.
(Ord. No. 08-05-01, § I(b), 5-8-2008)
Sec. 12-42. - Prohibited conduct.
(a)
Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00
midnight on Friday and Saturday.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
80/393
(1)
Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person to play, use, operate, or permit to be played,
used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier
or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a
volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly
audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the building, structure or vehicle, or in the case of real property,
beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday.
(2)
Human-produced sounds. It is unlawful for any person to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets
or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly
audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the place, building, structure, or in the case of real property,
beyond the property limits, in which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and
Saturday.
(3)
Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio
receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for
the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the
purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure
or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible
at a distance of 300 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public
property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is
located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12 midnight on Friday and Saturday.
(4)
Party noise. It is unlawful for any person in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private
property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner that such noise is plainly audible at
a distance of 300 feet or more from the building or structure from which the noise is emanating or in the case of
real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest,
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
12 midnight on Friday and Saturday. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "person in charge of a party or
other social event" means any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social
event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "noise" means the
same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in subsections (a)(1) or (2) of this section.
(b)
Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through
7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday.
(1)
Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person to play, use, operate, or permit to be played,
used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier
or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a
volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly
audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building, structure, or motor vehicle or in the case of real
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
81/393
property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on
Saturday and Sunday.
(2)
Human-produced sound. It is unlawful for any person to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or
sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly
audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the place on public streets and sidewalks, or in the case of private
real property, beyond the property limits, on which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00
a.m. on Saturday and Sunday.
(3)
Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio
receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for
the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the
purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure
or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible
at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public
property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is
located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday.
(4)
Party noise. It is unlawful for any person in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private
property to allow that party or event to produce noise in such a manner so as to such noise is plainly audible at a
distance of 100 feet or more from the building or structure from which the party noise is emanating or in the case
of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest,
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a
party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party
or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall
mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section.
(c)
Restrictions for areas within apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, or other such residential
dwelling units. Except for persons within commercial enterprises that have an adjoining property line or
boundary with a residential dwelling unit, it is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued any noise in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any other person a distance of five feet beyond
the adjoining property line wall or boundary of any apartment, condominium, townhouse, duplex, or other such
residential dwelling units with adjoining points of contact.
(1)
For the purposes of this subsection, the term "noise," means human-produced sounds of yelling, shouting,
hooting, whistling, singing, or mechanically produced sounds made by a radio-receiving device, television,
stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing,
reproducing, or amplifying of sound, or any combination thereof.
(2)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
82/393
For the purposes of this subsection, the term "property line or boundary" means an imaginary line drawn through
the points of contact of:
a.
Adjoining apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, or other such residential dwelling units with
adjoining points owned, rented, or leased by different persons; or
b.
Adjoining common areas or adjoining exterior walls. Said property line or boundary includes all points of a
plane formed by projecting the property line or boundary including the ceiling, the floor, and the walls.
(3)
Exclusions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the following:
a.
Noises and/or sounds caused to be made by manufacturing, governmental, construction or commercial entities in
the normal course of business;
b.
Noises and/or sounds that are permitted by a special event permit; provided, however, that the producer or
coordinator of the special event must comply with the terms, restrictions and conditions of the special event
permit;
c.
Sound volumes produced by radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound making device or instrument from
within a motor vehicle on a street or highway, which sound is controlled by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; or
d.
Noises or sounds made by law enforcement and other public safety officials performing their public functions.
(d)
Time restrictions on use of landscape maintenance motorized devices such as leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or
chain saws. It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any noise-generating, motorized landscape
maintenance devices, including but not limited to leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chain saws, within any
residential zoning district or in areas within 300 feet of any residential zoning district from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00
a.m., except that within the agricultural-residential zone no person shall use or operate any such devices within
300 feet of any residential dwelling on adjacent property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 08-05-01, § I(c), 5-8-2008)
Sec. 12-43. - Registration of outdoor entertainment events.
Registration is required of all outdoor entertainment events that have commercial entertainment and/or electronic
amplification. Registration of the event must be 72 hours prior to the event, and must be by the person
responsible for the event. Registration is to be in the city hall, Monday through Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., on an application specified by the county and shall include the organization sponsoring the event, the
location, the date and time of the event, and security provisions. Registration shall not be accepted for events that
include the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday, and between 12:00 midnight and
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
83/393
7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday mornings. Failure to register may result in a fine, forfeiture of the right of
future registrations, or both. Registration does not exempt the person registering the event from ensuring that the
event complies with the requirements of this section. Failure to register shall be a violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 08-05-01, § I(d), 5-8-2008)
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 14-1. - Behaviors or activities constituting an offense.
Any of the following behaviors or activities shall constitute the offense of disorderly conduct and shall be
punished as a misdemeanor:
(1)
Any person who, without authority of law, purposely or recklessly obstructs free pedestrian or vehicular access
to any public school parking area or building designated for use of persons attending or participating in an
athletic event in such a way as to deny access or in such a way as to create a hazard and fails or refuses to
remove such obstruction after receiving a reasonable official request or order of a police officer or principal or
his assistant or duly authorized agent of such public school that he do so;
(2)
Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear
of safety of his life, limb or health;
(3)
Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person
is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged;
(4)
Any person who shall endanger the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, threats of violence or abusive
conduct;
(5)
Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct, so as to endanger the life,
limb, health or property of another;
(6)
Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or
engaging in any fight or brawl;
(7)
Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place;
(8)
Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for unlawful purposes as defined by the
current ordinances for the city;
(9)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
84/393
Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose or with the intent to engage
in gaming;
(10)
Any person who shall go to or be at any public place with intent to obtain money from other person by illegal
and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices;
(11)
Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purposes of engaging in any
fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or
who shall aid or abet therein;
(12)
Any person who shall, without provocation, use to or of another in his presence fighting words, that are
opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace or
such words which, as a matter of common knowledge under ordinary circumstances, will, when used to or of
another person in his presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment;
(13)
Any person operating a motor vehicle upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle access or pedestrian
walkway of any parking facility by sudden starting, stopping or turning so as to endanger the person or property
of another;
(14)
Any person operating a motor vehicle upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle access or pedestrian
walkway of any parking facility at a speed great enough to endanger the person or property of another; or
(15)
Any person who aids or abets or encourages a minor to do any act which constitutes disorderly conduct or a
breach of the peace.
(Ord. No. 09-05-01, § I, 5-14-2009)
State law reference— Authority to pass laws punishing disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-34, 16-11-39,
16-11-41.
Sec. 14-2. - Unlawful marijuana possession.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the
city.
(Ord. No. 09-05-02, § I, 5-14-2009)
State law reference— Municipal jurisdiction in cases of marijuana possession, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6.
Sec. 14-3. - Theft by shoplifting.
(a)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
85/393
Manner of the offense. A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when he, alone or in concert with
another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to
deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following:
(1)
Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment;
(2)
Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment;
(3)
Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another;
(4)
Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of
merchandise; or
(5)
Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise.
(b)
Value of property. This chapter shall only apply to goods, merchandise, or property valued within the
jurisdictional limits imposed by O.C.G.A. § 36-32-9.
(c)
Transfer. Any defendant charged, within the city, with a first, second, or third offense of theft by shoplifting shall
be entitled upon request to have the case against him transferred to the State Court of Liberty County.
(d)
Reporting. It shall be the duty of the clerk of court of the city to submit the required reports to the state crime
information center, as required under O.C.G.A. § 35-3-30 et seq., and any amendments thereto.
(Ord. No. 09-05-03, 5-28-2009)
Sec. 14-4. - Penalties.
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14(b)(1), and any amendments thereto.
(Ord. No. 09-05-03, 5-28-2009)
Chapter 16 - SOLID WASTE
FOOTNOTE(S):
(7) State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const.
art. IX, § 2; Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Georgia
Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
86/393
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 16-1. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials.
Commercial user means any person having a business operation and having a city utilities facility for use,
regardless of the manner of the arrangement of the business location thereof within any structure or building.
Each separate business as herein stated, shall be considered a separate user of the system of the city for which a
minimum charge, as set forth by the terms of this chapter, shall be assessed.
Customer means for the purpose of establishing a utility service charge, each dwelling unit shall be considered a
customer and charged a minimum bill as set forth in this chapter.
Dwelling unit means living quarters occupied by a single family such as an apartment, duplex unit, separate
rooms set aside in a structure, or a single-dwelling unit, or any similar living arrangement.
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish,
ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles and appliances, and solid market and industrial wastes.
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible
wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
Tree trimmings not longer than five feet in length and no more than five inches in diameter shall be classified as
rubbish.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 1.1 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-2. - Interference with, or damage to public utilities.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without authority:
(1)
Damage or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, or other apparatus belonging to a company or
to the city, engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, or other public services;
(2)
Prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; in any way to interfere with the
proper action of such company or the city; or otherwise;
(3)
Use or cause to be used without the consent of such company or the city any service manufactured, sold or
distributed by such company or the city.
(b)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
87/393
Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts referred to in subsection
(a) of this section, and/or the person, who with knowledge of such violation, received the benefit of such service
without proper charge as a result of such improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for such acts of
tampering or diversion.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 1.2 , 11-24-1992)
Secs. 16-3—16-22. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 16-23. - Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning
indicated herein:
Building material means any material such as lumber, roofing material, brick, concrete block, plaster, gutters,
sand, gravel or other substances used in repairs or alteration of existing buildings, construction of new buildings,
or demolition of existing structures.
Bulk container means a metal container of not less than four cubic yards, not larger than eight cubic yards,
watertight, with a lid opening on top and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by specially
equipped trucks used by the county. The bulk containers while in service and use shall be equipped with a lid or
cover.
Director means the principal officer responsible for enforcement of this article.
Disposal site means an area, location, tract of land or a facility used or intended to be used for the disposal of
sold waste, putrescible waste, hazardous waste or other waste, except it shall not include the land or facility used
for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling in which the owner, occupant, or
lessee of such land or facility resides.
Garbage means the by-product of animal or vegetable food resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation
of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding areas or feeding
material for flies, insects or animals.
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poison, acids, caustics matter or solutions, chemicals, infected
materials, offal, fecal matter, explosives, sewage sludge, radioactive materials and highly flammable substances.
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of
any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping.
Industrial waste means all waste including solids, semi-solids, sludges and liquids, created by factories,
processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises.
Junked vehicles means and includes any wrecked or inoperable automobile, truck or other vehicle, or vehicle
which does not bear a current license plate or a current inspection sticker.
Litter means all garbage, refuse, waste material, sand, gravel, slag, brickbrats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris,
dead animals, or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance, which is not handled in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
Loading and unloading area means a space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving,
shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
88/393
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid waste for future use in accordance with an
approved procedure.
Recycling means the process by which reclaimed resources are transformed into new products in such a manner
that the original products may lose their identity.
Refuse receptacle means a poly-kart or as approved by the city.
Rubbish means and includes waste paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture,
appliances, metal, cans, glass, packing material, and similar material.
Scavenge or scavenging means unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discard refuse materials.
Small dead animals means cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size having a weight of
less than 50 pounds.
Tree and shrubbery trimmings means waste accumulation of tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery cuttings
or clippings, or other natural waste.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.1 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-24. - Collections by city.
(a)
Generally. All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the city, except as
otherwise expressly authorized herein. No person shall collect, convey over any streets or alleys of the city or
dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city, except as otherwise expressly authorized herein or as allowed by
pertinent and appropriate actions of the mayor and city council.
(b)
Supervision. All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the city under
the supervision of a designated city official, who shall prescribe the days and time of collection, and such other
matters pertaining to the storage location, conveyance and disposal as is necessary.
(c)
Fees. Fees, rates and charges for the collection services outlined in this article shall be as determined by the
mayor and city council from time to time and on file in the office of the city clerk.
(d)
Night collection. Should the best interest of the public be served by collection of refuse from certain areas in the
city at night, the city shall make such collections. The occupants of all residences or places of business within the
designated area shall be notified of the hours of such collection. All persons so notified shall comply with such
order and shall place the containers as designated within such hours.
(e)
Landlord's responsibility. All garbage charges to a complex of apartments, houses, mobile homes or businesses
will be billed to the landlord of the property, and the landlord shall be responsible to the city for payment of
assessed charges.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.2 , 11-24-1992)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
89/393
Sec. 16-25. - Private collection.
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect refuse within the city except from his own residence, business or
industrial plant, without first having obtained:
(1)
A proper permit from the state department of natural resources and the city; and
(2)
A city business license.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.3 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-26. - Receptacles and containers—Required.
Every person in possession, charge or control of any building from which business trash, industrial waste or
other waste is accumulated or produced shall be required by this article to provide and keep in a suitable place,
readily accessible to the city or county collection crews or other licensed private collector, receptacles and
containers suitable for the storage of all such waste materials which will normally accumulate between the
established collection dates. The director shall determine the quantity and location of such receptacles and shall
determine whether such receptacles and containers are in a serviceable condition.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.4 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-27. - Same—To be safe.
All receptacles and containers, as required by this article, shall be of safe construction and design and shall be
maintained in good, orderly and serviceable condition at all times. Any receptacle or container which does not
conform to the requirements of this article or which has ragged or sharp edges or any other defects likely to
hamper or injure the person collecting the contents therefrom or the public generally shall be promptly replaced
by the user thereof. If such container, after appropriate notice, has not been replaced, the director shall have the
right to suspend further collection of such waste material until such time as the container is brought into
compliance with this article.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.5 , 11-24-1992)
Secs. 16-28—16-57. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 16-58. - Responsible agency.
The public works director, the director or inspector designated by him shall investigate complaints or violations
of any provisions of this article. They shall determine if there has been a violation and initiate an attempt to
obtain compliance with this article by the person in violation thereof.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.2.1, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-59. - Initiation of complaint.
The director or his designated inspectors shall be authorized to sign a complaint or issue a summons against a
violator of this article.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.2.2, 11-24-1992)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
90/393
Sec. 16-60. - Civil remedies.
In case of any violation of this article, the director, with the approval of the city attorney in addition to any other
remedies, may institute injunctions, mandates, or other appropriate proceedings to prevent such violation, or to
correct or abate such violation.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.2.3, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-61. - Suspension of service.
Upon appropriate notice to the person violating this article; the director may suspend any service or the use of
any facility maintained by the city during the period such violation continues to exist.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.2.4, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-62. - Penalty for violation.
Any person violating this article may be held liable in damages for each violation. The city attorney may institute
a proceeding in any court having jurisdiction thereof.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.2.5, 11-24-1992)
Secs. 16-63—16-82. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES
Sec. 16-83. - Facilitating collection.
The practices and procedures specified in this division shall be employed by the persons in the city in order to
facilitate the collection of solid wastes.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.3.1, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-84. - Refuse.
All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers as specified in this article. All containers shall be
maintained at all times with tightfitting lids or covers.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.3.2, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-85. - Garbage.
All garbage placed in containers for collection shall first be drained of all liquids, and shall be wrapped, bagged,
or enclosed in paper or plastic material.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.3.3, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-86. - Household trash.
All household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its being placed in refuse receptacles. Household trash
may be combined with garbage.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.3.4, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-87. - Injurious trash items.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
91/393
All waste material of an injurious nature, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent
tubes, and television tubes shall be securely packaged or wrapped for the purpose of preventing injury to the
collection crews or other third parties.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.3.5, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-88. - Hazardous refuse and building materials.
No hazardous refuse or building materials shall be placed in any receptacle at any time, unless such refuse is to
be disposed of by the person packaging such refuse. The city shall not be required to collect any hazardous
refuse or building material. All hazardous refuse shall be secured against the possibility of causing injury to any
person and shall not be placed on public property or private property without the written consent of the owner
thereof.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.3.6, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-89. - Yard trash, tree and shrubbery trimmings.
Yard trash, tree limbs and shrubbery trimmings shall be collected by the city. Logs, trees and tree stumps shall
not be collected by the city.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.3.7, 11-24-1992; Ord. No. 04-04-01, § 1 , 4-22-2004)
Sec. 16-90. - Trees, shrubbery, branches, etc.
Tree and shrubbery branches, limbs and trimmings cut by landscape or tree service contractors or other
commercial workmen or resulting from land being cleared shall not be collected by the city, but shall be
collected and removed by those who have performed the work or shall be removed by the person for whom the
work was performed.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.3.8, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-91. - Household furniture and furnishings.
Upon request, the city shall collect normal household furniture and appliances, including, sofas, chairs, beds,
refrigerators, washers, dryers, hot water heaters and similar items, but not including furnaces. Persons requesting
this service shall be notified by the city as to the date collection will occur. The city shall have the right to set and
collect a fee for this service.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.4 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-92. - Prohibited activities.
The following activities are hereby declared to be unlawful and in violation of this article:
(1)
Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse and trash in any street,
median strip, alley or other public place of travel, not upon any private property, except with the written consent
thereof and then only in accordance with the provision of this article.
(2)
Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles, or containers on, over or near
any storm drain or drainage ditch, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such
drainage.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
92/393
(3)
Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public street,
alley, or other public or private place not permitted by this division, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Failure
of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the
director shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this division.
(4)
Junk. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling, except as specified in
section 16-91, any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material, junked motor
vehicle or other items which are either in a partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative
condition, and which are not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. Violators shall be punished in
accordance with section 1-8. This section shall not apply to licensed junk dealers or currently licensed
establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvaging of equipment or furniture.
(5)
Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof or an agent or employee of the director shall disturb or
interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, remove any contents
therefrom, or remove such container from its collection.
(6)
Use of streets. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any street, road, right-of-way,
etc., to transport same without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle. This section shall not apply to the
transportation of poultry, livestock, silage, or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 3.4.1, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-93. - Tires.
Tires can be collected by the city at an additional cost. Such cost shall be in an amount established by the city
council from time to time and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, available for examination in the
office of the city clerk. Customer shall be informed of the cost prior to collection of such tires and/or rims. Such
items shall be collected by the city as long as they are accepted at the landfill. Any items not accepted by the
landfill will be refused for pickup by the city. Items accepted by the landfills are governed by the solid waste
authority.
(Ord. No. 04-04-01, § 3 , 4-22-2004)
Secs. 16-94—16-116. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 16-117. - Refuse storage.
All commercial establishments shall store refuse in containers, as specified in this division, so as to eliminate
wind-driven debris and unsightly liter in and about the establishments. Approved methods of containerization
shall include refuse receptacles, bulk containers and detachable containers. Any spillage or overflow shall be
immediately cleaned up by such establishments.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 4.1 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-118. - Loading and unloading areas.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
93/393
All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging
materials and other trash. The owner or occupant of the commercial establishment shall place a sufficient number
of containers in such area to maintain a clean, neat, and sanitary condition at all times. The number of such
containers to be placed in service for a particular establishment shall be set by the director. The occupant of the
premise shall maintain surveillance to ensure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept
clean. If the occupant violates this section, collection service may be suspended by the director until such time as
the owner or occupant of the premises brings such premises into full compliance with the provision of this
division.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 4.2 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-119. - Parking lots.
(a)
All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide refuse receptacles within the parking area.
The director shall have the authority to determine the number and types of receptacles necessary to provide
proper containerization. Such receptacles shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent
spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his agent to collect the refuse and trash deposited in such
containers and store this material in a location until collected by the city or the county.
(b)
It shall be the obligation of all person using the parking areas to place any litter in receptacles or containers, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to dump, scatter, or throw on any parking lot any refuse, garbage or trash of
any kind.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 4.3 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-120. - Construction sites and demolition sites.
All construction and demolition contractors shall provide on-site refuse receptacles, bulk containers or
detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials and other trash
produced by those working at the construction site. The site shall be kept in a litter-free condition. The number
of refuse receptacles (not to exceed four) or bulk containers, or detachable containers, shall be determined by the
size of the job. Dirt, mud, construction material, or other debris upon any public or private property belonging to
a person other than the owner of the construction site shall be removed by the contractor upon completion of the
construction.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 4.4, 11-24-1992)
Secs. 16-121—16-138. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - COLLECTION PRACTICES
Sec. 16-139. - Residential.
Garbage and household trash accumulated by residence shall be collected at least once each week. Such
collections shall be limited to a maximum of two refuse receptacles.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 5.1 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-140. - Commercial establishments.
Service to commercial establishments will be provided by a schedule which is provided by the director of
sanitation. Such collections shall be limited to a maximum of two refuse receptacles per collection or the
standard bulk container.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
94/393
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 5.2 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-141. - Industrial waste.
Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by any factory, plant, or enterprise creating or
causing such waste.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 5.3 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-142. - Hazardous refuse.
No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of refuse by the city or county.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 5.4 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-143. - Dead animals.
Small dead animals will be collected by the city during operating hours of the county landfill; provided the body
is appropriately wrapped and is located in an area readily accessible to the collector. Owners of large dead
animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 5.5 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-144. - Building materials.
The city shall not be responsible for the collecting preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of a
new building, alterations or additions to an existing building of whatever type or from demolition of existing
structures. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 5.6 , 11-24-1992)
Secs. 16-145—16-171. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL REFUSE DISPOSAL
Sec. 16-172. - Contagious disease refuse.
The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from some or other places where highly infectious diseases
have prevailed shall be decontaminated prior to removal under the supervision and direction of the county health
department. Such refuse shall not be placed in receptacles or bulk container for collection until decontaminated.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 6.1 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-173. - Hypodermic instruments.
No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic
injunctions before first breaking, disassembling, destroying, or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of
reuse such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument, or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by
wrapping or securing same in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection
personnel.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 6.2 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-174. - Cardboard boxes and cartons.
Prior to depositing refuse for collection in authorized containers or receptacles or in commercial containers, the
person disposing of any such boxes or cartons or the person in charge of the premises shall collapse all cardboard
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
95/393
boxes and cartons.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 6.3, 11-24-1992)
Secs. 16-175—16-201. - Reserved.
DIVISION 7. - DISPOSAL SITES
Sec. 16-202. - Use authorized; regulations.
All domestic and other acceptable refuse shall be delivered and deposited at authorized public disposal sites in
accordance with the directions and orders of the director or his representative in charge of operations; except,
however, privately operated sites may be used for the sanitary disposal of industrial wastes or other specified
waste upon the approval of the director and upon the issuance of appropriate disposal permits, as required by the
regulations of the state department of natural resources and/or the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 7.1 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-203. - Designation of sites.
(a)
Public sites approved for the disposal of refuse shall be identified by appropriate directional signs posted near the
roadside and at the location of the county sanitary landfill. Such sites shall be maintained in use until
permanently closed, at which time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting and
through public advertisements.
(b)
The mayor and city council and the county board of commissioners may restrict certain sites or portions thereof
to a specific type of refuse.
(c)
Commercial collectors, including yard maintenance personnel, may use the public designated sites.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 7.2 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-204. - Operating schedule.
Authorized public disposal sites shall be operated on a schedule as established by the county board of
commissioners. During the hours designated, acceptable refuse generated in the city shall be received for
disposal from any resident of the city.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 7.3 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-205. - When use authorized; ownership of waste.
No person shall enter a disposal site except when an attendant is present and during the hours and days
prescribed in this article. All materials delivered and deposited for disposal in a disposal site shall immediately
become the property of the city.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 7.4 , 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-206. - Scavenging prohibited.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
96/393
No person shall be permitted to scavenge or reclaim any refuse which has been delivered to a public disposal site
for disposal.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 7.5, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-207. - Classification of refuse for disposal.
(a)
Domestic refuse. The following types of refuse shall be classed as domestic refuse and shall be accepted for
disposal:
(1)
Garbage;
(2)
Business trash;
(3)
Refuse; and
(4)
Household trash.
(b)
Industrial waste. The following types of wastes shall be classed as industrial waste and shall not be accepted for
disposal:
(1)
Industrial waste; and
(2)
Hazardous refuse.
(c)
Building materials. Building materials may be accepted for disposal upon such terms and conditions as may be
determined by the city and county.
(d)
Materials for recycling. Materials for recycling shall be separated for storage at each disposal site.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 7.6, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-208. - Permit required for private sites.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited on land under his ownership and control
any refuse without first having obtained a disposal area permit as required by any regulation of the state
department of natural resources, the Federal Environment Protection Agency and the city.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
97/393
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 7.7, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-209. - General maintenance.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly
condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or menace to public health.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 7.8, 11-24-1992)
Sec. 16-210. - Right to enter to inspect.
The director shall have the right to enter a private disposal site at any time during normal business hours for the
purpose of inspecting the site to determine whether on not the site is in compliance.
(Ord. No. 92-11-01A, § 7.9, 11-24-1992)
Secs. 16-211—16-230. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLING
Sec. 16-231. - Separation of recyclable materials required.
It shall be mandatory for all persons to separate the recyclable materials designated below from waste collected
by the public works department as follows:
(1)
Newsprint, with inserts, excluding contaminated papers.
(2)
Magazines/catalogs.
(3)
Telephone books.
(4)
Corrugated and container board cardboard.
(5)
Tin, aluminum, and steel cans (food and aerosol).
(6)
Glass, including clear, green and brown bottles and jars.
(7)
Plastic containers, including No. 1 clear and green bottles only, No. 2 bottles, jugs and wide-mouth containers,
any colors (tubs, cups and pails of five quarts or less).
(Ord. No. 2010-12-01, § I(1), 12-9-2010)
Sec. 16-232. - Residential collection of recyclable materials.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
98/393
(a)
Required containers. All recyclable material shall be placed in containers approved for such purpose by the city.
Said recyclable material does not need to be separated from each other.
(b)
Preparation for collection. Paper and cardboard should be flattened, bundled and tied or bagged, and all cans,
glass and plastic containers should be rinsed and free of foreign materials; labels on containers need not be
removed.
(c)
Time of collection. Recyclable materials shall be placed in approved containers at the curb, alley or roadside on
the same day and time as with other trash governed by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2010-12-01, § I(2), 12-9-2010)
Sec. 16-233. - Scavengers prohibited.
All recyclable materials placed for city pickup, as provided in this article, shall be deemed the property of the
city and no person shall disturb or remove such material. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this
section shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-8.
(Ord. No. 2010-12-01, § I(3), 12-9-2010)
Chapter 18 - TAXATION
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 18-1—18-17. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAXES
Sec. 18-18. - Construction of terms; definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling
and processing the occupation tax.
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is
derived from.
Gross receipts.
(1)
The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including,
without limitation, the following:
a.
Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred;
b.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
99/393
Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness;
c.
Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services;
d.
Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and
e.
Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income.
(2)
The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following:
a.
Sales, use, or excise tax;
b.
Sales returns, allowances and discounts;
c.
Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of
corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group
or corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2);
d.
Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and
e.
Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds
received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if
such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts.
Location of office shall not include a temporary worksite which serves a single customer or project.
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or
business for revenue raising purposes.
Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of
business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of the
proceeds for charitable purposes.
Practitioner of profession or occupation means a person who, by state law, requires state licensure regulating
such profession or occupation.
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are
required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an
occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
100/393
actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee.
Development impact fees, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land
development are not regulatory fees.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-37, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-19. - Penalty; violation.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city or county judge, be
punished in accordance with section 1-8.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-53, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-20. - Required for business dealings in the city.
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the
city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the
state pursuant to state law, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation; which
tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the
taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the
city; such business tax registration shall be shown to the revenue collection officer or this officer's deputies or to
any police officer of the city, upon request.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-36, 12-20-1994)
State law reference— Occupation tax levied by municipalities on businesses and practitioners of professions
with no location or office in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7
Sec. 18-21. - Administrative structure; occupation tax structure.
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts
for the initial start-up, renewal, or re-opening of those accounts. The amount of such fee, shall be established by
the mayor and city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city
clerk.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-38, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-22. - Levied; restrictions.
(a)
Tax levy. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and
occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable
out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the
following criteria: profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation as measured by
nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States.
(b)
Occupation tax schedule; profitability ratios. The tax rate determined by profitability ratios for each business,
trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the
revenue collection agency:
Profitability Ratio/Tax Class Tax Liability
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
101/393
Class 1 $80.00
Class 2 $90.00
Class 3 $125.00
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-39, 12-20-1994)
State law reference— Assessing occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10.
Sec. 18-23. - Paying tax for business with no state location.
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of
professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is
in the city, and the business or practitioner:
(1)
Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city of the
purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or
(2)
Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-40, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-24. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration.
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that
the business conducts.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-41, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-25. - Conducting business at multiple locations in city.
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a
separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-42, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-26. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9.
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire
occupation tax one of the following:
(1)
The occupation tax based on profitability ratio.
(2)
A fee of $125.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's
office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required
to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The
per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's
regulatory guideline and framework.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
102/393
(3)
This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by November 1 of each year.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-43, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-27. - Practitioner exclusively practicing for a government.
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United State,
the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality
or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-44, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-28. - Purpose and scope of tax.
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the
payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The
occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of
O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local
government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-45, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-29. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent.
(a)
Registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by February 1 of
each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or
calling begun in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained 30 days following the
commencement of the business and a ten percent penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall
be issued by the revenue collection officer and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after
said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of
profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender
shall, upon conviction by the municipal court judge, be punished in accordance with section 1-8
(b)
In addition to the remedies in subsection (a) of this section, the revenue and collection officer may proceed to
collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-46, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-30. - Exemption for charitable purpose.
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said
registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 75 percent or
more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-48, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-31. - Evidence of state registration required; state registration to be displayed.
(a)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
103/393
Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State, pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of
proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued.
(b)
Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place
of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-49, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-32. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain.
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary
registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for
or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a
registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the
registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact
in the city any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said
registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-51, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-33. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent.
(a)
Each registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained, unless otherwise
specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain
an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before February of each year, and
on February 1 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year
shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to
transact in the city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained such registration
shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 18-19. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other
penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for
collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the
penalty is applied.
(b)
The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the revenue collection officer, and if any person whose
duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact,
in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained such
registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-52, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-34. - Revenue collection officer; subpoena and arrest powers.
The revenue collection agency and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified
as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation
pertaining to the business tax ordinance.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-54, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-35. - Businesses not covered by this article.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
104/393
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax
or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law:
(1)
Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission.
(2)
Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.
(3)
Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including
agribusiness.
(4)
Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105.
(5)
Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq.
(6)
Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15.
(7)
Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats,
meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.)
(8)
Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356.
(9)
Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
(10)
Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-55, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-36. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law.
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or
exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-56, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-37. - When occupation tax due and payable; payment options.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
105/393
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the said city at the office of the treasurer, on January 1 each
year and delinquent if not paid on or before January 31 each year.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-59, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-38. - More than one place or line of business.
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said
business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation
tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-61, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-39. - Returns confidential.
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby
levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent, or clerk of city, or any other person to divulge or
make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any
occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of such return shall be confidential and open only
to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax
levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as
employees. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by city officials of statistics so classified
as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records
by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United State, and other local governments.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-62, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-40. - Failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation.
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in said city after the registration for said
business has been revoked are hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and:
(1)
Who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided;
(2)
Who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth; or
(3)
Who shall make false returns;
and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their
charge with the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the city request such inspection, during
business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to
penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government can not suspend the right
of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the
local government as in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage
of the amount due or a flat fee fine.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-65, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-41. - Lien taken for delinquent tax.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
106/393
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the
revenue collection officer of the city, upon any tax or installment of such tax becoming delinquent and remaining
unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the person liable for such tax, which the
execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment
becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person liable for said tax, all as
provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city, ordinances of the county and the laws of the state. The lien of
said occupation tax shall become fixed on and dated from the time when such tax or any installment thereof
becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the marshal or other appropriate officer of the city upon
the property of defendant located in the jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay
the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is
provided by ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall
have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in
regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued
by the revenue collection officer against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom
the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services
rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person
against whom the execution issued pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the
person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-66, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-42. - Amendment; repeal of provision.
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or
repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges
prescribed. The amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change
the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting
the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or
business.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-67, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-43. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance.
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied
under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and
hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by
such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay
regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall
continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-68, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-44. - Enforcement of provisions.
It is hereby made the duty of the revenue collection officer to see that the provisions of this article relating to
occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby
made the further duty of the revenue collection officer, sheriff, and their assistants to inspect all registrations
issued by city/county, as often as in their judgment for the business sought to be transacted thereunder.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-69, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-45. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
107/393
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the mayor and city
council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until
such taxes has been paid in full.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-70, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-46. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase.
The mayor and city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution
which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-71, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-47. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax.
The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax
to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic
development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or
professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons
shall be set forth in the minutes of the mayor and city council or a plan.
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, § 19-72, 12-20-1994)
Sec. 18-48. - Tax class by SIC code and business description.
The following table contains two-digit SIC codes with the associated business descriptions. The columns to the
right list the tax class for each SIC code for varying numbers of tax classes. From Table 4-A3 in appendix 4-A,
we determined break points and made these assignments into the tax classes. This table is an index. Before using
it, a local government must decide how many tax classes it wishes to use. Then, using the appropriate SIC code
for a business, government officials can determine its tax class. For example, city A decides to use six tax
classes. A business tax clerk verifies that a certain business is a special trade contractor with a SIC code of 17.
Locating SIC code 17 in the left-hand column, the clerk searches this row for the entry under the column headed
"6." The indicated tax class for this business is tax Class 2.
SIC
Code
Business Description Tax Class by Number of Classes
2 3 4 5 6 7
01 Agricultural production—Crops 2 2 3 3 4 4
02 Agricultural production—Livestock 2 2 3 3 4 4
07 Agricultural services 1 2 2 3 3 3
08 Forestry 1 2 2 3 3 3
09 Fishing, hunting, and trapping 1 2 2 3 3 3
10 Metal mining 2 3 4 5 5 6
11 Anthracite mining 1 1 2 2 2 2
12 Bituminous coal and lignite mining 1 1 2 2 2 2
13 Oil and gas extraction 2 3 4 5 5 6
14 Mining and quarrying of nonmetallic minerals, except
fuels
2 3 3 4 4 5
15 Building construction—General contractors 1 1 1 1 1 1
16 Heavy construction other than building—Contractors 1 1 2 2 2 2
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
108/393
17 Construction—Special trade contractors 1 1 1 2 2 2
20 Manufacturing—Food and kindred products 1 2 2 3 3 4
22 Manufacturing—Textile mill products 1 1 1 2 2 2
23 Manufacturing—Apparel and other finished textile
products
1 2 2 3 3 3
24 Manufacturing—Lumber and wood products, except
furniture
1 1 2 2 2 2
25 Manufacturing—Furniture and fixtures 1 1 2 2 2 3
26 Manufacturing—Paper and allied products 2 3 3 4 4 5
27 Manufacturing—Printing, publishing, and allied
industries
2 3 3 4 4 5
28 Manufacturing—Chemicals and allied products 2 3 4 5 5 6
29 Manufacturing—Petroleum and related products 2 3 3 4 4 5
30 Manufacturing—Rubber and miscellaneous plastic
products
1 2 2 3 3 3
31 Manufacturing—Leather and leather products 1 2 2 3 3 3
32 Manufacturing—Stone, clay, glass, and concrete
products
2 3 3 4 4 5
33 Manufacturing—Primary metal industries 1 1 2 2 2 3
34 Manufacturing—Fabricated metal products, except
machinery and transportation equipment
2 2 3 3 3 4
35 Manufacturing—Machinery, except electrical 2 3 3 4 5 5
36 Manufacturing—Electronic and other electrical
machinery, equipment, and supplies, except computer
equipment
2 3 3 4 4 5
37 Manufacturing—Transportation equipment 1 1 1 1 1 2
38 Manufacturing—Measuring, analyzing, and controlling
instruments; photographic, medical, and optical goods;
watches and clocks
2 3 3 4 5 5
39 Manufacturing—Miscellaneous manufacturing
industries
2 2 3 3 4 4
40 Railroad transportation 1 2 2 3 3 4
41 Local and suburban transit and interurban highway
passenger transportation
1 1 1 1 1 2
42 Motor freight transportation and warehousing 1 1 1 1 1 2
45 Transportation by air 1 1 1 1 1 1
46 Pipe lines, except natural gas 2 3 4 5 6 7
47 Services incidental to transportation 1 1 1 1 1 1
48 Communication 2 3 4 4 5 5
49 Electric, gas, and sanitary services (utilities) 2 3 3 4 5 5
50 Wholesale trade—Durable goods 1 1 1 1 1 1
51 Wholesale trade—Nondurable goods 1 1 1 1 1 1
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
109/393
52 Retail trade—Building materials, hardware, garden
supply, and mobile home dealers
1 1 1 1 1 1
53 Retail trade—General merchandise stores 1 1 1 2 2 2
54 Retail trade—Food stores 1 1 1 1 1 1
55 Retail trade—Automotive dealers and gasoline service
stations
1 1 1 1 1 1
56 Retail trade—Apparel and accessory stores 1 1 2 2 2 3
57 Retail trade—Home furniture, furnishings, and
equipment stores
1 1 1 1 1 1
58 Retail trade—Eating and drinking places 1 1 1 2 2 2
59 Retail trade—Miscellaneous, not elsewhere classified 1 1 1 1 1 2
60 Banking 2 3 4 5 6 7
61 Credit-extending agencies other than banks 2 3 4 5 6 7
62 Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges,
and services
2 3 3 4 5 5
63 Insurance carriers (underwriters) 1 1 2 2 2 3
64 Insurance agents, brokers, and services 2 3 4 4 5 5
67 Holding companies and other investment offices 2 3 4 5 6 7
70 Services-Hotels, roominghouses, camps, and other
lodging places
1 1 2 2 2 2
72 Services—Personal 2 2 3 3 3 4
73 Services—Business 1 2 2 3 3 4
75 Automotive repair, services, and parking 1 1 1 2 2 2
76 Miscellaneous repair services 1 2 2 3 3 4
78 Services—Motion pictures 1 2 2 3 3 3
79 Services-amusement and recreation, except motion
pictures
2 3 3 4 5 5
80 Health services 1 1 1 2 2 2
81 Legal services 2 3 3 4 4 5
82 Educational services and schools 1 2 2 3 3 4
83 Social services 1 1 2 2 2 2
86 Membership organizations 1 1 1 1 1 2
87 Professional services 2 3 3 4 4 5
89 Services not elsewhere classified 2 3 3 4 4 5
99 Nonclassifiable establishments 1 1 1 1 1 1
(Ord. No. 94-12-01, att. A, 12-20-1994)
Secs. 18-49—18-71. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE COMPANIES
Sec. 18-72. - Insurers license fees.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
110/393
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city. For each separate
business location in excess of one not covered by section 18-73, which is operating on behalf of such insurers
within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee. The amount of such fee, shall be established by the mayor
and city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city clerk. For
the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any
of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5.
(Ord. No. 96-10-01, § 1 , 10-8-1996)
Sec. 18-73. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by
a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term
financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes an application for insurance through
a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee per location. The
amount of such fee, shall be established by the mayor and city council, from time to time, and made available for
public examination in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 96-10-01, § 2 , 10-8-1996)
Sec. 18-74. - Gross premiums tax—On life insurers.
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life,
accident, and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums
received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with state law. The term "gross direct premiums," as
used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this
section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 18-72.
(Ord. No. 96-10-01, § 3 , 10-8-1996)
State law reference— Municipal taxes on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1.
Sec. 18-75. - Same—All other insurers.
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an
insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within
the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar
year in accordance with state law. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct
premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees
imposed by section 18-72.
(Ord. No. 96-10-01, § 4 , 10-8-1996)
State law reference— Municipal taxes on insurance companies other than those dealing in life insurance,
O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2.
Sec. 18-76. - Due date for license fees.
License fees imposed in sections 18-72 and 18-73 shall be due and payable on the first day of each year.
(Ord. No. 96-10-01, § 5 , 10-8-1996)
Secs. 18-77—18-95. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
111/393
FOOTNOTE(S):
(8) State Law reference— Consumer Choice for Television Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-76-1 et seq.
Sec. 18-96. - Franchise fee for state-issued cable or video franchise.
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable
or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the state.
(Ord. No. 08-02-02, § I(1), 2-26-2008)
Sec. 18-97. - Authorized designee.
The city hereby authorizes the city clerk, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee
for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and
each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the
city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise.
(Ord. No. 08-02-02, § I(2), 2-26-2008)
Chapter 20 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Sec. 20-1. - Speed zones.
The following speed zones are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation, as prescribed
by law:
ON-SYSTEM HIGHWAYS
SR From ML To ML Length in
Miles
Speed Limit
38/US 84 W. city limit 0.00 MP 0.50 0.50 0.50 50 mph
38/US 84 MP 0.50 0.50 E. city limits 1.69 1.19 45 mph
119 S. city limits 11.29 Co. Rd. 88 11.75 0.46 45 mph
119 Co. Rd. 88 11.75 Co. Rd. 86 12.79 1.04 35 mph
119 Co. Rd. 86 12.79 N. city limits 13.25 0.46 45 mph
Signs shall be erected by the department of transportation for all state routes.
(Ord. No. 96-12-01, 12-17-1996)
State law reference— Ability of local authorities to alter speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183.
Chapter 22 - UTILITIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(9) State Law reference— Authority to acquire, construct, or improve any water system or sewage system,
O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. - Rate schedule.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
112/393
(a)
The rates and charges imposed by the city for water and sewer service shall be as determined by the mayor and
city council from time to time, and are on file in the office of the city clerk.
(b)
The rate schedule contemplates a single user, such as a one-family dwelling, one-farm dwelling with
appurtenances, or one-commercial operation.
(c)
Extraordinary circumstances, such as, multiple-dwelling units, industrial users and fire protection shall be
governed by the mayor and city council on recommendation of the city's engineer.
(Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 1 , 1-12-1988; Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 1 , 9-26-2006; Ord. No. 88-01-1, § 1 , 1-2-2009)
Sec. 22-2. - Application for water and sewer service.
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service, in person at the city hall of the city and at the
same time shall make a security deposit. The deposit shall be in an amount determined by the mayor and city
council from time to time and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained in the clerk's office.
(Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 2 , 1-12-1988; Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 2 , 9-26-2006; Ord. No. 88-01-1, § 2 , 1-2-2009)
Sec. 22-3. - Charges for initial water and sewer service.
Each consumer subscribing to use water and sewer service of the city shall pay a tap fee. The amount of such
fees shall be determined by the mayor and city council from time to time and are on file in the office of the city
clerk.
(Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 3 , 1-12-1988; Ord. No. 88-01-1, § 3 , 1-2-2009)
Sec. 22-4. - Minimum charges.
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such subscribed for connection. Water
furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any
condition furnish water free of charge to anyone.
(Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 4 , 1-12-1988)
Sec. 22-5. - City's responsibility and liability.
The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exist or is
to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge,
other than the connection fee referred to in section 24-3, will be made for a five-eighths-inch by three-fourthsinch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee in section 24-3 will be made for meters of
larger dimensions.
(1)
The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable
costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service.
(2)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
113/393
The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property
within three feet of the property line.
(3)
The city reserves the right to refuse service, unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner
as to prevent cross-connections or backflow.
(4)
Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city.
(Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 5 , 1-12-1988)
Sec. 22-6. - Access to premises and extensions of system.
(a)
Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose
of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in
connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities.
(b)
Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be
granted or conveyed to the city, a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water
and sewer lines.
(Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 7 , 1-12-1988)
Sec. 22-7. - Change of occupancy.
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water and
sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the
time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply
for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for
paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading.
(Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 8 , 1-12-1988)
Sec. 22-8. - Meter reading; billings; collecting.
Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such day of each month as may be
determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at the city hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall
not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure of
water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following
penalties:
(1)
Nonpayment within five days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent
amount.
(2)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
114/393
Nonpayment within 15 days from the date due will result in the water being disconnected from the water users
property.
(3)
Nonpayment within 30 days after original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and
remedies, to terminate the agreement, and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the
city obligated to supply any water under this agreement.
Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security
deposit as may be required by the mayor and city council is made, and a service charge as determined by the
mayor and city council from time to time, is paid for each meter reconnected.
(Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 9 , 1-12-1988; Ord. No. 03-06-01, 6-10-2003)
Sec. 22-9. - Suspension of service.
When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the
consumer by the city.
(1)
Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward
settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is
insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by the law for
collection of debt.
(2)
The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice of the following additional reasons:
a.
To prevent fraud or abuse.
b.
Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules.
c.
Emergency repairs.
d.
Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control.
e.
Legal processes.
f.
Direction of public authorities.
g.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
115/393
Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident.
(Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 10 , 1-12-1988)
Sec. 22-10. - Complaints; adjustments.
If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, to the city before the bill
becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in
preventing discontinuance of service as theretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and
said payment shall not prejudice his claim.
(1)
The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee, as determined by the
mayor and city council from time to time; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that meter
was over-read, no charge will be made.
(2)
Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making
the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume,
no charge will be made.
(3)
If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is
stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or
from other proper data.
(Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 11, 1-12-1988)
Secs. 22-11—22-38. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE
Sec. 22-39. - Consumer's responsibility and liability.
Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and
employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other persons or permit any other person to use said
water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in
sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for
this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service.
(1)
Where meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the
consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader.
(2)
The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off value on the consumer's side of the meter.
(3)
The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's
expense, if a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health
department.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
116/393
(4)
In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants
must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the
city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they
continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to
the city's water system.
(Ord. No. 88-01-01, § 6 , 1-12-1988)
Secs. 22-40—22-65. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE
Sec. 22-66. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Address means the house number (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name,
describes a physical location of a specific property.
(1)
Even-numbered address means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number.
(2)
Odd-numbered address means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, 9.
Completion of work means the concurrence of the following events:
(1)
The work required by the construction contract shall have been completed;
(2)
The owner shall provide the city with a certificate verifying that payment has been made for all labor and
material employed in connection with the construction of the improvements and that the improvements have
been constructed in accordance with the construction contract; and
(3)
All appropriate governmental authorities have inspected and approved the improvements and the improvements
are in operation.
Construction contract means an agreement between the owner and the general contractor which shall be
approved by the engineer and shall include the following:
(1)
The contract;
(2)
The general conditions;
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
117/393
(3)
Plans and specifications;
(4)
All addenda (as defined in the general conditions) issued prior to the execution of the construction contract; and
(5)
All amendments to the construction contract signed by both parties; all change orders (as defined in the general
conditions) signed by both parties.
Contractor means a person, approved by the city council and consulting engineer, engaged in actual sewer
construction or extensions within the jurisdiction of the city.
Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity
of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe.
Drawings means detailed drawings prepared by a registered professional engineer showing the proposed sewer
improvements as supplemented by detailed specifications.
Engineer means the city's consulting engineer on sewer matters or its designated representatives.
Sewer impact fee means the fee charged by the city to individuals for the privilege of connecting to any existing
or future system operated by the city.
State means the State of Georgia, or any agency thereof.
Work means all of the labor and material necessary to produce the construction required by the plans and
specifications and all materials and equipment incorporated or to be incorporated in such construction. All
necessary off-site work required by other governmental authorities having jurisdiction of the construction and
operation of a sewer system. Connecting and hooking-up of electric and other utilities.
(Ord. No. 04-07-01, § I(1.05), 7-30-2004; Ord. No. 99-05-01, att. A(div. 1, § II), 5-25-1999)
Sec. 22-67. - Penalty.
Upon the failure of any person receiving sewer service to make payment thereof, then the sewer service shall be
cut off within 60 days of the default of payment. An interest fee of ten percent will be assessed against the
amount owed and added to that amount during the first 30 days of default. This fee will increase another ten
percent in the next 30 days of delinquency and an additional ten percent for each 30 days thereafter. All sums
due will be paid before service will be restored after the cutoff.
(Ord. No. 99-05-01, att. A(div. 4, § III), 5-25-1999)
Sec. 22-68. - Sewer system hook-up policy.
(a)
The consumer will receive a minimum bill 30 days after services are available. All consumers will be advised via
the water bill one month prior to being billed for sewer system services. (Bills to state: "Next month, your bill
will reflect minimum sewer rates.")
(b)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
118/393
Consumers within 300 feet of sewer lines must hook on to the city sewer within the six-month timeframe.
(Ord. No. 99-04-01, 4-13-1999)
Sec. 22-69. - Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to set forth requirements for obtaining sewer service in the city. This article also
provides that the city may establish specific standards and requirements for the construction of all new or
replacement sewer lines and any accessories or extensions thereto.
(Ord. No. 99-05-01, att. A(div. 1, § I), 5-25-1999)
Sec. 22-70. - General requirements.
The following requirements and policies shall be applicable to the incorporated area of the city:
(1)
Connection to sewer service when available; waiver of requirement. No person shall hereafter operate private
facilities when existing or new service is available within 300 feet of the facility to be served. The city may
waive this requirement for good cause shown and the city's decision in the exercise of its legislative discretion
shall be controlling.
(2)
Authorization to tap; application. No sewer line shall be tapped except by authorized employees of the city. An
application will be made to the city prior to connection to the sewer system.
(3)
Unauthorized connections. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any corrections with or opening into,
use, or disturb any public sewer main or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
city. No connection shall be made except at a connection point approved by the city.
(4)
Responsibility of property owner for costs. The owner of the property to be served shall be responsible for the
cost, installation and maintenance of the sewer service line from the facility to be served to a point where the
service line ties into the city system, which includes any portions of service line extending on to the public rightof-way or city easement.
(5)
Right of city to revoke permits. The city shall have the right for good cause shown to revoke or annul at any time,
any permit previously issued or the connection to any sewer lines, and no party shall have the right to claim
damage as a result of such permit being revoked or annulled. The city reserves the right to disconnect and
discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons:
a.
To prevent fraud or abuse.
b.
Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
119/393
c.
Emergency repairs.
d.
Circumstances beyond the city's control.
e.
Legal proceedings.
f.
Direction of public authorities.
g.
Strike, riot, flood, fire, unavoidable accidents.
(6)
Interruption of service in cases of emergency. The city may terminate or interrupt service in cases of emergency,
and for the repair or expansions of the sewer system. Advanced notice of said interruptions will be given when
possible.
(7)
Damage of facilities or machinery. No person shall interfere with or damage any city facility, machinery or other
property.
(8)
Violations. A person who violates these requirements is subject to criminal prosecution under the laws of the
state.
(Ord. No. 99-05-01, att. A(div. 1, § III), 5-25-1999)
State law reference— Damaging or interfering with municipal property prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25.
Sec. 22-71. - Cut-off requirements.
(a)
The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's
expense in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health
department.
(b)
The pipe from the main sewer line to the served premises shall be the property of the owner, and all repairs to
such lines shall be at the owner's expense. The city shall have an easement to use any portion of the pipe located
off of city property and any land adjacent thereto so long as any service is provided to the premises by the city.
(Ord. No. 99-05-01, att. A(div. 2, § I), 5-25-1999)
Sec. 22-72. - Service to rental buildings.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
120/393
When any building is occupied by two or more tenants, the owner of such building shall be liable for the
payment of all sewer bills. The owner shall be required to file an application for such service and shall agree
therein to be responsible for the cost thereof.
(Ord. No. 99-05-01, att. A(div. 2, § II), 5-25-1999)
Sec. 22-73. - Service charge.
The amount of the charges for sewer shall be figured in accordance with this article and the amount due shall be
paid monthly to the city in accordance with the statement indicating the amount then due. Such payment shall be
made on or before the tenth day following the date of the monthly bill, and shall be in default if not paid on or
before the 20th day after the date of the bill. Failure to receive notice of the amount due shall not relieve the
customer from making payment. Should any person fail to pay any sum due hereunder, the sewer service shall be
discontinued until the amounts due with penalties have been paid in full.
(Ord. No. 99-05-01, att. A(div. 4, § I), 5-25-1999)
Sec. 22-74. - Liability of owner.
If default occurs in the payment, the notice of such default shall be given to the customer and the owner of such
property, if other than the customer. It shall be the obligation of the owner to make payment of all amounts then
due including any penalty assessed. Failure of the owner or any transferee of the property to receive notice of the
defaults shall not effect the lien for sewer.
(Ord. No. 99-05-01, att. A(div. 4, § II), 5-25-1999)
Sec. 22-75. - Execution.
Should the owner of any property not pay the sewer charge and the payment thereof shall be in default for a
period of 60 days after the first date due, then the city council shall be entitled and authorized to have an
execution issued, which execution shall issue in the name of the city against the property, as described on the
latest ad valorem tax digest and in persons against the owner of the property. Subsequent costs thereof shall be
the same as those allowed by law to the sheriff for the performance of similar services. Executions for sewer
service charges shall be delivered to the sheriff of the county and shall be processed in accordance with the law
of the state covering the enforcement of tax executions. All executions shall be issued against the owner and real
property served and shall be recorded on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of superior court
of the county. The execution shall constitute a lien against the property from the time of its filling which lien
shall rank on a party with and be of equal dignity to other liens for special tax assessments.
(Ord. No. 99-05-01, att. A(div. 4, § IV), 5-25-1999)
Sec. 22-76. - Administrative procedure.
Whenever a sewer line is constructed in an established residential area of the city in which such service was not
previously available to residents of the area, or in case of public health hazard or extreme hardship, the city
council may, in exercise of its discretion by resolution, employ the following procedure for the collection of
impact or tap-in fees in order to extend service to an existing house or building in such area:
(1)
Upon application of the owner of the property lying in the unserved area, or in case of public health hazard or
extreme hardship in any area, the city council may approve the connection of the property to a sewer line to the
property without the payment in full of all tap-in or impact fees. Instead, the city council shall levy an
assessment against the property to be served and the owner thereof for the amount of the impact and tap-in fee
which shall constitute a lien upon the property from the date of adoption of the resolution.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
121/393
(2)
The city clerk shall keep a docket of convenient form and size, with property index, in which there shall be
registered all such assessments against property for sewer, which docket shall be posted immediately upon the
passage by the city council of a resolution authorizing the connection of any sewer line.
(3)
The owner of the property shall be required to pay in cash or by certified check, within 60 days, not less than 25
percent of the amount of such assessment. The remainder, after deduction of such payment, may upon request of
the property owner, be divided into not more than three equal annual installments maturing one, two and three
years respectively, from the date of the initial payment and the execution of an installment agreement; provided,
that proper documentation evidencing the extension of time of repayment shall be executed by the owner of the
property in a form acceptable to the city. The unpaid portion of the assessment shall bear interest from date of the
assessment until paid at the rate of 12 percent per annum on the unpaid balance. The evidence of the
indebtedness shall be negotiable in form, and the city free and clear of any and all encumbrances of title or
claims of title by the owner, shall have the right to transfer and assign the same to third parties.
(4)
No extension of time for the payment of any assessment shall affect the validity of the assessment or the right of
the city, or its assigns, to proceed to enforce the same against the property and the owner thereof. In case of
default in any installment, the entire assessment including accrued interest shall become due and payable
forthwith.
(5)
The installment agreement shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county and shall
contain an acknowledgment of the owner that said assessment constitutes a valid and legally enforceable lien
against his property.
(6)
Should the owner of any property against which an assessment has been levied fail either to execute the
instrument required extension as provided in the preceding section, or to pay the same in cash within 60 days, an
execution shall issue forthwith against the property to which the service has been provided and the owner
thereof.
(7)
All executions issued against property and the owner thereof for such assessments shall immediately be recorded
on the general execution docket in the aforesaid clerk's office.
(8)
The execution shall be collected by the city following the same procedure as set out in this article.
(Ord. No. 99-05-01, att. A(div. 5, § I), 5-25-1999)
Sec. 22-77. - Limitations of service.
The city will not allow any connection to any facility located in a 100-year floodplain as designated on the
relevant flood maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(Ord. No. 99-05-01, att. A(div. 6), 5-25-1999)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
122/393
Sec. 22-78. - Amendment to sewer system hook-up policy establishing service for nonwater customers.
The aforementioned hook-up policy shall remain in effect as previously adopted with the following amendments:
Residents not presently receiving water services from the city will be entitled to sewer service provided they
acquire water service and pay the required tap in fee for such service as outlined in water ordinance, dated
January 12, 1988, and/or all subsequent amendments.
(Ord. No. 01-12-01, 12-11-2001)
Sec. 22-79. - Permit to connect.
(a)
A permit to connect to the city sewer system will be required by all property owners before hook-up to the sewer
system. The cost of said permit is per location which covers application and two inspections. A fee will be
required for each subsequent reinspection. The amount of such costs and fees shall be determined by the mayor
and city council from time to time and are on file in the office of the city clerk.
(b)
After the initial six months, impact fees will be required in addition to the required security deposit and permit
fee before services can be established. The amount of such fees shall be determined by the mayor and city
council from time to time and are on file in the office of the city clerk.
(c)
Exceptions.
(1)
Consumers located within the targeted area for the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) will be
connected to the sewer system automatically and the fees in subsections (a) and (b) of this section will be billed
in monthly installments until paid in full.
(2)
Licensed plumbers will be selected by the city to connect sewer lines to consumer properties in the targeted area
only and the city shall be responsible for the cost of such connection using grant funds allocated for this purpose.
(3)
Consumers will be notified in writing prior to any connection being done.
(Ord. No. 03-01-01, 1-30-2003)
Secs. 22-80—22-102. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - WATER CONSERVATION
Sec. 22-103. - Penalty and appeal.
(a)
Notice of violation. Upon violation of this article, the city shall give notice to the customer at the premises at
which the violation occurred. All notices shall contain the facts of the violation, a statement of the possible
penalties for each violation, a statement informing the customer of his right to appeal violation, and where
appropriate, recommendations to remedy the violation.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
123/393
(1)
First incident. For the first incident, a city representative shall advise the customer of the provisions of this
article verbally and in writing. Water conservation advice and information shall be given to assist the customer in
eliminating the water waste problem.
(2)
Second incident. For the second incident, the city shall give written notice of the violation to the customer
personally, or tag the door of the premises and mail a certified notice to the person named on the water service.
An inspection date shall be set within ten days to verify that the violation has been remedied. The city shall
assess a penalty in conformity with section 1-8 and disconnection. Reconnect fee will be added before services
are restored.
(3)
Subsequent violations. For all subsequent violations, the city may assess an additional penalty not to exceed four
times the customer's prior monthly water bill amount, or give the date and time that service shall be terminated.
The customer shall be notified personally or by tagging the door and a certified notice shall be sent to the person
named on the water service.
(b)
Appeals. Any customer against whom a penalty is to be levied shall have a right to an appeal before the mayor
and city council. A written appeal and a copy of the notification must be received by the city clerk within ten
days of the date of notification of the notice of penalty. If appealed, penalties to be stayed until a decision is
made by the mayor and city council.
(c)
Restoration of services. Where water service is disconnected as authorized in this section, normal service shall be
restored upon correction of the condition or activity and payment of the reconnection charge and penalties.
(Ord. No. 04-07-01, § I(1.10), 7-30-2004)
Sec. 22-104. - Declaration of policy and enactment.
The city hereby adopts the City of Walthourville Water Conservation Plan, pursuant to the Rules of Georgia
Department of Natural Resources with like effect as if recited herein, such plan being identified by the
inscription "City of Walthourville Water Conservation Plan," dated July 30, 2004, a copy of which is on file with
the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 04-07-01, § I(1.01), 7-30-2004)
Sec. 22-105. - Applicability of plan.
The provisions of the city conservation plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property served by the
city.
(Ord. No. 04-07-01, § I(1.03), 7-30-2004)
Sec. 22-106. - Implementation of plan.
The mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the provisions of the
city water conservation plan as approved by the mayor and city council.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
124/393
(Ord. No. 04-07-01, § I(1.04), 7-30-2004)
Sec. 22-107. - Prohibited acts.
(a)
Generally, no customer or user served by the municipal water system shall knowingly make, cause, use, or
permit the use of water supplied by the city for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, or any other
purpose contrary to the city water conservation plan.
(b)
No person shall water, for outdoor purposes, their home or business during the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.;
however, outside watering will be allowed as follows:
(1)
Monday, Wednesday, Saturday: anyone living with even-numbered address, before 4:00 p.m. and after 10:00
p.m.
(2)
Tuesday, Thursday, Sunday: anyone living with odd-numbered address, before 4:00 p.m. and after 10:00 p.m.
(3)
There is absolutely no usage (watering lawns, washing cars, etc.) on Friday for anyone.
The restriction includes all residential, commercial, government and institutional outdoor irrigation and
nonessential water uses. (Examples include watering lawns and landscapes, washing cars at residential sites, and
hosing sidewalks.) The following is a partial list of nonessential applications of water, which include but are not
limited to all residential, commercial, governmental and institutional outdoor irrigation and nonessential water
uses: watering lawns, and landscapes; and washing cars at residential sites and hosing sidewalks.
(Ord. No. 04-07-01, § I(1.05), 7-30-2004)
Sec. 22-108. - Outdoor water use schedule—During nondrought periods.
Outdoor water use other than exempted activities shall occur only as follows:
(1)
Odd-numbered addresses: outdoor water use is allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays.
(2)
Even-numbered addresses: outdoor water use is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays.
(Ord. No. 04-07-01, § I(1.06), 7-30-2004)
Sec. 22-109. - Same—During declared drought response levels.
(a)
The director of the environmental protection division is authorized to make drought declarations.
(b)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
125/393
During scheduled drought conditions, outdoor water use, other than activities exempted in section 22-110, shall
occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days.
(c)
Declared drought response level one shall be as follows:
(1)
Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m., and 4:00 p.m.
to 12:00 midnight.
a.
Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and
b.
Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays.
(2)
Use of hydrants for any purposes other than firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing is prohibited.
(d)
Declared drought response level two shall be as follows:
(1)
Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m.
a.
Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays.
b.
Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays, and
Saturdays.
(2)
The following uses are prohibited:
a.
Using hydrants for any purposes other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing.
b.
Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, and driveways, except when necessary for public
health and safety.
(e)
Declared drought response level three shall be as follows:
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
126/393
(1)
Outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m.
a.
The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday.
b.
The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf courses fairways is Saturday.
(2)
The following uses are prohibited:
a.
Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing.
b.
Washing hard surfaces, such as, streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health
and safety.
c.
Filling installed swimming pools, except when necessary for health care or structural integrity.
d.
Washing vehicles, such as, cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts.
e.
Washing buildings or structures, except for immediate fire protection.
f.
Noncommercial fund-raisers, such as, carwashes.
g.
Using water for ornamental purposes, such as, fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls, except when necessary
to support aquatic life.
(f)
Declared drought response level four shall be as follows: No outdoor water use is allowed, other than for
activities exempted in section 22-110, or as the EPD director may order.
(Ord. No. 04-07-01, § I(1.07), 7-30-2004)
Sec. 22-110. - Exemptions.
(a)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
127/393
Generally. This rule shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses:
(1)
Capture and re-use of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances.
(2)
Re-use of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances.
(b)
Landscape uses. The following established landscape water uses are exempt form the outdoor water use
schedules of this rule:
(1)
Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed
wastewater.
(2)
Irrigation of personal food gardens.
(c)
Newly installed landscaping. Newly (in place less than 30 days) installed landscapes are subject to the following:
(1)
Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the
drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during
drought response level four.
(2)
For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply.
(d)
Golf courses. The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of
this rule:
(1)
Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to proved reclaimed
wastewater.
(2)
Irrigation of fairways during times of nondrought and declared drought response level one.
(3)
Irrigation of tees during times of nondrought and declared drought response levels one, two and three.
(4)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
128/393
Irrigation of greens.
(e)
Commercial outdoor water uses. The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor
water use schedules of this rule:
(1)
Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers during
installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for
commercial exemptions to apply.
(2)
Irrigation contractors: during installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only.
(3)
Sod producers.
(4)
Ornamental growers.
(5)
Fruit and vegetable growers.
(6)
Retail garden centers.
(7)
Hydro-seeding.
(8)
Power washing.
(9)
Construction sites.
(10)
Producers of food and fiber.
(11)
Carwashes.
(12)
Other activities essential to daily business.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
129/393
(13)
Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf.
(Ord. No. 04-07-01, § I(1.08), 7-30-2004)
Secs. 22-111—22-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - LANDSCAPE WATERING
Sec. 22-131. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape.
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or
other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided,
however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses:
(1)
Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the
commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to,
cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not
limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial
production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise
defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3;
(2)
Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable county ordinances
and state guidelines;
(3)
Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations;
(4)
Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection
division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater;
(5)
Watering personal food gardens;
(6)
Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during
installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation;
(7)
Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
(8)
Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
(9)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
130/393
Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such
well or surface water is on said property;
(10)
Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
(11)
Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
(12)
Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or
(13)
Hydroseeding.
(Ord. of 12-9-2010, § II(1))
Sec. 22-132. - Enforcement.
(a)
No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in
this article.
(b)
The police department shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The mayor may also authorize, in
writing, other city departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement of this article.
(c)
Jurisdiction for any violation of this article shall be the city court.
(d)
Criminal penalties.
(1)
First offense. Violation of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00, or imprisonment not to
exceed 24 hours, or both.
(2)
Second offense. Upon the second offense of violation of this article, the violation may be punished by a fine not
to exceed $300.00, or imprisonment not to exceed 24 hours, or both.
(3)
Third offense. Upon the third or subsequent offense of violation of this article, the violation may be punished by
a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imposition of community service not to exceed 30 days, or both.
(Ord. of 12-9-2010, § II(2))
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
131/393
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Sec. 101-1. - Applicability of chapter 1.
The provisions of chapter 1 of this Code apply to this subpart.
Sec. 101-2. - Status.
While this subpart is a codification of the ordinances pertaining to land development regulations, provisions in
subpart A of this Code may also pertain to land development. The failure to include provisions in this subpart
does not excuse failure to comply with such provisions.
Sec. 101-3. - Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission.
The consolidated planning commission shall have the power and duty to review and approve engineering layouts
and designs for development projects and associated infrastructure construction, and inspect and approve the
construction and installation of infrastructure and improvements associated with such land development projects,
recognizing that said approvals shall not constitute acceptance of public improvements which is a power
reserved for the city.
(Res. No. 06-05-02R, 5-9-2006)
Chapter 103 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 103-1. - Building permit required.
(a)
Any person desiring to build within the city limits shall file an application for a permit to build. At such time as
an application is approved for said building, the builder shall be issued a permit to build.
(b)
Fees set for permits shall be $25.00 for the first $12,000.00 and $1.00 for each additional $1,000.00 thereafter.
This shall apply to commercial buildings to the extent that such fee shall not exceed an amount as established by
the mayor and city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the city
clerk.
(Ord. No. 74-07-01, 7-9-1974)
Secs. 103-2—103-20. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(10) State Law reference— Minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20.
Sec. 103-21. - Minimum state construction codes.
The following codes, as published by the International Code Council, are adopted by reference as though they
were copied herein fully:
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
132/393
(1)
International Building Code (ICC).
(2)
International Plumbing Code (ICC).
(3)
International Fuel Gas Code (ICC).
(4)
International Mechanical Code (ICC).
(5)
International Fire Code (ICC).
(6)
National Electrical Code (NFPA).
(7)
International Residential Code for One-Family and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC).
(8)
International Energy Conservation Code (ICC).
The adoption of these codes is done to facilitate inspection activities by the city relating to construction and to
maintenance of buildings within the corporate limits of said city, and to promote public safety, health, and
general welfare.
(Ord. No. 86-02-01, § I, 2-11-1986)
Sec. 103-22. - Authority to administer and enforce construction codes.
Authority to administer and enforce the codes cited in section 103-21 is delegated to the county building official
or his designated representative.
(Ord. No. 86-02-01, § III, 2-11-1986)
Secs. 103-23—103-47. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - HOUSE NUMBERING
Sec. 103-48. - Duties of city clerk; display.
(a)
It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to administer the general plan for the numbering of houses and
buildings located in the corporate limits of the city.
(b)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
133/393
It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to assign a proper number to each house and building within the
corporate limits of the city.
(c)
Whenever the city clerk ascertains that any house or building is improperly numbered, it shall be his
responsibility to assign a proper number for that location. The owner of any such house or building or if the same
is not occupied by the owner, the occupant thereof; or if the owner is a nonresident and represented by an agent,
the agent therefor, shall be notified by the city clerk of the assignment of the proper number. Those shall be
served by first class mail upon the owner or upon the occupant, or upon the agent of the owner, if the owner is a
nonresident and is represented by an agent. It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or agent to remove the old
number and affix the new number so assigned in the manner prescribed in subsection (e) of this section within
ten days after service of notice. It will be assumed that the notice is received five days after mailing.
(d)
The building official shall not issue final approval of any newly constructed building until the builder or owner
has exhibited satisfactory proof that the newly constructed building has displayed the proper number, assigned
by the city clerk, which is clearly visible to the public from a position on the nearest public thoroughfare to the
building.
(e)
All houses and buildings located in the corporate limits of the city shall conspicuously display the number
assigned to such house or building by the city clerk. Such number shall be displayed in a manner so that it shall
be clearly visible to the public from a position on the nearest public thoroughfare to the building.
(Ord. No. 91-06-01, § 1 , 6-25-1991)
Chapter 105 - DRAINAGE
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 105-1. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the city storm sewer system which occurs
by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence.
Appeal means a request for a review of the county's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request
for a variance.
Best management practices (BMPs) means a wide range of management procedures, activities, and prohibitions
or practices which control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with the
planned land use.
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.).
Construction means any alteration of land for the purpose of achieving its development or changed use,
including particularly any preparation for, building of or erection of a structure.
Conveyance means stormwater features designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system,
such as, concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, etc.
Cooling water means water used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance, device or apparatus.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
134/393
Detention facility means a facility which provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this
runoff during a storm. This facility only contains water during the storage period.
Developer means any person who acts in his own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and engages in
alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity.
Development means any action in preparation for construction activities which results in alteration of either land
or vegetation. The term "development" shall not apply to individual single-family dwelling unit construction or
to alteration, modification or additions to single-family dwelling units, except for, in either case, individual
single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots
as are located within the intermediate regional floodplain. For the purpose of this section, only the alterations of
the drainage system shall be deemed to be development on individual single-family lots.
Discharge means the release of treated or untreated water to the city storm sewer system.
Drainage means a general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by
gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water.
Drainage plan means a plan prepared by a professional engineer using appropriate and commonly accepted
engineering standards which specifies the means for alteration or development of a drainage system. The term
"drainage plan" is also referred to as the stormwater management plan.
Drainage system means the surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including both
the natural elements of streams, marshes, swales, and ponds whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and
the manmade element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, detention facilities, retention facilities, all parts
of the storm sewer system and easements in which the facilities are contained.
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, and/or gravity.
Flood means a temporary rise in the level of rivers, streams, drainageways and lakes which results in inundation
of areas not ordinarily covered by water.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance
Administration, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report
contains flood profiles, as well as the flood hazard boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
Hydrology means the science that treats the occurrence, circulation, distribution, and properties of the waters of
the earth, and their reaction with the environment.
Illicit connection means a connection to a storm sewer system which results in discharge that is not composed
entirely of stormwater runoff, except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for
discharges from the city storm sewer system).
Intermediate floodplain (100-year floodplain) means the land areas within the intermediate regional floodplain
elevation contours as defined on the flood hazard map.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
135/393
Intermediate regional flood (100-year flood) means a 100-year frequency flood as defined on the flood hazard
map which has a probability of occurring once every 100 years or having a one percent chance of occurring each
year.
Land disturbing activity means any land change which may result in soil erosion from water, wind or ice and the
movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing,
dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land.
Live retention means that quantity of water capable of being effectively contained by a designated facility for
stormwater storage for a specified period of time.
Maintenance means any action necessary to preserve stormwater management facilities in proper working
condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this chapter or to prevent structural failure of such
facilities.
Maintenance of retention facility means preserving the enclosing walls or impounding embankment of the
retention facility in good condition; ensuring structural soundness, functional adequacy, and freedom from
sediment, and rectifying any unforeseen erosion problems.
Mayor means the mayor of the City of Walthourville, Georgia.
Owner means the person in whom is vested the fee ownership, dominion, or title of property, the proprietor. The
term "owner" may also include a tenant, if chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of the property, and
any agent of the owner or tenant including a developer.
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties,
including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid,
gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or
render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to domestic,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild
animals, birds, fish, or other aquatic life.
Private means property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by the
county, city, state, or federal government.
Procedure means a procedure adopted by the city, by and through the city council, to implement a regulation
adopted under this chapter, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this Code or other codes,
ordinances or resolutions of the city or other agencies.
Reach means the length of a drainage channel uniform with respect to discharge, depth, area, and slope.
Record drawing means amended site plans specifying the locations, dimensions, elevations, capacities and
operational capabilities of road and drainage structures and facilities as they have been constructed.
Regulation means any regulation, rule or requirement prepared by the engineering department and adopted by
the city pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.
Retention facility means a facility which provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this
runoff during and after a flood or storm. This facility normally contains water at all times.
Runoff means the portion of precipitation on the land which reaches the drainage system.
Runoff coefficient means the ratio of runoff to rainfall.
Sanitary sewage system means a complete sanitary sewage system which discharges sewage directly or indirectly
into the sewage treatment plant, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes and flushing inlets and
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
136/393
appurtenances to the foregoing, but the term sanitary sewage system shall exclude any portion or facilities of the
sewage treatment plant.
Sedimentation means the processes that operate at or near the surface of the ground to deposit earth, debris, and
other materials either on other ground surfaces or in water channels.
Sedimentation facility means a retention or detention facility specifically developed for the purpose of allowing
the deposit of sediment resulting from the land development process which may be constructed as part of, or
separately from, a retention facility.
Site means any lot, plot, parcel, or tract of land.
Site plan means that plan required to obtain a development, construction or building permit which shows the
means by which the developer will conform with applicable provisions of this and other applicable ordinances.
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation and/or mulch or other
ground cover which may be in combination with installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of
reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice, or gravity.
Storm sewer system means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
highways, rights-of-way, city streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains,
detention ponds, other stormwater (facilities) which is owned or maintained by the city; designed or used for
collecting or conveying stormwater; not a combined sewer; and, not part of a publicly owned treatment works
(POTW)).
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff
in a manner to meet the objectives of this chapter and which includes a system of vegetative or structural
measures, or both, that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts
caused by manmade changes to the land.
Stormwater management facilities means constructed or natural components of a stormwater drainage system,
designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions, including, but not limited to, pipes, swales,
ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices,
catchbasins, oil/water separators, sediment basins, natural systems, and modular pavement.
Stormwater runoff means the direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and
subsurface runoff that enters a ditch, stream, storm drain, or other concentrated flow during and following the
precipitation.
Stream means natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface
of the ground.
Used for. The term "used for" includes the terms "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for,"
and "occupied for."
Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements for specific
circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the
intent of this chapter.
Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or
radiological integrity of water.
Water quantity means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the rate and volume of the
stormwater runoff.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
137/393
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit,
culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and
which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by
reason of overflow or floodwater.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 5 , 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-2. - Statutory authorization.
By the Constitution of Georgia, article IX, section II, chapter 2-49, local governmental units are given the
authority and responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry and specifically with regard to water drainage, collection and disposal.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 1 , 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-3. - Findings of fact.
(a)
The city is subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life or property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(b)
These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood
heights and velocities and by occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other
lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise protected from flood damages.
(c)
Increased velocities and quantities of water draining off developed land causes erosion, sedimentation and
maintenance problems resulting in significant damages.
(d)
Uncontrolled stormwater drainage can increase the incidence of flooding and the level of floods which occur,
endangering roads, other public and private property and human life.
(e)
Altered land surfaces can change the rate and volume of runoff.
(f)
Many future problems can be avoided through proper stormwater management.
(g)
Every parcel of real property, both public and private, either uses or benefits from the maintenance of a storm
sewer system.
(h)
Current and anticipated growth will contribute to and increase the need for improvement and maintenance of the
storm sewer system.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
138/393
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 2 , 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-4. - Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote, protect, maintain and enhance the short-term and long-term public
health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific
areas by provisions designed to:
(1)
Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion, flood heights
or velocities;
(2)
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damages at the time of initial construction;
(3)
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, wetlands, and natural protective barriers which are
involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4)
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands; and
(5)
Comply with state (DNR) and federal (EPA) stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act.
These requirements include:
a.
Control the contribution of pollutants to the storm sewer system by stormwater discharges associated with
commercial and industrial activity and the quality of stormwater discharged from sites of commercial and
industrial activity;
b.
Prohibit illicit connections to storm sewers;
c.
Control discharge to storm sewers of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater; and
d.
Control, through intergovernmental agreements, contribution of pollutants from one city system to another.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 3 , 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-5. - Scope.
This chapter supplements the following:
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
139/393
(1)
Subdivision Regulations, Liberty County.
(2)
Liberty County Zoning Ordinance.
(3)
Buildings, construction and related activities.
(4)
Erosion and sediment control ordinance.
(5)
Flood control ordinance.
(6)
Any other ordinance relating to the regulation and control of surface waters and or floodwaters.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 4 , 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-6. - Statement of policy objectives.
The enactment and enforcement of this chapter is intended to address the following policy objectives:
(1)
To recognize the necessity of and to encourage joint action and a full exchange of information by the city and the
development industry in resolution of existing drainage problems, the prevention of their worsening or
recurrence and the implementation of these objectives;
(2)
To work in a cooperative relationship with the development industry to accomplish the objective stated in
subsection (1) of this section by encouraging through this chapter and other public actions the development of
on-site self-maintaining retention/detention facilities and for off-site centrally located regional
retention/detention facilities;
(3)
To maintain, where feasible, the natural environment of city streams through reduction of flow quantities
resulting from new development and, where feasible, restore the floodplain to its natural functional purpose to
resolve existing flooding problems, but recognize the necessity of using urban streams for stormwater runoff in
those situations where maintenance of the natural stream environment would result in continuation or worsening
of flooding conditions;
(4)
To incrementally assume maintenance responsibility for the public drainage system;
(5)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
140/393
To require of the development industry the responsibility to maintain the functioning of the storm drainage
system;
(6)
To encourage the construction of joint retention/detention ponds serving several properties which can be
accepted for maintenance by the city upon completion of project development. The city encourages where
engineering judgment so warrants the location of these retention facilities off the site of the property under
development and may participate in the construction of major retention facilities which would serve not only the
needs of the property under development, but would assist in resolving existing flooding problems;
(7)
To encourage innovative design solutions to the effective retention and reduction of runoff. Drainage control
measures to retain, reduce and regulate the rate of stormwater discharge which shall be acceptable shall include,
but need not be limited to, retention/detention ponds percolation facilities, parking lots, open space areas, and
oversized storm drains with restricted outlets. In addition, the city encourages the development of retention
facilities in such a manner that they will become aesthetically and recreationally beneficial to the community in
which they are located; and
(8)
To require any development to retain any runoff which exceeds an allowable increase of one cubic foot per
second per acre caused by the development and to utilize the parking area or privately owned retention/detention
facility.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 6 , 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-7. - Title.
This chapter, as the same shall be amended from time to time, shall be known as the "City of Walthourville
Drainage Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 7 , 3-11-1997)
Secs. 105-8—105-32. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 105-33. - Standards.
(a)
All persons proposing development or construction shall submit to the county consolidated planning
commission, prior to beginning any construction activity, site plans prepared in accordance with this chapter
illustrating the means by which conformance with this article is to be achieved and illustrating compliance with
applicable development standards before issuance of a development or building permit.
(b)
Electric, telephone and gas utilities shall submit plans and obtain a development permit only for major
transmission installations located within rights-of-way or easements devoted exclusively to installations of utility
facilities. Individual single-family lots within approved subdivisions shall be exempt from these requirements for
new residential construction with the exception that individual single-family lots where site plans for each are
required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots are located within the 100-year floodplain shall
be submitted for review and approval in accordance with this and other applicable Code provisions.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
141/393
(c)
The grading and drainage portion of a site plan shall be prepared under the supervision of a currently statelicensed registered professional engineer. The plan shall include site location map of the project area indicating
the location of the project in relation to rivers and streams, topographic map showing existing and proposed
contours at one-foot intervals, proposed drainageways and drainage structures in addition to the requirements
established in other ordinances.
(d)
When the hydraulic/hydrologic engineering analysis includes applications of the principles of flood routing,
super critical flow, high energy dissipation or conversion, backwater curves, floodplain studies, or other
advanced hydraulic/hydrologic engineering techniques, the analysis shall be made by a currently state-licensed
registered professional engineer proficient in hydraulics/hydrology.
(e)
The county consolidated planning commission may grant a variance from the requirements of this article, if
exceptional circumstances applicable to a site exist such that strict adherence to article provisions will result in
unnecessary hardship and will not fulfill the intent of the article.
(f)
The county consolidated planning commission may grant a variance from requirements of this article, if the
proposed development will not:
(1)
Change the rate or volume of runoff significantly;
(2)
Have a significant, negative impact on any wetland, watercourse or water body; or
(3)
Contribute to degradation of water quality.
(g)
Site plans and supporting documentation to show conformance with the requirements of this article shall be
submitted in accordance with applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations and shall include:
(1)
Evidence of conformance with the requirements of this article for grading and drainage system alteration or
development. Grading plans shall illustrate existing and proposed contours to the one-foot interval. Golf courses
and other open space areas shall be exempt from this requirement but general grading plans shall be submitted.
Related plans shall show locations of structures, roads, surface drainage, existing and proposed drainage conduits
and proposed alterations to the existing site or facilities;
(2)
A hydrologic engineering analysis of stormwater runoff under existing and proposed developed site conditions
and a detailed evaluation of the projected effects on upstream and downstream properties within the affected
drainage basin. This analysis shall include a determination of the culvert, floodplain and channel cross section
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
142/393
area required to carry the affected stream at the 25-year and 100-year flood stage level. The requirements for a
complete hydrologic study may be waived by the county engineer for any development where the site plan
submitted illustrates existing or proposed improvements sufficient to ensure compliance with applicable
provisions of this chapter;
(3)
Delineation of the boundaries and contour elevations of the 100-year floodplain as represented on the county's
flood hazard maps prepared by FEMA. The actual building site in relation to the 100-year floodplain boundaries
shall be shown. Any structure located in the 100-year floodplain shall show the finished floor elevation of the
first floor. The same information shall be indicated by the seller to the purchaser of each property so affected.
The elevation contours representing the intermediate regional flood conditions shall be shown when they are
located outside established ditch banks. A benchmark suitable for determining 100-year flood elevations shall be
established and shown on the plan;
(4)
The projected sequence of work represented by the grading and drainage plans as related to other major items of
construction; and
(5)
Upon development/project completion, location, size and invert elevations of pipe segments of the storm
drainage system, of control weirs, and maximum water surface elevations in retention ponds shall be shown on
the final plat for a subdivision, and on a final plat for other developments which shall be submitted to the county
engineer. The professional engineer reviewing the construction shall provide a certification that the development
is in substantial compliance with approved plans for the project.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 20, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-34. - Plan approval process.
(a)
Unless granted an exemption, any person planning a development shall submit to the county consolidated
planning commission four copies of a drainage plan, prepared in accordance with this article for review and
approval.
(b)
The county engineer or his designee shall review the plan.
(1)
The county engineer shall issue a decision approving, rejecting or conditionally approving the plan with
modification.
(2)
The county engineer's decision will be based on conformance with requirements included in this chapter. No plan
shall be approved unless it conforms with the requirements included in this article. The county engineer may
require such additional documents or other items necessary to make this determination.
(3)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
143/393
If rejected, changes, additional analysis or other information needed to approve the next submittal of the plan
shall be identified.
(c)
If the drainage plan involves any stormwater management facilities or land to be dedicated to public use, the
drainage plan shall be submitted to the engineering department for review and approval.
(d)
Approved plans shall be valid for one year from the date of approval.
(1)
Extensions or renewals of plan approvals shall be granted by the county consolidated planning commission upon
written request by the person responsible for the development activity.
(2)
A stormwater management plan shall not be considered approved without the inclusion of an approval stamp
with a signature and date on the plans from the county consolidated planning commission. The stamp of
approval on the plans is solely an acknowledgement of satisfactory compliance with the requirements of these
regulations. The approval stamp does not constitute a representation or warranty to the applicant or any other
person concerning the safety, appropriateness or effectiveness of any provision, or omission from the stormwater
management plan.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 21, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-35. - Permit suspension and revocation.
(a)
Any development-related (subdivision/utility/other) permit may be suspended or revoked if one or more of the
following violations are committed:
(1)
Violation of conditions of drainage plan approval;
(2)
Construction is not in strict accordance with the intent of approved plans;
(3)
Noncompliance with any correction notice or stop work order; or
(4)
Existence of immediate danger in the downstream area, as judged by the county consolidated planning
commission.
(b)
If one or more of the violations set out in subsection (a) of this section are found, a written notice of violations
shall be served upon the owner or his authorized representative, and an immediate stop work order may be
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
144/393
issued.
(1)
The written notice shall set forth measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan; and
(2)
Correction of the violation must be started immediately, or the owner shall be deemed in violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 22, 3-11-1997)
Secs. 105-36—105-58. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS, FACILITIES, AND PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS
Sec. 105-59. - Standards.
(a)
All engineering design items for storm drainage and erosion control and sedimentation control and delineation of
the 100-year floodplains shall meet the applicable minimum requirements available from the county consolidated
planning commission. Rainfall intensities used in hydrologic computations shall not be less than shown by
applicable rainfall curves published by the National Weather Service for the affected area.
(b)
A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required for all development and
construction which will increase the peak rate of runoff from the site by more than one cubic foot per second per
acre for a 25-year frequency (type II) storm. This shall not apply to individual single-family lots of less than two
acres.
(c)
The release rate of stormwater from all developments where detention is required shall:
(1)
Not exceed the peak stormwater runoff rate from the area in its existing state for all intensities up to, and
including, the 25-year frequency for all durations of rainfall; or
(2)
Not be greater than that calculated for a 25-year (type II) frequency storm with a runoff coefficient of 0.20, 0.25
and 0.35 for land with an average slope of up to two percent.
(d)
The drainage system being developed shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream
areas for a (type II) storm of 25-year design frequency except for areas considered to be major drainage canals.
The major drainage canals shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream areas for a
storm of 100-year frequency.
(e)
Land uses within the 100-year floodplain shall not diminish or restrict the capacity of the channels or floodplains
of the stream, its tributaries, drainage ditches or any other drainage facilities or systems and shall not increase the
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
145/393
100-year elevation or velocity or concentration of flow in downstream areas. If the required hydrologic studies
reveal that a request for filling or grading within the 100-year floodplain would overload the capacity of the
channel downstream or increase flood stages upstream, the development permit shall be denied unless equivalent
flow and storage capacity is replaced and maintained by the owner within the 100-year floodplain. Altered
sections of the 100-year floodplain shall have a positive slope so as to provide positive drainage back to the
stream flow line and this section must be maintained by the owners in perpetuity so as to prevent or remove silt
build-up.
(f)
The live retention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the 25-year frequency rainfall as
published by the National Weather Service for the affected areas. The retention system required shall be that
necessary to handle the runoff of a 25-year rainfall, for any and all durations from the proposed development,
with a release rate that does not exceed the pre-development runoff. Retention control structures and other
drainage improvements shall be located and designed to prevent erosion damage to adjacent property owners.
Retention/detention control structures shall be sized for the release rate as presented in previous sections and will
have provisions for overflow of the 100-year storm without damage to the structure.
(g)
When the developer requests and the county consolidated planning commission determines that development and
construction projects are too small, or that engineering and economic factors make combined retention or other
drainage facilities more practical, the city may authorize the joint construction of these facilities to serve two or
more properties by two or more developers. This authorization shall be granted by the county consolidated
planning commission upon application for approval being submitted through the planning commission. Where
joint retention facilities serving two or more properties are approved for construction, no use of land or
occupancy of buildings within the properties served by these facilities shall be permitted until completion of the
retention facility, except upon approval of the county consolidated planning commission.
(h)
When adequacy of existing drainage structures are being considered in association with proposed development,
the overall capacity of the structure will be evaluated and divided among upstream properties. The available
capacity will be divided among property owners based on acreage in the basin. Under no condition will the
available capacity of the structure be exceeded. Should the developer desire to replace the structure in lieu of
retention/detention, all downstream structures should be evaluated and deemed adequate. The developer will be
responsible for providing calculations and studies needed to evaluate downstream structures. If an existing
structure not being modified by the development is found to be inadequate to handle the pre-development flows,
the developer shall provide calculations to show the structure size required to handle the pre-development flows
of the entire basin area. The city at that time will evaluate its ability to modify that structure. This evaluation will
take into consideration available funds, required permits, capabilities of downstream structures and current work
loads. Based on the county's findings, the developer will be notified within 45 days of the county's intentions for
modification and any schedule required for modification of structures.
(i)
The following requirements shall apply to the installation, development and maintenance of all retention,
detention and sedimentation control facilities designed for temporary storage of stormwater runoff:
(1)
Permanent chain-link fencing at least six feet in height shall be required around all these facilities. This fencing
shall be designed, installed and maintained to allow the free flow of runoff and sediment, if intended, into the
facility. The fence shall include a lockable gate of sufficient size to permit entrance of equipment necessary to
allow periodic maintenance activities, 12-foot minimum. Different fencing material may be substituted for chain
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
146/393
link upon approval of the county consolidated planning commission. requirements for fencing may be waived if
deemed necessary by the mayor and city council.
(2)
These facilities shall be located on tracts of land, designated for this use on the recorded plat, with sufficient area
around the perimeter to provide access for maintenance purposes and shall be immediately adjacent to or be
provided with an access easement to a public street. The access easement shall provide at least 20 feet of width
outside of above-ground obstructions including trees, utility poles, fences, buildings, headwalls, weirs, settling
basins, top of slopes, or other drainage structures.
(3)
Perforated standpipes or a French drain, as approved by the county engineer, or other methods which will
achieve equal performance to prevent standing of water and/or inadequate drainage shall be installed within all
these facilities.
(4)
Except as provided in subsection (i)(5) of this section, the property owner shall be responsible for the
maintenance of these retention facilities during grading, construction and following final approval of the
completed project. This maintenance obligation shall be binding on future owners, successors and assigns of the
property.
(5)
In the case of single-family residential subdivisions approved after the date of adoption of the ordinance from
which this article is derived, the city shall assume maintenance responsibility two years after the release of
subdivision streets. A special drainage district, as authorized by state law, will be established for property in a
single-family residential subdivision at the time the plat is finally recorded and will be so noted on the plat. Upon
completion of developer maintenance all detention ponds shall have a positive slope to the outlet in order to
facilitate complete drainage.
(6)
These facilities in single-family residential subdivisions constructed under permits issued prior to the adoption of
the ordinance from which this article is derived will not be accepted for city maintenance, unless individually
approved and accepted by the mayor and city council and suitable access easements are provided. At the time the
mayor and city council accepts a retention facility for city maintenance, a special drainage district may be
established that includes all properties for which the retention facility is designed.
(7)
Pursuant to the creation of special drainage districts by the city, as authorized by state law, revenues to fund city
maintenance of retention facilities may be obtained by an ad valorem tax on all properties for which the retention
facilities are designed. Such ad valorem millage rates may be set annually by the board of commissioners when
other ad valorem millage rates are set. No assessment will be made in a special drainage district in the calendar
year in which it is established.
(j)
Items required to be included in the drainage plan:
(1)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
147/393
A vicinity map with an indicating north arrow, scale, boundary lines of site, the land lot and district numbers, and
other information necessary to locate the development site.
(2)
Existing and proposed topography of the development site.
(3)
A description of all watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands on or adjacent to the site or into which stormwater
flows.
(4)
Physical improvements on the site, including present development and proposed development.
(5)
Proposed dimensions, elevations, characteristics of all stormwater management facilities.
(6)
Location of BMPs for water quality control, including temporary and permanent vegetative and structural
measures, processes, procedures, prohibitions on practices and other management practices that prevent or
reduce discharge of pollutants in stormwater runoff.
(7)
Identify all areas within the site which will be included in land disturbing activities and the expected date final
stabilization will be completed.
(8)
The anticipated starting and completion dates of various stages of land disturbing activities and the expected date
final stabilization will be completed.
(9)
A determination that no occupied first floor elevation of any structure is below the 100-year flood elevation.
(10)
Designation of all easements needed for inspection and maintenance of the drainage system and stormwater
management facilities and BMPs.
(11)
All engineering calculations needed to design the system and associated structures, including:
a.
Pre- and post-development runoff flows velocities;
b.
Peak rates of discharge; and
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
148/393
c.
Inflow and outflow hydrograph of runoff at all existing and proposed points of discharge from the site.
(12)
Description of site conditions around all points of surface water discharge. This description shall include, but not
be limited to:
a.
Vegetation; and
b.
The method of flow conveyance from any land disturbing activity.
(13)
Construction and design details for structural controls.
(14)
An assessment of activities, materials, and physical features of the proposed development that have a reasonable
potential to contribute significant amounts of pollutants to stormwater. Any such activities, materials, or features
must be addressed by the measures and controls subsequently described in other portions of the stormwater
management plan.
(15)
Include in the hydrologic-hydraulic study an analysis of all stormwater management facilities and all major
portions of the conveyance system through the proposed development for design conditions and operating
conditions reasonably expected during the life of that facility.
(16)
If the plan and/or design report indicates there may be a drainage or flooding problem at the exit to the proposed
development, the county consolidated planning commission may require the following:
a.
Water surface profiles of pre- and post-development conditions for design storms; and
b.
Elevations of all structures potentially damaged by design year flows.
(17)
Certification by the person responsible for the land disturbing activity that the activity will be accomplished
pursuant to the approved plan, and responsible personnel will be assigned to the project.
(18)
The name, address and telephone number of the developer/owner.
(19)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
149/393
The name, address and telephone number of a 24-hour local contact responsible for stormwater runoff controls.
(20)
Maintenance statement:
"Stormwater runoff control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional stormwater runoff control
measures will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection."
(21)
All maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a professional engineer.
(k)
All buildings located adjacent to or in the 100-year floodplain shall be constructed in accordance with the county
flood damage prevention code.
(l)
Special drainage system maintenance requirements:
(1)
No impoundment of water which retains in excess of 0.5 acre feet of runoff shall be removed without first
obtaining a development permit, which shall only be issued after competent engineering studies provided by the
developer show that this removal will not adversely affect downstream properties.
(2)
Trash, garbage, construction materials, construction byproducts or other debris shall not be deposited in any part
of the drainage system.
(3)
No restrictions or barriers, including fences, may be placed in the drainage system without first obtaining a
development permit. When on-site or off-site debris has accumulated within a floodplain in such a manner as to
interfere with the free flow of water so as to increase the risk of hazardous inundation of upstream properties
adjacent to the floodplain, the city shall require the owner of the property where this debris was generated, if its
source can be identified, to clear and remove the debris so as to permit the free flow of water.
(m)
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system.
(n)
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
(o)
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
150/393
(p)
All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 30, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-60. - Off-site drainage facilities.
(a)
The county consolidated planning commission may allow stormwater runoff that otherwise is of unacceptable
quality or which would be discharged in volumes or at rates in excess of those otherwise allowed by this article,
to be discharged into drainage facilities off site of the development, provided the applicant has demonstrated:
(1)
Off-site drainage facilities and channels leading to them are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance
with requirements of this article;
(2)
Adequate provision is made for sharing of construction, maintenance and operating costs of facilities. The
developer may be required to pay a portion of the cost of constructing facilities as a condition to receiving
approval of the drainage plan; and
(3)
It is not feasible to completely manage runoff on site in a manner that meets the design and performance
standards found in this article.
(b)
A request to use off-site drainage facilities and all information related to proposed off-site facilities should be
made a part of the developer's drainage plan.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 31, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-61. - Prohibition and illicit connections.
(a)
Prohibition and exemptions.
(1)
It is unlawful for any person to throw, drain, run, or otherwise discharge to any component of the city storm
sewer system or to cause, permit or suffer to be thrown, drained, run, or allow to seep or otherwise discharge into
such system any matter of any nature excepting only such stormwater or surface water as herein authorized.
(2)
The county consolidated planning commission may exempt the following from the prohibition provision in
subsection (a)(1) of this section:
a.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
151/393
Water-line flushing performed by a government agency, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, and
unpolluted groundwater infiltration.
b.
Unpolluted pumped groundwater.
c.
Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water,
springs, water from crawlspace pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential carwashing, flows
from wetlands, and street wash water.
d.
Discharges or flows from firefighting.
e.
Other unpolluted water.
(3)
In the event of an accidental discharge or an unavoidable loss to the city storm sewer system of any material or
substance other than stormwater runoff, the person concerned shall inform the county consolidated planning
commission within 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. The person
concerned shall take immediate steps to contain, treat or other actions to minimize effects of the discharge on the
city system and receiving streams. The person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the
discharge.
(b)
Illicit connections.
(1)
It is unlawful for any person, company, corporation, etc., to connect any pipe, open channel, any other
conveyance system that discharges anything, except stormwater or unpolluted water which is approved by the
county consolidated planning commission, based on the exemptions listed in section 105-60(a)(2), to city storm
sewer system.
(2)
Improper connections in violation of this code must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to a sanitary
sewer system upon approval by the county consolidated planning commission.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 32, 3-11-1997)
Secs. 105-62—105-80. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 105-81. - Administration.
(a)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
152/393
The county consolidated planning commission will administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
county consolidated planning commission shall:
(1)
Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2)
Advise permittee when additional federal or state permits may be required; and, if specific federal or state
permits are known to be required, ensure that copies of such permits are provided and maintained on file with the
development permit.
(3)
Notify adjacent communities, Federal Emergency Management Agency and the state department of natural
resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(4)
Administer, coordinate and oversee acquisition, design, construction, and O and M of municipal/county
stormwater facilities and conveyances.
(5)
Establish or oversee establishment of development standards and guidelines.
(6)
Determine the manner in which stormwater facilities should be operated.
(7)
Inspect private systems which discharge to the county and city storm sewer systems.
(8)
Advise the city and other departments on issues related to stormwater.
(9)
Protect facilities and properties controlled by the city and prescribe how they are used by others.
(10)
Require new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater contributions to comply with the terms of this
article.
(11)
Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the city storm sewer system.
(b)
The county engineer or his representative shall administer and enforce those provisions of this chapter which
apply to developed and occupied areas and to undeveloped areas which affect the city's responsibility for
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
153/393
maintenance of the storm drainage system. The county engineer shall ensure that any altered or relocated portion
of any watercourse is maintained so that flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 40, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-82. - Flood hazard map preparation.
The county engineer shall prepare and maintain the flood hazard map using the most current flood insurance
study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with accompanying maps or by using
engineering studies prepared under the supervision of a currently state-licensed registered professional engineer,
by using common and appropriate engineering procedures, shall deem such studies accurate and acceptable for
floodplain definition.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 41, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-83. - Inspection and right-of-way.
(a)
Upon presentation of identification to the developer, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator, or occupant,
employees of the city may enter during all reasonable hours any property under proposed or existing
development and construction. These employees may make inspections of the facilities for the purpose of
determining plan requirements or compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(b)
Designees of the county engineer may inspect any drainage system within or outside of an existing drainage
easement. All drainage facilities located on private property, whether dedicated to the city or not, shall be
accessible at all times for city inspection. Where drainage facilities are accepted by the city for maintenance,
public access easements shall be provided. Reasonable access shall be provided to all drainage easements for
inspection and maintenance functions. Where an easement does not exist for the drainage system, the permission
of the owner shall be obtained before entrance; however, in the event of emergency maintenance requirements,
permission of the owner shall not be mandatory.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 42, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-84. - Ownership, maintenance, and inspections.
(a)
Any stormwater management facility which services a single lot or commercial and industrial development shall
be privately owned and maintained. The owner shall maintain a perpetual, nonexclusive easement which allows
for access for maintenance.
(b)
All other stormwater management control facilities shall be publicly owned and/or maintained only if accepted
for maintenance by city.
(c)
The county consolidated planning commission may require dedication of privately owned stormwater facilities
which discharge to the city storm sewer system.
(d)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
154/393
The county consolidated planning commission shall determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the
provisions of this article. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1)
An initial inspection prior to drainage plan approval;
(2)
A bury inspection prior to burial of any underground drainage structure;
(3)
Erosion control inspections as necessary to ensure effective control of erosion and sedimentation; and
(4)
A final inspection when all work, including installation of drainage facilities, has been completed.
(e)
The county engineer or his designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter, in
accordance with state and federal law, all properties for regular inspections, periodic investigations, observation,
measurement, enforcement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with provisions of this article. The county
engineer or his designee shall duly notify the owner of said property or the representative on site, except in the
case of an emergency.
(f)
The county engineer or designated employee of the city or the city, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter, in accordance with state and federal law, all properties for which the city holds a
negotiated easement for repairs, maintenance and other purposes related to any portion of the stormwater
management facilities lying within said easement. The county engineer or his designee shall duly notify the
owner of such property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency.
(g)
If, after inspection, the condition of a facility presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general
welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, The city shall have right, but not duty to take
action as may be necessary to protect the public and make the facility safe.
(h)
The county consolidated planning commission shall inspect the work and shall either approve it or notify the
applicant in writing in what respects there has been failure to comply with the requirements of the approved
drainage plan. Any portion of the work which does not comply shall be promptly corrected by the applicant, or
said applicant shall be subject to a penalty.
(i)
The county consolidated planning commission shall prepare an inventory of detention/retention structures
located in the city that are installed after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The
structures on this list shall be inspected once per year to ensure proper maintenance. An annual report shall be
given to the city stating the condition of detention/retention structures within the city limits.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 43, 3-11-1997)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
155/393
Sec. 105-85. - Emergency maintenance.
(a)
The city may conduct emergency maintenance operation on private land and on drainage systems where
emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance shall constitute the removal of trees and other debris,
which in the judgment of the county engineer or his representative create a condition potentially injurious to life,
property and the public road system.
(b)
Emergency maintenance conducted on any drainage system shall not be construed as constituting a continuing
maintenance obligation on the part of the city.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 44, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-86. - Notice of violation/stop work order.
Whenever the county engineer or his representative determines that activity on a property does not comply with
the approved development and construction plans, he may issue a notice of violation and/or a stop work order.
Whenever the county engineer determines that the drainage system has been unlawfully altered, causing
inadequate drainage, he may issue a notice of violation and/or a stop work order. A stop work order or notice of
violation of the provisions of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall be directed to
the owner of the property or his agent and shall:
(1)
Be in writing;
(2)
Include a description of the property sufficient to identify where the violation has occurred;
(3)
State that, if repairs, construction or alterations are not completed within a reasonable time period specified by
the inspector, summons shall be issued for the owner to appear in court.
Each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. However, in the judgment of the
county engineer, where the violation is willful, in want on disregard of the provisions of this article or constitutes
a public health and safety hazard, he may issue a court summons in lieu of a notice of violation.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 45, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-87. - Administrative appeal.
(a)
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the county consolidated planning commission (including any decision
with reference to the granting or denial of a variance from the terms of this chapter) may appeal same by filing a
written notice of appeal with the county engineer within 15 days of the issuance of said decision by the county
engineer.
(b)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
156/393
The county engineer can then reverse his decision or send this notice to the consolidated planning commission.
A notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the decision of the county engineer is alleged to be in
error, and the county engineer shall prepare and send to the consolidated planning commission and appellant a
written response to said notice of appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal.
(c)
The county consolidated planning commission will then make a recommendation to the city with regards to the
appeal. The city will make the final decision regarding the appeal.
(d)
All appeals shall be heard by the mayor and city council in accordance with the city bylaws. The hearing shall be
held within 60 days after receipt of notice of appeal or a date mutually agreed upon in writing by the appellant
and the chairperson of the city council. The city council shall then make its findings within 30 days of the appeal
hearing. Decisions of the mayor and city council shall be based on guidelines for appeals established by the
mayor and city council and amended from time to time, with guidelines published in a newspaper of general
circulation.
(e)
If the appellant is dissatisfied with the mayor and city council decision, he can appeal said decision to the
superior court.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 46, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-88. - Civil penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, permitting conditions or stop work order shall be liable for a
civil penalty of not less than $100.00 per day or more than $500.00 per day, by a sentence of imprisonment not
exceeding 60 days in jail, or both fine and jail. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 47, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-89. - Legal status provisions.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all development activity within the city. The provisions shall not,
however, be construed as repealing or modifying any condition attached to the issuance of any development
permit issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Further, this article
shall not be construed so as to require any department of the city government to amend any development permit
issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. However, the standards set
forth in this article shall apply to all development, as defined herein, subsequent to the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 48, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-90. - Cooperation with other governments.
The city may enter into agreements with other local governments to carry out the purpose of this article. These
agreements may include, but are not limited to, enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, cooperative
monitoring and cooperative management of stormwater system and management programs.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 49, 3-11-1997)
Sec. 105-91. - Property owner liability; supplemental charges.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
157/393
Any person in violation of any portion of this article shall pay for all city costs associated with the violation,
including, but not limited to, containment, cleanup, injury, death, legal, and other costs.
(Ord. No. 97-03-01, § 50, 3-11-1997)
Chapter 107 - FLOODS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 107-1. - Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1)
Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or
which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(2)
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
(3)
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved
in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4)
Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and
(5)
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(1-1), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-2. - Objectives.
The objectives of this article are to:
(1)
Protect human life and health;
(2)
Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3)
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense
of the general public;
(4)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
158/393
Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5)
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines, and streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6)
Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a
manner as to minimize floodblight areas; and
(7)
Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a floodprone area.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(1-2), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-3. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage, and other
nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay shed, and the like.
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which
the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition
which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing walls is new construction.
Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a
request for a variance.
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within the community subject to a one percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-
A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface
elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given
year.
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
Coastal high hazard area means an area subject to high velocity waters caused by, but not limited to, hurricane
wave wash. Such an area is designated on the FIRM as zone VE.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
159/393
permanent storage of materials or equipment.
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level
by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway
walls.
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before September 26, 2008.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or pouring of
concrete pads) was completed before the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
Expansion of an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community, and any revisions or amendments thereof.
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and shall include any revisions, amendments or replacements of the FIS.
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete
slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term "floor" does not include the floor
of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose, unless it is
located in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of
cargo or passengers or shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood processing facilities. The term "functionally
dependent facility" does not include longterm storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction, next to
the proposed walls of a building.
Historic structure means any structure that is either:
(1)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior to meet the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
160/393
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance
of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
(3)
Individually listed on the Georgia Register of Historic Places.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or floodresistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a
basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of other provisions of this Code.
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures
placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for
establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term "mean sea level" is
synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD).
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for
establishing various elevations within the floodplain.
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of
construction commenced after September 26, 2008, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the
start of construction commenced after the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed after the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis, which contains 400 square feet or less
when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light-duty truck; and is designed primarily as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use and not for use as a permanent dwelling.
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements), under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act 16 USC 3501 et seq., includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit
was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The term "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of a building
(including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles,
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as, garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
building. For substantial improvement, the term "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
161/393
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or
liquid storage tank or other manmade facilities or infrastructures.
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a
building, taking place during the life of a building in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of
the market value of the building. The market value of the building should be:
(1)
The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or
(2)
In the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures
which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the fire and structural safety inspector and which are solely necessary to ensure safe living
conditions.
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision in which the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of the streets, utilities, and
pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the repair, reconstruction,
or improvement commenced.
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such
time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(1-3), 8-28-2008; Ord. No. 08-10-01, § I(1-3), 10-9-2008)
Sec. 107-4. - Application to lands.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(1-4), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-5. - Identification of areas of special flood hazard.
(a)
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood
insurance study (FIS), dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
162/393
revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. For those land areas acquired by a
municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS, supporting data and any revision thereto, for the
county, dated September 26, 2008, are hereby adopted by reference.
(b)
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through
standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in an FIS.
(c)
The Repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other
supporting data is located at the following address: Liberty County Courthouse Annex Building, Room 105, 112
N. Main Street, Hinesville, Georgia.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(1-5), 8-28-2008; Ord. No. 08-10-01, § I(1-5), 10-9-2008)
Sec. 107-6. - Permit required.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the
commencement of any development activities. A development permit issued for new construction or substantial
improvement shall become null and void upon the expiration of 60 days from the date of issuance, unless the
start of construction, as defined herein, has occurred within such period of time. The building official may grant
an extension of time, in writing, not to exceed 60 days, for good cause shown in writing. All other permits for
building or repair shall be null and void upon the expiration of 90 days.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(1-6), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-7. - Compliance.
No structures or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, improved or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(1-7), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-8. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
However, where any provision of this chapter and another restrictive provision conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restriction shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(1-8), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-9. - Incorporation of federal regulations.
This chapter is intended to carry into effect regulations of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, title 44,
Code of Federal Regulations, part 59 and part 60, particularly 44 CFR 60.3, as amended, as such regulations
relate to the city, and such regulations are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this chapter by reference.
In the event of omission from this chapter of any requirement of 44 CFR 60.3, it shall be deemed to be supplied
herein by reference, and in the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this chapter and
requirements of 44 CFR 60.3, the more restrictive provision shall be controlling.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(1-9), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-10. - Interpretation.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
163/393
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
(1)
Considered as minimum requirements;
(2)
Liberally construed in favor of the mayor and city council; and
(3)
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(1-10), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-11. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights
may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made pursuant hereto.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(1-11), 8-28-2008)
Secs. 107-12—107-40. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 107-41. - Generally, permit application.
(a)
The county building official and the director of the LCPC (collectively, the building official or official) are
hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
(b)
Application for a development permit shall be made to the county building and licensing department or the
director of LCPC on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include,
but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in
question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage
of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities.
(1)
At the application stage.
a.
Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all buildings;
b.
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential building will be floodproofed;
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
164/393
c.
A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building
will meet the floodproofing criteria set forth in this chapter;
d.
Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development; and
(2)
During the construction stage. A floor elevation or floodproofing certification after the lowest floor is completed,
or in instances where the building is subject to the regulations applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after
placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor (i.e., Upon placement of the lowest floor, or
floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the
lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the building official a
certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, floodproofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of
the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea
level). The certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by him. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and
certified by him. Any work done prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The
building official shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to
proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a
stop work order for the project.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(2-1), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-42. - Duties of the building official.
Duties of the building official shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:
(1)
Review of all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2)
Advice to permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state
permits are known, requiring that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the
development permit.
(3)
Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
(4)
Notification to adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submission of evidence to the Federal Emergency Management Agency showing
that such notification has been given.
(5)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
165/393
Requiring maintenance of such altered or relocated watercourse so that its flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
(6)
Verification and recording of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new or substantially improved structures.
(7)
Verification and recording of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all new or substantially
improved structures have been floodproofed.
(8)
Requiring certification from a registered professional engineer or architect, when floodproofing is utilized for a
particular structure, that such floodproofing is in accordance with the requirements of sections 107-41, 107-78,
and 107-84
(9)
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the
building official shall make the necessary interpretation, subject only to any existing supervisory authority.
(10)
When base flood elevation data or floodway data has not been provided in accordance with section 107-5, the
building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data or floodway data
available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(11)
The building official shall maintain written records detailing performance of all duties set forth in this section
and in other provisions of this chapter and all information and certifications required herein, and such records
shall be maintained in his office and shall be open for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(2-2), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-43. - Appeals and requests for variances.
(a)
There shall be no appeal from any decision or determination made by the building official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter. The decision or determination of the building official, acting upon advice of the
city attorney and subject to the then existing supervisory authority, in any case in which the building official's
judgment is questioned, shall be final.
(b)
The building official shall be authorized to issue variances from the requirements of this chapter for the
reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the
state inventory of historic places without regard to the procedure set forth in the remainder of this section;
provided, however, that no variance shall be issued pursuant to this subsection unless the applicant for a variance
furnishes satisfactory evidence in the form of copies of official documents certifying the listing of the structure
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
166/393
as a historic place, and such evidence shall be maintained on file by the building official; and provided further,
that no variance shall be issued pursuant to this subsection for an alteration or addition to a structure.
(c)
Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no variance from the requirements of this chapter shall be
granted unless authorized by the mayor and city council pursuant to the procedure set forth in subsections (d)
through (m) of this section, which shall be strictly followed.
(d)
Application for a variance shall be made in conjunction with the application for a development permit and shall
be typewritten. Four copies of the application, including all information required herein, shall be filed with the
building official, who shall forward one copy to the secretary of the commission and two copies to the city
attorney.
(e)
The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee upon filing the application, which shall be in addition to other
charges routinely made for issuance of a development permit, to defray the city's administrative and other
expenses incidental to consideration of the application for a variance. The amount of such fee shall be
established by the mayor and city council, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the
office of the city clerk.
(f)
In addition to the information otherwise required in an application for a development permit, the application for a
variance shall include the following:
(1)
Site plan and building plan drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing;
(2)
Area plan showing grade elevations and drainage facilities and elevations of structures on surrounding
properties;
(3)
Certification of the foregoing by a registered professional engineer or architect;
(4)
A detailed statement showing that the applicant has good and sufficient cause for requesting a variance and that
the applicant will suffer exceptional hardship should a variance be denied; and
(5)
A detailed statement showing that a variance will not cause increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety or extraordinary public expense; create nuisance; cause fraud or a victimization of the public; or conflict
with existing local laws or ordinances.
(g)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
167/393
The city attorney shall immediately forward one copy of the application for a variance, together with all
supporting information, to the regional office of the federal emergency management agency and shall request the
advice and comments of the agency regarding the application, which he shall report to the mayor and city
council.
(h)
The mayor and city council shall set a date for a public hearing on the application, which shall be held not less
than 30 days thereafter, and the secretary of the commission shall cause notice of the date, time, place and
purpose of the same, identifying the applicant and property in question, to be advertised in the newspaper in
which official proceedings of the commission are published, once each week for four weeks preceding the
hearing.
(i)
In passing upon an application for a variance, the mayor and city council shall consider all technical evaluations,
all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter and the following additional factors:
(1)
Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(2)
Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3)
Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;
(4)
Importance of the services to be provided by the proposed facility to the community;
(5)
Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(6)
Availability of alternate locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
(7)
Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(8)
Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area;
(9)
Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(10)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
168/393
Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of
wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(11)
Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of
public or quasi-public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges;
(12)
Any advice and comments received from the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and
(13)
FEMA guidelines.
Editor's note—
The Federal Emergency Management Agency's guidelines are not printed in this volume but are available in the
city clerk's office.
(j)
Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the mayor and city council may
attach such conditions to the grant of a variance as it deems necessary or appropriate to further the purposes of
this chapter.
(k)
Variances shall not be granted except under the following conditions:
(1)
A variance shall not be issued unless the alleged hardship is based on physical characteristics peculiar to the land
in question. Characteristics pertaining to the proposed structure and personal characteristics of its inhabitants, the
applicant or property owners, and economic or financial hardship will not be considered;
(2)
A variance shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief;
(3)
A variance shall only be issued upon:
a.
Showing of good and sufficient cause;
b.
A determination that a failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
c.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
169/393
A determination that the grant of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense; create nuisance; cause fraud on or victimization of the public; or conflict
with existing local laws or ordinances.
(l)
The city clerk shall report the decision of the commission on the application for a variance to the building
official, and the building official shall maintain a record of all requests for variances and the decisions of the
commission thereon and shall report the same to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(m)
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the
base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(2-2), 8-28-2008)
Secs. 107-44—107-74. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 107-75. - General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following requirements shall be met:
(1)
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure.
(2)
All manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard
shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces.
(3)
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.
(4)
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize
flood damage.
(5)
All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
(6)
All new and replacement water-supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
170/393
(7)
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
(8)
On-site waste-disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(9)
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter shall meet the requirements for new construction as set forth in this chapter.
(10)
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure which is not in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(3-1), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-76. - Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in this chapter,
the provisions outlined in this article shall be met.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(3-2), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-77. - Residential construction; new construction; substantial improvements.
Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure
or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the
base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient
to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in
accordance with standards of section 107-79, pertaining to elevated buildings. All heating and air conditioning
equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities
shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(3-3), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-78. - Nonresidential construction.
New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zone may be
floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be
designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above,
and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 107-41.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(3-4), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-79. - Elevated buildings.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
171/393
New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living
space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls.
(1)
Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or
meet the following minimum criteria:
a.
Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot
of enclosed area subject to flooding;
b.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
c.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the
automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions;
(2)
So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises,
or entry to the elevated area; and
(3)
The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(3-5), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-80. - Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
(a)
All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions of
existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or in substantially improved manufactured home parks or
subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring.
(b)
All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
must be elevated so that:
(1)
The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood
elevation;
(2)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
172/393
The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an
equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above grade;
(3)
The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision in which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage as the result of a flood, any manufactured home placed or substantially improved must meet the
standards provided in subsection (b)(1) and (b)(3) of this section.
(c)
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
(1)
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(2)
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(3)
The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation
requirements of subsection (b) hereinabove.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only
by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached structures.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(3-6), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-81. - Floodway.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 107-5, are areas designated as floodway. A
floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In
addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without
increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
(1)
Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other
development within the regulatory floodway.
(2)
Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer
must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof.
(3)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
173/393
Only if subsection (2) of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall
comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(3-7), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-82. - Standards—Streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established by this section 107-5 where streams exist but where
no base flood data has been provided or where no floodways have been provided, the following provisions shall
apply.
(1)
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 107-5, then
the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article.
Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions, subsections (2) and (3) of this
section shall apply:
(2)
No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the
stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the streambank, unless certification by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a
one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(3)
In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements
of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no
less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be
elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been
completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in
accordance with standards of section 107-79, pertaining to elevated buildings.
(4)
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation,
plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at
the building site.
The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of
the permit file.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(3-8), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-83. - Same—Subdivision proposals.
(a)
All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(b)
All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
174/393
(c)
All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(d)
For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation
data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be
submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map
amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for
submitting the as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(3-9), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-84. - Same—Areas of shallow flooding (AO zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 107-5, are areas designated as shallow
flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate;
therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1)
All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including
basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate
the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 107-79,
pertaining to elevated buildings. The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record
shall become a permanent part of the permit file.
(2)
New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of
elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight
to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
provisions above and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in section 107-41(b)1c and (b)2.
(3)
Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(3-10), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-85. - Same—Critical facilities.
(a)
Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain.
(b)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
175/393
All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(3-11), 8-28-2008)
Sec. 107-86. - Same—Coastal high hazard areas (V zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 107-5, are areas designated as coastal high
hazard areas (V zones). These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave action and storm surge;
therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
(1)
All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be located landward of the reach
of mean high tide.
(2)
All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be elevated on piles, columns, or
shear walls parallel to the flow of water so that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal structural member
(excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation level. All space
below the lowest supporting member shall remain free of obstruction. Open lattice work or decorative screening
may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave
action and in accordance with subsection (6) of this section.
(3)
All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be securely anchored on pilings,
columns, or shear walls.
(4)
All pile and column foundations and the structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement due to the combined effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building
components, both (nonstructural and structural). Water loading values shall equal or exceed those of the base
flood. Wind loading values shall be in accordance with the most current edition of the standard building code.
(5)
A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for
construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in subsections (2), (3) and/or (4) of this section.
(6)
All space below the lowest horizontal supporting member must remain free of obstruction. Open lattice work or
decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the
event of abnormal wave action without causing structural damage to the supporting foundation or elevated
portion of the structure. The following design specifications are allowed:
a.
No solid walls shall be allowed; and
b.
Material shall consist of lattice or mesh screening only.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
176/393
If aesthetic lattice work or screening is utilized, any enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation, but
shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises.
(7)
Prior to construction, plans for any structures having latticework or decorative screening must be submitted to
the administrator for approval.
(8)
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to any structure shall not enclose the space below the
lowest floor except with latticework or decorative screening, as provided in this section.
(9)
There shall be no fill used as structural support. Noncompacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a
building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge, (thereby rendering
the building free of obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection.
The administrator shall approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided
an analysis by an engineer, architect, and/or soil scientist, which demonstrates that the following factors have
been fully considered:
a.
Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction;
b.
Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave defection to adjacent properties; and
c.
Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping.
(10)
There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, which would increase potential flood damage.
(11)
Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured homes park
or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of this section are met.
(Ord. No. 2008-08-01, § I(3-12), 8-28-2008)
Chapter 109 - GROUNDWATER
Sec. 109-1. - Title.
This chapter will be known as the "City of Walthourville Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 01-01-01, § 8.5-1, 1-23-2001)
Sec. 109-2. - Definitions.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
177/393
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing
water from a well.
Drastic means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic
settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600/2-87-035. (Note: the drastic
methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluation of pollution susceptibility.)
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges,
leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area.
Recharge areas are determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the
Hydrologic Atlas 20, Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, prepared by the department of
natural resources.
Pollution susceptibility maps means maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the department of
natural resources, using the drastic methodology. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land area of the
state into areas having high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential.
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish and
aquifer.
Significant recharge areas means those areas mapped by the department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas
18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type and thickness, slope,
density, or lithologic contacts, geologic structure, the presence of darts, and potentionmetric services.
(Ord. No. 01-01-01, § 8.5-2, 1-23-2001)
Sec. 109-3. - Criteria in significant recharge areas.
The following criteria shall apply in significant recharge areas as identified in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition)
within the incorporated area of the city:
(1)
New above-ground chemical of petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have
secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest
tank in cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt from this requirement, provided
they comply with all federal requirements.
(2)
New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within:
a.
A high-pollution susceptibility area;
b.
A medium-pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet in size; or
c.
A low-pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet in size.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
178/393
As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical
hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 by 10-7
 cm/sec or other criteria established by the natural resource
conservation service.
(3)
New homes served by a septic and drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as
follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums
set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections AF) of the DHR Manual. (Table attached)
a.
150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are
within a high-pollution susceptibility area;
b.
125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are
within a medium-pollution susceptibility area;
c.
110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are
within a low-pollution susceptibility area.
Any lot of record on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be exempt
from the minimum lot size requirements of this subsection, and the minimum lot size requirements of the city
zoning regulations shall be resolved in favor of the provision that establishes the larger minimum lot size.
(4)
New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots of spaces having minimum size
limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2).
The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set
forth in sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. (MT-2 Table attached)
a.
150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if
they are within a high-pollution susceptibility area;
b.
125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if
they are within a medium-pollution susceptibility area;
c.
110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if
they are within a low-pollution susceptibility area;
Any lot of record on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be exempt
from the minimum lot size requirements of this subsection. Any conflict between the minimum lot size
requirements of this subsection and the minimum lot size requirements of the city zoning regulations shall be
resolved in favor of the provision that establishes the larger minimum lot size.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
179/393
(5)
No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank, unless the county
health department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the
Georgia Department of Human Resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter DHR
manual) and this chapter.
(6)
New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation
And Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on
any one day shall perform operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal
spill prevention requirements and any local fire prevention code requirements.
(7)
Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high-pollution susceptibility.
(Ord. No. 01-01-01, § 8.5-3, 1-23-2001)
Sec. 109-4. - Permit requirements.
The permitting criteria in chapter 103 shall apply insignificant recharge areas as identified in Hydrologic Atlas 18
(1989 edition) within the incorporated area of the city.
(Ord. No. 01-01-01, § 8.5-4, 1-23-2001)
Chapter 111 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS
Sec. 111-1. - Establishment of parks prohibited.
The establishing of new mobile home parks in the city shall be prohibited.
(Ord. No. 83-01-01, 1-11-1983)
Sec. 111-2. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Accessory structure means a detached subordinate building or structure located on the same site as the mobile
home which it serves.
Building and zoning inspector means the official charged with the responsibility of administering this chapter.
Cul-de-sac means a driveway having one end open to traffic and the other end terminated by a vehicular
turnaround; a dead-end driveway.
Mobile home means a non-self-propelled vehicle or conveyance that is towable and supported on its own chassis,
permanently equipped to travel upon the public highways, that is used either temporarily or permanently, as a
residence or living quarters. Such unit shall be considered a mobile home whether or not the wheels have been
removed and whether or not set on jacks, skirts, masonry blocks, or other foundation.
(1)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
180/393
Doublewide mobile home means a single-family home consisting of two sections, each mounted on its own
chassis, and combined horizontally at the site.
(2)
Expandable mobile home means a mobile home with one or more room sections that fold, collapse or telescope
into the principal unit when being transported and which can be expanded at the site to provide additional living
area.
Mobile home lot means that portion of a mobile home park reserved for occupancy by a single mobile home unit
and its accessory buildings or structures and uses.
Mobile home park means a parcel of land owned by an individual, partnership or corporation used for or set apart
for the purpose of supplying parking space for two or more mobile homes and which includes buildings,
structures, vehicles, or enclosures used or intended for use as a part of such mobile home park.
Property line means the platted boundary of a mobile home park.
Roadway means a minor public right-of-way used by vehicles and pedestrians of a mobile home park for access.
Service building means a structure housing toilet and bathing facilities, maintenance equipment or such other
facilities as may be allowed by or required by ordinance.
Tandem parking means any parking facility which, when fully occupied, denies one or more vehicles free access
to a driveway or street.
(Ord. No. 88-03-01, art. I, 3-8-1988)
Sec. 111-3. - Development plan.
(a)
Development plan approval. In order to construct, alter or expand a mobile home park, a developer must secure
approval of a development plan from the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. Such plans must be
submitted at least 30 days prior to the time that construction is desired to begin. Water systems which serve 25 or
more people must be approved by the state department of natural resources; therefore, this 30-day lead time is
necessary and may not be waived.
(b)
The mobile home park development plan shall contain the following:
(1)
Name and address of applicant.
(2)
Name and address of proposed mobile home park, location and legal description of the property.
(3)
Three complete copies of the plot plan prepared by a registered engineer and a registered surveyor at a scale of 1
inch = 100 feet, and showing the following:
a.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
181/393
The total park area, including the shape and dimensions of the site and the north arrow.
b.
All existing and/or proposed structures, facilities and lots.
c.
A topographic map showing existing and proposed grades at two-foot contour intervals. Where property is too
level to permit such a map, a drainage sketch shall be furnished along with a certificate from an authorized
engineer stating that the drainage from the property is adequate and will not adversely affect adjacent property
owners.
d.
Location, size and number of existing and proposed mobile home lots and automobile parking areas.
e.
Location, surface and width of all existing and proposed roads, entrances, exits and walkways.
f.
Location and size of all existing and proposed utilities.
g.
Such other information as may be required by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission.
(c)
The Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission shall have authority to refer the development plan to other
governmental agencies for review and comment, but will give a decision within 30 days from the date of
submission of the development plan.
(Ord. No. 88-03-01, art. II, § 1 , 3-8-1988)
Sec. 111-4. - Construction permit.
Application for a construction permit will be submitted with the development plan, and the construction permit
will be issued as soon as the development plan is approved.
(Ord. No. 88-03-01, art. II, § 2 , 3-8-1988)
Sec. 111-5. - Final inspection and issuance of occupancy permit.
Final inspection of the mobile home park for conformance with the approved plan will be conducted by the
building and zoning inspector prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. No portion of a mobile home park
will be occupied prior to receipt by the owner or operator of an occupancy permit and a business license or
operation permit as may be required by the mayor and city council.
(Ord. No. 88-03-01, art. II, § 3 , 3-8-1988)
Sec. 111-6. - Park design standards.
(a)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
182/393
The minimum area for a mobile home park shall be five acres. At least ten percent of the mobile home park shall
be set aside as a common recreation area. Recreation facilities shall be provided to meet the anticipated needs of
the residents of the mobile home park. The recreation area shall be easily identifiable and accessible to the park
residents.
(b)
All mobile home lots shall have a minimum area of 6,000 square feet. No lot shall have a width of less than 50
feet.
(c)
A new park must have a minimum of 20 lots completed with all utilities and other required improvements,
including roadways, before any lot can be occupied.
(d)
All mobile homes and all buildings and structures within a mobile home park shall have a front setback of at
least 25 feet from the right-of-way of any public street or highway, and a minimum setback of 10 feet on each
side and the rear line shall be unobstructed for a minimum distance of 7½ feet to allow use as a fire lane.
(e)
A mobile home park shall provide each mobile home with all utilities, including sewage, but not gas, unless gas
is to be the method of heating. All utilities shall be underground.
(f)
A mobile home park shall be screened along the front property line by a planting of evergreens at least five feet
high or a privacy wall or fence of equal height.
(g)
Mobile home park signs may be located within the setback area.
(h)
Signs shall not exceed a combined total of 150 square feet per park and may be illuminated.
(i)
A park office, laundromat, maintenance buildings and recreation facilities are permitted in the mobile home park
for the convenience of park occupants.
(j)
If located in a flood hazard area, the following additional requirements apply for the new parks:
(1)
Ground anchors for tie-downs must be provided for each mobile home, and when the mobile home is placed,
these tie downs must be connected and remain so as provided by law.
(2)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
183/393
Stands or lots must be elevated on compacted fill or on piers so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be
at or above the 100-year flood level.
(3)
Surface drainage must be adequate, and easy access for a hauler must be provided.
(4)
When elevated on piers, lots must be large enough to permit steps; pier foundations must be placed on stable soil
no more than ten feet apart, and steel reinforcement must be provided for piers more than six feet high.
(k)
Existing mobile home parks which are located in flood hazard areas must take the following actions:
(1)
Install ground anchors and tie downs as provided by law.
(2)
Notify each purchaser, renter or lessee that the mobile home is located in a flood hazard area.
(3)
Prepare an evacuation plan to be used in case of flood, and file it with disaster preparedness authorities. (See the
local civil defense plan.)
(Ord. No. 88-03-01, art. III, § 1 , 3-8-1988)
Sec. 111-7. - Parking.
A minimum of two motor vehicle parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home. Parking spaces shall
be within 30 feet of the mobile home.
(Ord. No. 88-03-01, art. III, § 2 , 3-8-1988)
Sec. 111-8. - Roadways.
(a)
All roadways within a mobile home park shall have a minimum right-of-way of 30 feet, exclusive of parking,
and shall have a minimum paved width of 22 feet.
(b)
No access roadway to a mobile home park shall be located closer than 150 feet to any public street intersection.
(c)
The number of entrances and/or exits shall not exceed the ratio of one per 150 feet of park frontage. Parks with
less than 150 feet frontage are only allowed one combination ingress and egress road.
(d)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
184/393
Roadway intersections within the mobile home park shall be at least 150 feet apart and no greater than 1,000 feet
apart.
(e)
All roadway intersections shall be provided with a streetlight. New mobile home parks shall be provided with
adequate security lights within the park and at each entrance of the park.
(f)
All dead-end roadways shall terminate in a cul-de-sac with a minimum turning radius of 80 feet, exclusive of
parking. In lieu of a cul-de-sac, other methods to achieve vehicular turnarounds may be approved by the
planning commission.
(Ord. No. 88-03-01, art. III, § 3 , 3-8-1988)
Sec. 111-9. - Mobile homes.
(a)
All mobile home lots shall front upon a roadway.
(b)
A mobile home shall not cover more than 25 percent of the lot on which it stands.
(c)
Mobile homes shall be placed at least ten feet from the side lot boundary.
(d)
Mobile homes shall be at least 30 feet from any common building.
(e)
No accessory structure shall be erected within five feet of any mobile home or within ten feet of any common
building (i.e., offices or laundry facilities).
(f)
At least two garbage cans shall be provided for each unit.
(g)
Garbage cans shall be enclosed so that they are protected from animal intrusion.
(h)
There shall be no storage of liquid or gas fuels within a mobile home park unless such storage areas have been
authorized by the local fire department or its authorized representative.
(i)
No pets shall be sheltered in the crawlspace under the mobile home.
(j)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
185/393
Each lot shall have an approved paved patio pad of not less than ten feet by 20 feet.
(k)
Every mobile home within the park shall be numbered by a means to provide ready visibility from a park
roadway.
(l)
All mobile homes shall be skirted.
(Ord. No. 88-03-01, art. IV, 3-8-1988)
Sec. 111-10. - Permits for mobile homes.
Any new location permits for mobile homes in the city must be approved by the city council; also each location
must have its own water meter and must be underpinned within 30 days upon the delivery of such mobile home.
(Ord. No. 96-02-01, 2-27-1996)
Chapter 113 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
(RESERVED)
Chapter 115 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL
Sec. 115-1. - Title.
This chapter will be known as "Walthourville Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, § I, 3-16-2007; Ord. No. 2010-08-01, § 5-71, 8-12-2010)
Sec. 115-2. - Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise
specifically stated:
Best management practices (BMPs) includes sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and
minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those
practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as
of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted.
Board means the board of natural resources.
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation,
which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved
by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission.
Concrete washout means residue and contaminants from washing down equipments such as concrete trucks,
pumps, chutes, hand tools, and wheelbarrows.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
186/393
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified
Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also
referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc.
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by
excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation.
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources.
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture,
landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion
and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment
Control, Inc.
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources.
District means Coastal Soil and Water Conservation District.
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources.
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic
or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a
release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act,
O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general
permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 115-4(c).
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the
original ground surface or an excavation.
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas
and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill
cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in
permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures
(such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation
shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of
year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region.
Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction.
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the
proposed design.
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping,
cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled
condition.
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.
Hazardous waste means any solid, liquid, or contained gaseous materials which are no longer used and, if not
handled or disposed of properly, could damage or pollute the land, air or water. They can also cause injury or
death to exposed individuals. A waste is hazardous if it exhibits one or more of the following characteristics but
it is not limited to these characteristics alone:
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
187/393
(1)
Ignitability. Ignitable vapors can create fires under certain conditions. Examples include liquids, such as solvents
that readily catch fire, and friction-sensitive substances.
(2)
Corrosivity. Corrosive wastes include those that are acidic and those that are capable of corroding metal, such as
tanks, containers, drums, and barrels.
(3)
Reactivity. Reactive wastes are unstable under normal conditions. They can create explosions and/or toxic fumes,
gases, and vapors when mixed with water.
(4)
Toxicity. Toxic wastes are harmful or fatal when ingested or absorbed. When toxic wastes are disposed of on
land, contaminated liquid may drain from the waste and pollute groundwater.
Illicit discharge means any activity or event which results in a release, leak, flow, escape, or the placement of any
material other than rainwater (including liquids and solids) into the storm drain system. Each illicit discharge has
a unique frequency, composition and mode of entry in the storm drain system. Examples of illicit discharge are
listed below but are not limited to these characteristics:
(1)
Motor oil drained from vehicles into a ditch line or storm drain system.
(2)
Gray water discharges (household laundry/wash water that is not being drained into an approved septic or
sewage system).
(3)
Discharges from commercial/manufacturing operations, such as manufacturing byproducts (i.e., oil, cooking
grease, gasoline, petroleum-based products, or other industrial waste).
(4)
Dumpsters left open that would leach water that has been contaminated with refuse.
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the
movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing,
dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as
described in section 115-3(5).
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct
construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition,
the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales
pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation
such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a
specific plot.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
188/393
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant
to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a).
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which
addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage
basins.
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical
techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This
technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles
are present.
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit.
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit.
Operator means the party that has:
(1)
Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications
to those plans and specifications; or
(2)
Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion,
sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to
direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or
to comply with other permit conditions.
Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility
or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water.
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this
chapter.
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust,
estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other
political subdivision of this State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity.
Pervious area means an area that is open to passage or entrance; permeable.
Pollution control means preventing the contamination of the environment with materials that interfere with
human health, the quality of life, or the natural functioning of ecosystems (living organisms and their physical
surroundings).
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in
the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia ("Manual") published by the Georgia Soil and Water
Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and
amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal.
Refueling station means a place where the activity of supplying or taking on fuel is performed.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
189/393
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually
nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway
by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or
without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.
Sanitary waste means general household/lavatory waste that may be disposed of through the sanitary sewer
system.
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has
been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water,
wind, ice or gravity.
Soil and Water Conservation District approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan
approved in writing by the Soil and Water Conservation District.
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of
temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the
resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or
permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued
in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f).
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems,
springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part
of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a
single individual, partnership, or corporation.
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible
or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing
the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples
of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways
or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the
publication "Manual for Erosion and sediment Control in Georgia."
Trout streams means streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife
Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water
Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-
6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining
population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which
there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First
order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs.
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or
sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with:
(1)
Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or
(2)
Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
190/393
(3)
Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
Such measures can be found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit,
culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and
which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by
reason of overflow or floodwater.
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and
similar areas.
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, § II, 3-16-2007; Ord. No. 2010-08-01, § 5-72, 8-12-2010)
Sec. 115-3. - Exemptions.
This chapter shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the
following:
(1)
Surface mining, as the same is defined in The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968 (O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72);
(2)
Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying;
(3)
Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance
work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion;
(4)
The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part
of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre
and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence
shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For singlefamily residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between
the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia
Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the
residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks
of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance
to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal
feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary
or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs,
the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum
requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the
local issuing authority;
(5)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
191/393
Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of
products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for
use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and
rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing
plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and
apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds;
(6)
Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry
practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in
section 115-4(c)(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices,
shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three
years after completion of such forestry practices;
(7)
Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
of the United States Department of Agriculture;
(8)
Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not
apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned
disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any State Waters, and for
purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only
during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them
yearround; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which
involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way,
must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and
provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such
project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section;
(9)
Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the
department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road
construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that
construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or state road and tollway authority
which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except
where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a
secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state
general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the
local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set
forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as
violations by permit holders;
(10)
Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system
or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the
regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in
O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation,
transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical
system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
192/393
the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined
in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation,
transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan
of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce
compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and
violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and
(11)
Any public water system reservoir.
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, § III, 3-16-2007; Ord. No. 2010-08-01, § 5-73, 8-12-2010)
Sec. 115-4. - Minimum requirements using best management practices.
(a)
General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing
activities if requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those
land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil
erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices The provisions shall be incorporated into the
erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures
and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The
application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility
installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to
prevent or control erosion sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in
accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit.
(b)
Minimum requirements/BMPs.
(1)
Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required tor all land
disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a
complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2)
of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued
pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms
"proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications
contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b).
(2)
A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly
designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a
local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f),
the Georgia Water Quality Control Act for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving
waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries
or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the
receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection
shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not
part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is
equal to or greater than five acres.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
193/393
(3)
Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land
disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division
pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure
occurs.
(4)
The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent
monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur.
The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in
light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c).
(c)
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., for the
purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as
the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices
to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent
than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the
Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing
activity was permitted, as well as the following:
(1)
Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to
minimize erosion;
(2)
Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum;
(3)
Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion
potential;
(4)
Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented;
(5)
The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum;
(6)
Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;
(7)
Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development;
(8)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
194/393
Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable;
(9)
To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins,
silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is
stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-
1 et seq.;
(10)
Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or
the sloping of fills;
(11)
Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property;
(12)
Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect
other property owners;
(13)
Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are
not feasible; provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum;
(14)
Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for
treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments
on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this
section;
(15)
Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of
all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream
flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of
natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8,
where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided that adequate erosion
control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any
ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal
circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the
channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for
which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral
stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia
Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this
paragraph. A 25-foot buffer shall also exist adjacent to all saltwater marsh as delineated by the department of
natural resources. A ten-foot buffer shall also exist adjacent to all jurisdictional wetlands as delineated by the
Army Corps of Engineers. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer:
a.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
195/393
No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural,
undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the
final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective
vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient
quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family
residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may
thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water
quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and
b.
The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as
measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of
disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated
into the project plans and specifications and are implemented:
1.
Stream crossings for water lines; or
2.
Stream crossings for sewer lines; and
(16)
There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested
by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant
to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage
structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams
which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may
be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance
promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the
landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a
variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are
incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply
to such buffer:
a.
No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural,
undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once
the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a
protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in
sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a singlefamily residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy,
may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water
quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and
b.
The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as
measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of
disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated
into the project plans and specifications and are implemented:
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
196/393
1.
Stream crossings for water lines; or
2.
Stream crossings for sewer lines.
(d)
On-site construction site waste management. Upon attaining a land disturbing activity permit, on-site
construction site waste management will be required to specify the locations of the following good housekeeping
methods:
(1)
Dumpster locations.
a.
Used to store unwanted litter, and discarded building materials.
b.
Dumpster containers will have lids or covers that can be placed over the container prior to rainfall.
c.
All trash and construction debris from the site will be deposited in the dumpster. Waste collection shall occur
before the containers overflow.
d.
The waste disposal company will be a licensed solid waste management company and shall meet all local and
any state solid waste management regulations.
(2)
Hazardous waste receptacles. If a land disturbing activity identifies, contains, proposes or otherwise includes
chemicals or waste, a hazardous material data sheet must be provided for each chemical or waste material. The
manufacturer's guidance will be required for the containment of these materials. This hazardous waste must be
disposed of on a regular basis and in the appropriate manner according to the guidelines of the manufacturer.
(3)
Refueling stations.
a.
This area should be designated to refueling any construction equipment and precautions must be implemented to
prevent the release of hazardous pollutants into the environment.
b.
Construction sites will have equipment on site or on board maintenance fueling vehicles to contain and clean up
petroleum spills in fuel storage areas.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
197/393
(4)
Petroleum storage facility.
a.
If the applicant chooses to store petroleum products on-site, a fuel storage facility must be provided. All on-site
fuel storage facilities will be monitored for leaks and receive regular preventative maintenance to reduce the
chance of leakage.
b.
All fuel products shall be stored in tightly sealed containers that are clearly labeled.
c.
Petroleum products will be stored in covered areas, where possible.
(5)
Chemical storage.
a.
Chemicals will be stored in a dry covered area. Chemical storage containers should be located in a retaining
(diked) area, not exposed to precipitation or stormwater.
b.
Each site that has a chemical storage facility where flammable and combustible chemicals are stored must ensure
that storage tanks and venting systems are equipped with all necessary safeguards to prevent chemical leaks into
the atmosphere or explosion.
(6)
Concrete washout location. Excess concrete and wash water should be contained in an area that prevents contact
between these materials and stormwater that will be discharged from the site. After excess concrete and
washwater has hardened they should be disposed of properly.
(7)
Sanitary waste disposal units. The developer/contractor should ensure servicing of sanitary waste disposal units
on a regular basis.
All on-site waste disposal systems, storage facilities, washout locations, and refueling stations shall be in proper
working condition at the inception of the land disturbing activity. On-site waste disposal systems, storage
facilities, washout locations, and refueling stations shall be located to avoid impairments to them or
contamination from them during the land disturbing activity.
(e)
Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq., shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules
and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum
requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section.
(f)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
198/393
The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of
another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in
this chapter or the terms of the permit.
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, § IV, 3-16-2007; Ord. No. 2010-08-01, § 5-74, 8-12-2010)
Sec. 115-5. - Prohibition of illicit discharge and illicit connections.
(a)
Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to throw, drain, run or otherwise discharge to any component of the city
storm sewer system or to cause, permit, or suffer to be thrown, drained, run, or allow to seep or otherwise
discharge into such system any matter of any nature excepting only such stormwater or surface water as herein
authorized.
(1)
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited
except as described as follows:
a.
The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing
performed by a government agency, potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland
flows, swimming pools, firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
b.
Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health
and safety.
c.
Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency
prior to the time of the test.
(2)
In the event of an accidental discharge or an unavoidable loss to the city storm sewer system of any material or
substance other than stormwater runoff, the person concerned shall inform the county engineer within 24 hours
of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. The person concerned shall take immediate steps
to contain, treat or other actions to minimize effects of the discharge on the county system and receiving streams.
The person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge.
(b)
Illicit connections.
(1)
It is unlawful for any person, company, corporation, etc., to connect any pipe, open channel, any other
conveyance system that discharges anything except stormwater or unpolluted water which is approved by the
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
199/393
county engineering department, based on the exemptions listed in subsection (a)(l)b of this section, to the county
storm sewer system.
(2)
Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to a sanitary
sewer system upon approval by the county engineering department.
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, § V, 3-16-2007; Ord. No. 2010-08-01, § 5-75, 8-12-2010)
Sec. 115-6. - Application/permit process.
(a)
General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before
submittal. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They
shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage
prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the
development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner
and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit.
(b)
Application requirements.
(1)
No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without
first obtaining a permit from the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission to perform such activity and
providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable.
(2)
The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Liberty County Consolidated Planning Commission and
must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary.
Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion,
sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the
land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 115-4(b) and
(c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by copies of the applicant's
erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the
plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10.
(3)
A fee as published by the Liberty County Consolidated Planning Commission shall be charged for each acre or
fraction thereof in the project area.
(4)
In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided
that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and
paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity
included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to
issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half
of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
200/393
required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division,
regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction.
(5)
Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the
application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the
erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days
of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The
results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the
plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 115-4(c)(15) and (16) has been
obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(7) of this section, have been
obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an
agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without
referring the application and plan to the district. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority
to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal.
(6)
If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and
Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration,
the local issuing authority may deny the permit application.
(7)
The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security,
cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or
fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit, if the applicant does not
comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call
the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of
the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect
an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the
local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations.
(c)
Plan requirements.
(1)
Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 115-4(b) and (c); or through
the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering
practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this
chapter. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological
and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including
roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and
state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design
professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or
inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements,
dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in
consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20.
(2)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
201/393
Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation
and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which
the land disturbing activity was permitted.
(d)
Permits.
(1)
Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the
local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where
necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions
under which the activity may be undertaken.
(2)
No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control
plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is
in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by section 115-4(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding
requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(7) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and
regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is
denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant.
(3)
Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this
chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division
shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority.
(4)
If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase.
(5)
The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the
land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the
approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in
violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of
the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit.
(6)
The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or
the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in
light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1).
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, § VI, 3-16-2007; Ord. No. 2010-08-01, § 5-76, 8-12-2010)
Sec. 115-7. - Inspection and enforcement.
(a)
The Liberty County Joint Planning Commission will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for
which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
202/393
and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local
issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state
general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management
practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be
responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is
conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance
where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a
person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with
permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that
person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within
which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply
within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.
(b)
The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any
amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975.
(c)
The Liberty County Consolidated Planning Commission shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it
may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at
reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of
land disturbing activities.
(d)
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the
commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents
appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in
the process of carrying out his official duties.
(e)
The districts or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities
which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the
commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving
the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The
districts or the commission shall notify the Division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or
ineffective local program is found.
(f)
The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as
local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to,
review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance
with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the
governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not
administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement
entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or
municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days
within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the
county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division,
the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
203/393
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, § VI, 3-16-2007; Ord. No. 2010-08-01, § 5-77, 8-12-2010)
Sec. 115-8. - Penalties and incentives.
(a)
Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity
requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit the person shall
be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business
and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority.
(b)
Stop work orders.
(1)
For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority
shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the
violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order
requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred;
provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if
the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local
issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning;
(2)
For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop
work order; and
(3)
All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary
corrective action or mitigation has occurred.
(4)
When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer or significant
amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or
are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed,
installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his
or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance, and shall be in effect
until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land
disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent
erosion and sediment controls.
(c)
Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has
failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice
shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which
such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the
time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed
to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 115-6(b)(7). The
local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a
contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
204/393
(d)
Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or
limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with
any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty
not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any
provisions in any city Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to
exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed
for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases
brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to
impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation
or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, § VII, 3-16-2007; Ord. No. 2010-08-01, § 5-78, 8-12-2010)
Sec. 115-9. - Education and certification.
(a)
Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any
land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level
of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the
stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20.
(b)
For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary,
secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who
is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and
meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on
site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any
land disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner
or operator for compliance with the state general permit.
(c)
Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified
personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter.
(d)
If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the
certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing
activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational
requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational
requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph.
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, § VIII, 3-16-2007; Ord. No. 2010-08-01, § 5-79, 8-12-2010)
Sec. 115-10. - Administrative appeal; judicial review.
(a)
Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the
local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sedimentation
and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
205/393
of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the county
board of commissioners within 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal.
(b)
Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his
administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the superior court of the county.
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, § IX, 3-16-2007; Ord. No. 2010-08-01, § 5-80, 8-12-2010)
Sec. 115-11. - Liability.
(a)
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this
chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed
by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property.
(b)
The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of
another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in
this chapter or the terms of the permit.
(c)
No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of
1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved there under
or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby.
(Ord. No. 07-03-01, § X, 3-16-2007; Ord. No. 2010-08-01, § 5-81(c), 8-12-2010)
Chapter 117 - SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 117-1. - Authority.
The general planning authority contained in article IX, § 2, ¶ 4 of the 1983 Constitution, grants authority to the
governing body of each county and municipality to regulate subdivisions and land development.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 1.1
Sec. 117-2. - Jurisdiction.
These regulations shall apply to all land located within the boundaries of the city.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 1.2
Sec. 117-3. - Application.
These regulations shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision and development:
(1)
The division of land into two or more parcels, lots, or tracts;
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
206/393
(2)
The dedication, vacation, or reservation of any public or private easement or roadway through any tract of land
regardless of the area involved; and
(3)
Planned developments such as manufactured home parks, apartment complexes, commercial complexes, and
other developments where the site is not subdivided into lots and public streets as contained in article VIII of this
chapter.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 1.3
Secs. 117-4—117-24. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE AND SHORT TITLE
Sec. 117-25. - Purpose.
The public health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare require
the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within the city. In furtherance of the general intent
of this chapter, the regulation of land subdivision by municipal and county governing authorities is authorized for
the following purposes, among others:
(1)
To encourage the development of economically sound, sustainable and stable municipalities and counties;
(2)
To ensure the timely provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land
developments;
(3)
To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and
pedestrian, in and through new land developments;
(4)
To ensure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the
dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; and
(5)
To ensure, in general, the wise and timely development of new areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan of
the municipalities and the county.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 2.1)
Sec. 117-26. - Short title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "City of Walthourville Subdivision Regulations."
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 2.2)
Secs. 117-27—117-55. - Reserved.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
207/393
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 117-56. - Rules.
In the construction of these regulations, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and
applied, except when the content clearly indicates otherwise:
(1)
Terms used in the present tense shall include the future tense; terms used in the singular number shall include the
plural number; terms used in the plural number shall include the singular number.
(2)
The term "shall" is mandatory, not discretionary.
(3)
The term "may" is permissive.
(4)
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 3.1
Sec. 117-57. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Accessory building means a secondary residence, garage, or other building or structure subordinated to and not
forming an integral part of the main or principal building on a lot or parcel but pertaining to the use of the main
building.
Alley means a narrow thoroughfare or lane dedicated or used for public passageway up to 20 feet in width, which
usually abuts the rear of the premises, or upon which service entrances or buildings abut, and which is not
generally used as a thoroughfare by both pedestrians and vehicles, which is not used for general traffic, and
which is not otherwise officially designated as a street. An alley may be a way which affords only a secondary
means of access to abutting property.
Buildable area means that portion of any lot which may be used or built upon in accordance with the regulations
governing the given zoning district within which the particular lot is located, once the various front, side and rear
yard requirements required for the district have been subtracted from the total lot area.
Building means a building is any structure having a roof entirely separated from any other structure by space or
by walls, having no communicating doors or windows or any similar opening, and being erected for the purpose
of providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind, and having a foundation to
which it is anchored.
Building and zoning inspector means any person hired by the local governing authority to inspect, determine
compliance with, and render minor decisions concerning the compliance of structures and lots within the
jurisdiction of the governing authority, to the ordinances of the governing authority.
Building line means a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way and
nearest extreme projection of a building, including all areas covered by any vertical projections to the ground or
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
208/393
overhang, walls, roof, or any other part of the structure.
Building site means the ground area of a building or buildings together with all open spaces surrounded by said
building or buildings.
Certified survey means a survey, sketch, plat, map, or other exhibit is said to be certified when a written
statement regarding its accuracy or conformity to specified standards is signed by the specified professional
engineer, registered surveyor, architect, or other legally recognized person.
Condominium (building) means a building containing two or more attached, individually owned, dwelling units
and related, jointly owned common areas under condominium or cooperative ownership.
Development means any construction or activity that results in a change in, or changes the use of a parcel, or
portion of a parcel, of land. The term "development" also includes redevelopment.
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof which is designed or used as living quarters for one or more
families or persons.
Dwelling, group, means a building or portion of a building occupied or intended for occupancy by several
unrelated persons or families, but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident, persons
or families. The term "group dwelling" includes but is not limited to the terms "roominghouse," "apartment
hotel," "fraternity house," "sorority house," "YMCA," or "YWCA." A hotel, motel, or tourist home shall not be
deemed to be a group dwelling as herein defined.
Dwelling, multifamily, means a dwelling within a building containing three or more dwellings designed for
occupancy by three or more families living independently from each other including apartments, apartment
houses, but not including auto or mobile home parks, subdivisions or camps, condominiums, or townhouses
designed for owner-occupancy, hotels or resort-type hotels.
Dwelling, single-family, means a detached dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.
Dwelling, two-family, (duplex) means a building on a single lot or parcel designed exclusively for occupancy by
two families living independently of each other and does not include condominiums or townhouses.
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate independent
housekeeping establishment for use on a basis with provisions for cooking, eating, sleeping, and bathroom
facilities and physically set apart from other rooms or dwelling units in the same structure.
Easement means a grant by the property owner to any person, firm, corporation, municipality or to the general
public of the use of a strip or parcel of land for a specific purpose.
Enforcing official means, where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named herein, that designated
official who has duties corresponding to those named officials herein and shall be deemed to be the responsible
official insofar as enforcing these regulations.
Engineer means any person having an acceptable degree from a recognized institution of higher learning who is
capable of determining the correct manner in which to construct roads, streets, highways, water and sewerage
systems, drainage system, structures or other technical related areas. The person must be a registered
professional engineer in good standing with the state board of registration. An engineer may be designated by the
governing authority or by the planning commission to review and approve the engineering design for all
subdivisions and planned developments.
Family means one or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit; provided that, unless all members are
related by blood or marriage, no such family shall contain over five persons; but further provided that service or
health providers employed on the premises may be housed on the premises.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
209/393
Floodprone area means the land that is usually flooded whenever a rise in the water level of a creek, stream,
river or other body of water is experienced; that land adjacent to a creek, stream, river, channel, canal or other
body of water that is designated as a floodplain or floodprone area by a governmental agency.
Governing authority means the mayor and city council of the City of Walthourville.
Group development means a development comprising two or more principal structures, whether in single,
condominium, or diverse ownership built on a single lot, tract or parcel of land and designed for occupancy by
separate families, firms, businesses or other enterprises. Such development generally contains parcels or tracts of
land in common and such land is controlled and maintained through a property owners' association or similar
group.
Lot means a parcel of land shown on a recorded plat or on the official governing authority zoning maps, or any
piece of land described by a legally recorded deed.
Lot area means gross lot area and shall mean the total area of the lot including easements. The term "net lot area"
means the area, minus any portions of the lot or parcel that do not represent usable space. For such a lot or parcel
the unusable space consists of wetlands, utility and drainage easements and other such areas that cannot be used
and enjoyed by the individual property owner. The net lot area shall be the area defined in the zoning appendix as
the minimum lot area for any zoning district.
Lot, corner, means any lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersections or intersecting
streets or public highways. If the angle or intersections of the direction lines of two highways is more than 135
degrees, the lot fronting on such intersection is not a corner lot.
Lot, double frontage, means a lot having frontage and access on two or more public streets. A corner lot shall not
be considered having double frontage, unless it has frontage and access on three or more streets.
Lot, interior, means any lot which is not a corner lot that has frontage only on one street other than an alley.
Lot line, front, means, in the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the the line separating such lot from such
street. In the case of a corner lot, that part of the lot having the narrowest frontage on any street shall be
considered the front lot line. In the case of any other lot, one such line shall be elected to be the front lot line for
the purpose of this chapter; provided it is so designated by the building plans which meet the approval of the
building and zoning inspector.
Lot line, rear, means the rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, or any odd-shaped lot, the building and zoning inspector shall determine
the rear lot line.
Lot line, side, means a any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot
from a street is an exterior side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is an interior side lot line.
Lot, reverse frontage, means a lot having frontage on two or more public streets, the access of which is restricted
to one street.
Lot width means the distance between the side boundaries of the lot measured at the minimum required front
yard setback line.
Manufactured home means a nonself-propelled vehicle or conveyance that is towable and supported on its own
chassis, permanently equipped to travel upon the public highways, that is used, either temporarily or
permanently, as a residence or living quarters. Such unit shall be considered a manufactured home, whether or
not the wheels have been removed and whether or not set on jacks, skirts, masonry blocks, or other foundation.
The term "modular home" means a house that does not have its own chassis, is not towable, and is constructed at
some site other than the parcel on which it is located, and then installed on a permanent foundation.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
210/393
Manufactured home park means a parcel of land under single ownership or management which is used or
intended to be used for rental or lease of spaces or lots and the provision of services for two or more
manufactured homes.
Manufactured home space means a plot of ground within a manufactured home park designed for the
accommodation of one manufactured home.
Manufactured home subdivision means a manufactured home park except that manufactured home spaces are for
sale rather than or as well as, for rent.
Metes and bounds description means a method of property description whereby properties are described by
means of their direction and distances for an easily identifiable location or point.
Planning commission. The Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission is the appointed body of people
established by the local governing authority whose responsibilities include the guidance of growth and
development within the county and all municipalities in the county and the interpreting of the various regulatory
ordinances concerning land use. The secretary of the planning commission shall be the enforcing official acting
on behalf of the planning commissioners.
Plat means a map showing the features of a proposed subdivision (lot split, metes and bounds description). This
plat would show the entire tract, and the lot which is to be subdivided, the adjacent properties and owners, roads
or streets, and giving all necessary bearings and distances for the proposed split.
Plat, final, means the map, plan, or record of subdivision, and any accompanying materials as described in article
V of this chapter.
Plat, preliminary, means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision, including topographical
data, submitted to the planning commission for purposes of preliminary consideration.
Principal building means the building situated or to be placed nearest the front property line and the use of
which conforms to the primary use permitted by the zone classification in which it is located.
Public use means use of any land, water, or buildings by a municipality, public body, or board, commission or
authority, county, state, or the federal government, or any agency thereof for a public service or purpose.
Regulatory flood means a flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the
area and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur in a particular stream. The regulatory flood
generally has a frequency of approximately 100 years determined from an analysis of floods on a particular
stream and other streams in the same general region.
Reserve strip means a strip of land adjacent to a public street or similar right-of-way which has been reserved for
the purpose of controlling access to the public way.
Residential or residence is applied herein to any lot, plot, parcel, tract, area, or piece of land and/or any building
used, and zoned exclusively for family dwelling purposes or intended to be used, including concomitant uses
specified herein.
Right-of-way line means the outside boundaries of a highway right-of-way, whether such right-of-way is
established by usage, dedication, or by the official right-of-way.
Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, rear or side lines of the lot and
the front, rear or side lines of the building. When two or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior
property line so grouped shall be used in determining offsets.
Site means an area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded subdivision plat or in
a legally recorded deed.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
211/393
Site plan means a map showing the salient features of a proposed planned development as defined in article VIII
of this chapter, including topographical data, submitted to the planning commission for purposes of
consideration.
Street means a public right-of-way affording primary access to abutting property. For the purposes of these
regulations, the term "street" shall also mean avenue, boulevard, road, land, and other public ways.
Street, arterial, means a street of exceptional continuity that is intended to carry the greater portion of throughtraffic from one area of the country to another. All streets with this designation shall be included on the
thoroughfare plan element of the comprehensive plan.
Street, collector, means those streets which are neither local streets nor arterial streets. The location and design
are such that they are:
(1)
Of exceptional continuity; serve as routes passing through residential areas;
(2)
Serve as means of moving traffic from local streets and feeding it into arterial streets.
Street, cul-de-sac, means a short local street having but one end open for vehicular traffic, the opposite end being
terminated with a permanent turnaround.
Street, dead-end, means a street not intersecting other streets at both ends, and distinguished from a cul-de-sac by
not being terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
Street, local, means streets which provide only access to adjacent properties and, by nature of the layout, do not
serve vehicles passing through the area with neither origin nor destination within the area.
Street, marginal access, means a minor service street which parallels and which is immediately adjacent to an
arterial street (frontage road).
Street, width, means the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street.
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires rigid location on the ground or
attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground; provided, however, that utility poles, fences
and walls (other than building walls) shall not be considered to be structures.
Subdivider means any person, firm or corporation who or which divides for sale, rent or lease, or develops any
land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined. The term "subdivider" also includes the developer of any
planned development that is not subdivided but remains in one ownership as defined in article VIII of this
chapter.
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development and includes all divisions
of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate,
to the act or process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided.
Surveyor means a person who determines or delineates the form, extent, position, distance, or shape of a tract of
land by taking linear and angular measurements, and by applying the principles of geometry and trigonometry.
Townhouse means a building containing two or more attached single-family dwelling units separated by lot lines,
with no common related areas.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
212/393
Use means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either lands
or a building is or may be occupied or maintained.
Waterfront. Any site shall be considered as waterfront property, provided any or all of its lot lines abut on or are
contiguous to any body of water including creek, canal, river, or any other body of water, natural or artificial,
including marshlands, not including a swimming pool, whether said lot line is front, rear, or side.
Yard means an open space on a platted lot which lies between the building setbacks and nearest lot or street line.
Yard, front, means that area of open space to the front of the platted lot, the area immediately adjacent to the
street side of the lot. If streets bound on two sides of the lot, the narrower portion fronting on a street shall be
declared the front. (See Lot line, front).
Yard, rear, means that area of open space that is opposite the area delineated as the front; that area of open space
which has the greatest distance from the street. (See Lot line, rear).
Yard, side, means that area of open space that is immediately adjacent to the side lot lines. (See Lot line, side).
Zoning ordinance means an officially adopted ordinance by the mayor and city council that regulates the manner,
type, size, and use to which a piece of property may be put.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 3.2
Secs. 117-58—117-87. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL
Sec. 117-88. - Five-step review.
The procedure for review and approval of a subdivision plat consists of five separate steps. These are:
Step 1. Review of sketch plan by planning commission.
Step 2. Review and approval of preliminary plat by consolidated planning commission.
Step 3. Review and approval of preliminary plat by the mayor and city council.
Step 4. Review and approval of final plat by consolidated planning commission.
Step 5. Review and approval of final plat by the mayor and city council.
Step 1 may, and step 3 shall be completed prior to making any street improvement, installing any utilities or
other land disturbing activities. Step 5 shall be completed prior to the sale of any lots in the proposed
subdivision. The site proposed to be subdivided must be zoned in the appropriate residential, commercial,
industrial, planned development or other zoning district prior to the completion of step 2.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 4.1
Sec. 117-89. - Review procedure.
The following procedure shall be followed in the submission, review, and action upon all subdivision plats:
(1)
Sketch plan review procedures. Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider may submit to the
secretary of the planning commission a simple sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. The sketch plan may be
a simple free-hand drawing. Included with the sketch plan should be a sketch map, which shows the subdivision
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
213/393
in relation to the surrounding area. The purpose of the sketch plan is to assist the subdivider prior to extensive
site planning for the preparation of the preliminary plat and enable the subdivider to become familiar with the
regulations affecting the land to be subdivided. The secretary of the planning commission shall review and
approve, disapprove, or approve with modification the sketch plan within 15 days from the meeting at which it is
presented. Pertinent comments and recommendations shall be noted in the minutes of the planning commission
meeting.
(2)
Preliminary plat procedures. Application for preliminary approval of a subdivision plat shall be submitted to the
secretary of the planning commission at least 25 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting date of the
planning commission. The plat of the subdivision shall be submitted in six black-line or blue-line prints and shall
be such as to meet the minimum requirements contained herein, as well as one electronic copy in a format
acceptable to the planning commission. Any preliminary plat submitted to the planning commission shall contain
the name and address of the subdivider (or subdivider's designee) to whom notice of hearing may be sent; and no
preliminary plat shall be acted upon by the planning commission without affording a hearing thereon, notice of
time and place of which shall be sent to said address not less than five days before the date of the hearing.
a.
The planning commission may request additional copies of the plat and supplemental information. The abovementioned copies shall be distributed as required by section 117-114(4) and additionally as deemed necessary by
the secretary of the planning commission. The person or agency to which a copy of the preliminary plat is
directed shall review the preliminary plat and indicate any required changes or comments on the plat and submit
to the planning commission prior to the formal presentation of the preliminary plat. The local governing
authority shall receive a copy for review and information.
b.
The secretary of the planning commission shall examine the preliminary plat to determine if it meets all
requirements of these regulations, has approval of the health department, and/or the state environmental
protection division, has been reviewed and approved by the Coastal Soil and Water Conservation District, and
that the design of the roadways, drainage structures, public water and sewerage systems and other facilities
related to the subdivision have been reviewed and approved by the designated engineer of the planning
commission or other designated official.
c.
If water and or sewerage systems, not connected to a municipal system, are to be installed, the subdivider is to
indicate who will own the system, who will operate the system and what assurance will be given to the mayor
and city council for continued operation.
d.
The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 45 days after formal submission and having
received confirmation of all necessary approvals as described in subsection (2)b of this section. Failure of the
planning commission to act within 45 days after formal submission of the complete preliminary plat shall be
deemed to constitute approval and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the planning commission on
demand; provided, however, that the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent in writing to the
extension of such period. The action of the commission shall be recorded in the minutes of the commission
meeting.
e.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
214/393
The planning commission shall vote to approve or disapprove of the preliminary plat. In the event a preliminary
plat is disapproved the grounds for such disapproval shall be noted in the minutes of the planning commission
and a copy of such minutes provided to the subdivider. The subdivider has the right to appeal a decision of the
planning commission to disapprove the preliminary plat to the governing authority. Such appeal shall be filed in
writing with the secretary of the planning commission within ten days of the decision of the planning
commission. Approval of the subdivision plat shall be noted on the plat and certified by the secretary of the
planning commission. Also noted shall be the date of approval and the date of written notification to the
subdivider or subdivider's authorized agent. Failure of a subdivider to initiate any development within 18 months
from the approval of the preliminary plat will require the preliminary plat to be resubmitted to the planning
commission for approval. The developer shall not initiate action to change any of the existing conditions
reported on the preliminary plat as required by section 117-114(2) until the preliminary plat has been approved.
f.
Approval of a preliminary subdivision plat shall not constitute approval of the final subdivision plat. Preliminary
approval shall constitute approval of the proposed widths and alignments of streets, location of other required
infrastructure, and the dimensions and shapes of lots. Application for approval of the final plat will be considered
only after the requirements for final plat approval as specified herein have been fulfilled and after all other
specified conditions have been met. Upon approval of the preliminary subdivision plat by the planning
commission, the subdivider may proceed to comply with the other requirements of these regulations and the
preparation of the final subdivision plat.
(3)
Final plat procedure.
a.
After completion of the physical development of public water and sewer, drainage, and roadway base and curb
and gutter as shown on the approved preliminary plat, the subdivider may submit to the secretary of the planning
commission 12 copies of the final plat, and one electronic copy in a format acceptable to the planning
commission, prepared in accordance with the provisions of these regulations along with the required certificates
executed by the appropriate officials. Application for approval of a final plat shall be submitted to the secretary
of the planning commission, along with a bond or letter of credit for an amount necessary to complete any
remaining improvements, at least ten days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting date of the governing
authority.
b.
Until a final plat of a subdivision has been submitted to, reviewed and approved and signed by the governing
authority, the clerk of the superior court of the county shall not record the plat of such subdivision, nor shall the
owner or agent of such subdivision transfer title to any lot within the subdivision by reference to the subdivision
plat. For large subdivisions the final plat may be submitted for approval in contiguous sections satisfactory to the
governing authority.
c.
The installation of streets, drainage systems and water and sewerage systems shall be in compliance with the
governing authority's standard specifications for materials and installation procedures on file with the planning
commission and the governing authority's flood regulations. The elevation of fill and the installation of streets
drainage systems, and water and or sewerage systems shall be certified by the developers registered engineer as
being in compliance with applicable requirements before approval of the final plat.
(4)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
215/393
Final approval. Final approval of the plat shall be by the governing authority.
(5)
Certification by planning commission secretary. The secretary of the planning commission shall certify for
recording all plats approved by the planning commission and the governing authority and all plats found to be
exceptions under section 117-90 without referral to the governing authority. The planning commission shall
retain copies of such plats as information.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 4.2
Sec. 117-90. - Sketch plans and preliminary plats not required.
Subdivisions which do not involve platting, construction or opening of new streets; new or improvements to
municipal, public, or community water or sewer facilities; or improvement of existing streets shall be accepted
and certified by the secretary of the planning commission in the form of a final plat. Such plat shall comply in all
respects to these regulations. Sketch plans and preliminary plats are not required in such cases, but construction
drawings of selected improvements may be required by the planning commission.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 4.3
Sec. 117-91. - Federal Housing Administration approval.
In the event the subdivider plans to secure approval of the subdivision design by the Federal Housing
Administration, it is suggested that such approval be secured after submission to and approval of a preliminary
plat by the planning commission.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 4.4)
Sec. 117-92. - Approval of subdivision in floodprone area.
No portion of a subdivision shall be approved which is subject to inundation by a flood of 100-year frequency or
less, which fails to conform to the following restrictions:
(1)
Standards for floodprone area uses. All subdivisions must be designed to minimize flood damage; all public
utilities and facilities, such as, sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located, elevated, and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; adequate drainage must be provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards; water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into the floodwaters; on site waste
disposal system must be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding.
These additional standards shall also apply to floodprone areas:
a.
Fill.
1.
Any fill proposed to be deposited in the floodplain must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and the
amount thereof not greater than is necessary to achieve that purpose, as demonstrated by a plan submitted by the
owner showing the uses to which the filled land will be put and the final dimensions of the proposed fill or other
materials. The Federal Emergency Management Agency, prior to approval of the final plat, must approve any fill
in the floodplain.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
216/393
2.
Such fill or other materials shall be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover or bulk heading.
b.
Structures, temporary or permanent.
1.
All structures shall be designed consistent with all federal flood insurance standards.
2.
Structures shall have low flood damage potential.
3.
The structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of floodwater.
(i)
Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood
flow; and
(ii)
So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those adjoining
structures.
4.
Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures,
restriction of bridge openings and other narrow sections of the stream or river.
5.
Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be constructed at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the particular area or floodproofed.
6.
The level of the lowest habitable floor shall not be lower than the 100-year flood level established by FEMA.
c.
Storage of material and equipment.
1.
The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be
injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.
2.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
217/393
Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly
anchored to prevent flotation or readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning.
(2)
Standards for areas adjacent to state waters. All subdivisions or planned developments must be designed to
minimize the impact of stormwater runoff from development that may affect the state waters as defined in the
chapter 115 and the state stormwater management manual. Stormwater should meet the stormwater runoff
quality minimum standard #2 of the state stormwater management manual before it is discharged. A plan for any
buffers and handling of stormwater shall be included with all preliminary plats or site development plans. This
plan may be included as an attachment to the preliminary plat or site development plan and must be reviewed by
the planning commission and approved by the local governing authority with the preliminary plat.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 4.5)
Secs. 117-93—117-112. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - PLAT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 117-113. - Sketch plan.
(a)
Scale. The sketch plan should include a narrative report that describes the proposed plan. Any drawings of the
plan should generally be drawn at a scale of not less than 200 feet to one inch.
(b)
Vicinity map. The sketch plan shall include a vicinity map at a scale not less than one inch equals one mile,
showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to surrounding development.
(c)
Other requirements. The sketch plan shall show:
(1)
The proposed name of subdivision.
(2)
The name, address, and telephone number of petitioner and architect, surveyor, engineer, or designer.
(3)
All names and addresses of all property owners of the site.
(4)
All names and addresses, as listed by the county assessor, of all owners of the land adjacent to the site.
(5)
The north indicator.
(6)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
218/393
The date of preparation.
(7)
The total acreage in the tract to be subdivided.
(8)
The existing and proposed uses of land throughout the subdivision.
(9)
The location and data of each percolation test, soil boring, and well on the land in question.
(10)
The sheet size shall be up to 30 inches by 42 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this
size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size.
(11)
Tentative streets and lot arrangements.
(12)
The approximate rights-of-way.
(13)
The typical lot area and approximate number of lots.
(14)
Existing uses of land surrounding the subdivision.
(15)
The topography by contour at vertical intervals of not more than five feet.
(d)
Subdivision of part of property. The subdivider shall submit a sketch plan of such subdivider's entire tract even
though such subdivider's present plans call for the actual development of only a part of the property.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 5.1
Sec. 117-114. - Preliminary plat.
The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and meet the minimum
standards of design set forth in these regulations and shall include the information listed in this section. Both
electronic and paper copies of all plats shall be provided to the planning commission for review.
(1)
General conditions.
a.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
219/393
Full name of subdivision.
b.
Name, address and telephone number of petitioner and architect, surveyor, engineer, and designer.
c.
All names and addresses of all property owners on the site.
d.
All names and addresses of all deed record owners of the land adjacent to the site.
e.
Graphic scale, north point and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true, or grid north.
f.
Vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch equals one mile showing the relationship of the subdivision to
the surrounding area.
g.
Acreage to be subdivided.
h.
A written legal description (metes and bounds with all bearings and distances) of the acreage to be subdivided.
i.
Proper identification of the boundaries of the tract to be subdivided with all bearings and distances indicated. The
boundary survey shall be to such a degree of accuracy that the error of closure is not greater than 1:10,000.
(2)
Existing conditions.
a.
Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than one-foot intervals based on mean sea level.
b.
Zoning district classification of land to be subdivided and adjoining land.
c.
In case of resubdivision, a copy of the existing plat with proposed re-subdivision superimposed thereon.
d.
Location of natural features such as streams, lakes, swamps, land subject to flood based on a 100-year flood
frequency, and land subject to floodway restrictions on the property to be subdivided.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
220/393
e.
Identification of the limits of flood zones and limits of floodways if applicable. In all cases the flood zone of the
property in question shall be shown.
f.
Location of existing adjoining property lines and existing buildings on the property to be subdivided.
g.
Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads, and utility lines either on or adjacent to the property to be
subdivided. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or right-of-way and show location of poles or towers.
h.
Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the
street or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers
shall be shown.
i.
The acreage of each drainage area affecting the proposed subdivision.
j.
All elevations shall refer to mean sea level datum where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed.
k.
Locations of city limit lines and county lines, if applicable.
(3)
Proposed conditions.
a.
Layouts of streets, roads, alleys, public crosswalks, with widths, road names or designations, grades, and cross
sections.
b.
Profile of proposed streets showing natural and finished grades.
c.
Detailed layout of all lots, including building setback lines; dimensions on lots; lot and block numbers; all
easements with width and use.
d.
Construction drawings of sanitary sewers (if applicable) with grade, pipe size, location of manholes, and points
of discharge, percolation tests, soil borings, and wells as specified by the health department.
e.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
221/393
Construction drawings of storm sewer system with grade, pipe size, and location of outlets. Storm sewers shall
be sized to accommodate runoff in accordance with the drainage chapter.
f.
Plans of all drainage provisions, retaining walls, cribbing, planting, anti-erosion devices, or other protective
devices to be constructed in connection with, or as a part of the proposed work together with the provisions to
accommodate the drainage area of land tributary to the site, and address the ability of the downstream system to
accommodate the estimated runoff.
g.
Construction drawings of sewage collection system and/or disposal system.
h.
Construction drawings of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants and valves. Also, all
drawings must include a system for a nonpotable reuse system, which shall include reuse water mains, valves,
fittings, and hydrants.
i.
Designation and plan for the use of all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use.
j.
Designation of proposed use of all lots to be used for other than single-family residential, if any.
k.
Proposed major contour changes in areas where substantial cut and/or fill is to be done.
l.
A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the development sequence and the
time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures.
m.
Total number of lots, total acreage, and total length of new streets.
n.
Specifications relative to materials for construction of roadways, drainage systems, and water and sewerage
systems.
o.
Size and elevations of driveway pipes and proposed location of all driveways.
p.
Parking facilities for multifamily and other planned developments where the site is not subdivided, but remains
in one or common ownership.
q.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
222/393
Landscaping as required by landscape ordinances.
r.
Show benchmark including location, description and elevation.
s.
The proposed location of all utilities, such as gas and electricity, along with the plan for street lighting as
approved by the electric utility that will provide electrical service.
(4)
Review and approval. The preliminary plat shall be considered complete and may be recommended for approval
by the planning commission only after review and approval of the following:
a.
The engineer for the planning commission, or the local governing authority, shall review and approve the
subdivision plans and all design calculations including, but not limited to, drainage calculations, roadway design,
water systems, and sewerage systems.
b.
The state environmental protection division and/or the health department shall review the water supply and
sewage disposal facilities to be provided on all preliminary plats. In addition, it shall make determinations in all
matters concerning the public health, as specified herein. Such determinations and recommendations shall be
forwarded to the planning commission in writing.
c.
The Coastal Soil and Water Conservation District shall review the preliminary subdivision plat and make
comments and determinations regarding slopes and soil erosion, drainage and water runoff, floodplain areas and
other related areas. The district shall forward in writing to the planning commission comments and/or
recommendations and approval or disapproval.
d.
The environmental protection division, if required for other than water and sewer approvals.
(5)
Fees. The subdivider shall, at the time of submission of the plan, pay a filing fee, the amount of which is
determined by and payable to the consolidated planning commission and credited to the general fund of the
planning commission to cover administrative costs of processing the preliminary and final plats. No part of the
filing fee shall be returned. The filing fee shall be determined by the planning commission.
(6)
Drafting standards. All preliminary plats shall be drafted or drawn using commonly accepted standards of the
industry. All lines shall be clean and crisp. All lettering shall be clean, crisp, and legible. No letter or number
shall be less than 0.06 of an inch in height, and all plats shall be submitted in electronic form as required by the
planning commission.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 5.2
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
223/393
Sec. 117-115. - Final plat.
(a)
Contents. If the final plat is drawn in two or more sections, each section shall be accompanied by a key map
showing the location of the several sections. The final plat shall contain the following specific information:
(1)
Name of owner of record.
(2)
Name of subdivision, date, north arrow, graphic scale and revision dates.
(3)
Name and registration number, and seal of registered surveyor and civil engineer.
(4)
Name of counties or cities in which subdivision is located and location map.
(5)
Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce accurately on the ground the location, bearings, and length of
every street and alley line, lot line, easement, boundary line, and building line, whether curved or straight. This
shall include the radius, point of tangency, and other data for curved property lines and curved streets, to an
appropriate accuracy and in conformance with good surveying practice.
(6)
Names of owners of record of all adjoining land and all property boundaries, watercourses, streets, easements,
utilities and other such improvements, which cross or form any boundary line of the tract being subdivided.
(7)
Exact boundaries and original property lines within the tract of land being subdivided shown with bearings and
distances.
(8)
Streets and alleys, rights-of-way, and street names.
(9)
All easements; location, widths, and purposes.
(10)
Lot lines, minimum building setback lines, streets and lot and block numbers.
(11)
Parks, school sites, or other publics open spaces, if any.
(12)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
224/393
All dimensions shall be to the nearest 1/10 of a foot and angles to the nearest second.
(13)
Accurate description of the location of all monuments and markers.
(14)
The final plat must be drawn on a medium of good grade using high quality ink that is suitable to the clerk of
courts for filing. The maximum sheet size shall be 11 inches by 17 inches unless otherwise approved by the clerk
of courts.
(15)
Utility easements, widths, and location of pipes from centerline of roadway:
a.
Water;
b.
Gas;
c.
Sanitary sewer;
d.
Storm drainage;
e.
Electrical lines;
f.
Communication;
g.
Nonpotable water reuse.
(16)
Identification of the limits of flood zones and limits of floodways if applicable. In all cases the flood zone of the
property in question shall be shown.
(17)
The following signed certificates shall appear on the final plat that is submitted to the planning commission by
the subdivider:
a.
Certificate of accuracy:
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
225/393
"I hereby certify that this plat is a true, correct and accurate survey as required by the City of Walthourville
Subdivision Regulations; and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision,
and that monuments shown have been located and placed to the specifications set forth in said regulations.
By: .....
By: .....
(Signature) (Signature) (Registered Professional Engineer—If final plat contains (Registered Engineering) design
that requires a registered professional engineer)
(Surveyor)
(Seal Required) (Seal Required)
.....
(Typed Name)
.....
(Typed Name)
RLS No. ____________ Registered PE No. ____________
Date ____________ Date ____________"
b.
Certificate of ownership and dedication, individuals:
"It is hereby certified that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we)
hereby dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks and other sites to public or private use as noted.
.....
Date
.....
(Owner)
.....
(Printed Name and Address)
.....
(Owner)
.....
(Printed Name and Address)"
c.
Certificate of ownership and dedication, corporation:
"It is hereby certified that ____________, a corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the State
of Georgia by, (principles authorized to sign the certificate) is the owner of the property shown and described
thereon, and that all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites shown hereon, are dedicated to public or private
use as noted.
(Corporate seal required)
.....
(Witness)
.....
(Corporation Name and Address)
..... .....
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
226/393
Printed Name (Principal authorized to sign)
.....
(Witness)
.....
Principal Name, Title
.....
Printed Name, Chairman
.....
(Principal authorized to sign)
.....
Printed Name, Title"
d.
Certification of approval of the installation and construction of streets, utilities and other required improvements:
"I do hereby certify (1) that streets, utilities and other required improvements have been installed in an
acceptable manner and according to Specifications and Standards adopted by the governing authority in the
subdivision/development entitled ____________, or (2) that a guarantee of the installation of the required
improvements in an amount of ____________ or manner satisfactory to the governing authority has been
received.
.....
Date
.....
Engineer"
e.
Certificate by the planning commission: To be placed on an original of the approved final plat by the planning
commission representative for recording.
"The subdivision plat known as ____________, has been found to comply with the City of Walthourville
subdivision Regulations.
.....
Chairman,
Certification of the approval of the Liberty
Consolidated Planning Commission
Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission Typed or Printed Name
.....
Secretary,
.....
Date Signed Liberty Consolidated Planning
Commission Signature"
f.
Certificate of approval by the City of Walthourville:
"I certify that the City of Walthourville approved the final plat of the subdivision/development entitled
____________ on the ____________ day of ____________, 20 ____________.
.....
City Clerk, City of Walthourville"
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
227/393
(b)
Final plat approval. The governing authority shall approve the final plat after review and approval by the
following:
(1)
The environmental protection division or the county health department.
(2)
The designated engineer of the planning commission or the governing authority.
(3)
Coastal Soil and Water Conservation District.
(4)
Georgia Department of Natural Resources when required.
(5)
Certification by the consolidated planning commission.
(c)
Permanent reference points. Prior to the approval of the final plat, all of the subdivision's permanent reference
points shall have been placed in accordance with the following requirements:
(1)
Subdivision corner tie. At least two corners of the subdivision shall be designated by state plane coordinates
using NAD 83. These corners shall be marked with a monument so designated by computed X and Y coordinates
which shall appear on the map with a statement identifying this station or monument to an accuracy of 1:10,000.
At least one corner of the subdivision shall be tied to some permanent and readily recognizable landmark or
identifiable point, physical object or structure. In subdivisions of more than ten lots, the information for this
corner tie shall include elevation above sea level.
(2)
Monuments.
a.
Monuments shall be located in the ground:
1.
At all angles in the boundaries of the subdivision;
2.
At the intersection lines of streets and at the intersection of the lines of streets with boundaries of the plat and at
the intersection of alleys with the boundaries of the subdivision;
3.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
228/393
At all points of curvature, points of tangency, points of reverse curvature, and angle points in the side lines of
streets and alleys; and
4.
At all angles of an intermediate traverse line.
b.
It is not intended or required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a street to mark angles in
the boundary of the subdivision if the angle points can be readily reestablished by reference to monuments along
the sidelines of the streets.
c.
All required monuments shall be placed flush with the ground where practicable.
d.
If the required location of monument is in an inaccessible place, or where the location of a monument would be
clearly impracticable, it is sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location thereof be
clearly indicated on the plat and referenced to the true point.
e.
All monuments used shall be made of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half-inch in diameter and 36 inches
long and completely encased in concrete at least four inches in diameter.
(3)
Control corners. Within each block of a subdivision at least two monuments designed and designated as control
corners shall be installed. All control corners shall be constructed of concrete and shall be at least four inches in
diameter or square and not less than three feet in length. Each monument shall have imbedded in its top or
attached by a suitable means, a metal plate of noncorrosive materials and marked plainly with the point, the
surveyor's registration number, the month and year it was installed and the words "control corner."
(4)
Property markers. A steel or wrought iron pipe or the equivalent not less than three-fourths inch in diameter and
at least 30 inches in length shall be set at all corners, except those located by monuments. Temporary lot number
identification markings (stakes) shall be installed on all lots. Markers shall be placed near the front corner pins
and shall remain in place until the subdivision physical development has been completed.
(5)
Accuracy. Land surveys, both within the limits of incorporated areas and beyond shall be at an accuracy of at
least 1:10,000.
(6)
Reference elevation. A permanent bench mark elevation referenced to mean sea level shall be established for all
subdivisions with 15 or more lots or any subdivision located in or adjacent to a designated flood zone other than
zone "C."
(7)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
229/393
Drafting standards. All final plats shall be drafted or drawn using commonly accepted standards of the industry.
All lines shall be clean and crisp. All lettering shall be clean, crisp, and legible. No letter or number shall be less
than 0.06 of an inch in height.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 5.3
Sec. 117-116. - Final plat electronic submission requirement.
An electronic copy of a computer aided drafting version of the final plat drawing shall accompany the hard copy
submittal of the final plat to the consolidated planning commission. The medium of the electronic copy shall be
determined by the consolidated planning commission. The electronic copy shall contain the following
information" technical details for submission of the electronic copy and layering convention are on file at the
consolidated planning commission.
(1)
Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce accurately the location, bearing, and length of every street and
alley line, lot line, easement, boundary line, and building line whether curved or straight. This shall include the
radius, point of curvature, point of tangency, degree of curve and other data for curve property lines and curved
streets, to an appropriate accuracy and in conformance with good surveying practice.
(2)
All property boundaries, watercourses, streets, easements, utilities, and other such improvements, which cross or
form any boundary line of the tract being subdivided.
(3)
Exact boundaries of the tract being subdivided shown with bearing and distances.
(4)
Streets, rights-of-way, and street names.
(5)
Easements locations, widths, and purposes.
(6)
Lot lines, minimum building setback lines, and lot and block numbers with net and gross square footage of each
lot printed inside of the lot lines.
(7)
Parks, school sites, or other public open spaces, if any.
(8)
All dimensions shall be to the nearest 1/10 of a foot and all angles to the nearest second. Surveys will be tied into
the state plane coordinate system.
(9)
Flood zones "A," "B," "C," and "V" shall be identified, if applicable, with required base flood elevation for each
lot.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
230/393
(10)
Identified wetlands.
(11)
Identify floodway.
(12)
Residential zoning designation as applicable.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 5.4
Sec. 117-117. - Record drawing electronic submission requirement.
Upon completion of the installation and inspection of the required improvements in a subdivision/development,
an electronic copy showing all as-built information of all required improvements must be submitted to the
secretary of the planning commission. The information must be reviewed and accepted by the local governing
authority prior to the final approval of the required improvements in a subdivision/development. Submitted
drawings must be compatible and be coordinated with that information submitted in accordance with section
117-116, pertaining to final plat electronic copy submission requirement. Technical details for submission of the
electronic copy and layering convention are on file at the consolidated planning commission. The release of any
performance bonds or letters of credit, as well as final approval and acceptance of improvements by the local
governing authority, shall not be given until the required as-built plans are submitted and approved by the
secretary of the planning commission.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 5.5
Secs. 117-118—117-147. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 117-148. - Required improvements.
A well designed subdivision or development includes improvements that provide for the safety and security of
all citizens, includes adequate open spaces for recreation and circulation, preserves and protects our wetlands,
streams, and marshes and promotes the overall public good. A subdivision means little to a prospective lot buyer
until such buyer can see actual physical transformation of raw land into lots with all necessary improvements
provided. Likewise, a subdivision is not an asset to the community until the necessary improvements have been
installed and provide adequate levels of service. In order that prospective lot purchasers may get useable
products and new subdivisions may be an asset rather than a liability to the community, the subdivider shall
install and/or pay for the improvements required by these regulations necessary to serve the subdivision prior to
the approval of the final plat. Any request for an exception to these required improvements must be documented
by the developer, and address the reason for the exception and why it meets the spirit and intent of these
regulations.
(1)
Natural gas. When gas lines are located in a street right-of-way, where possible, such lines shall be located
outside the portion of the street to be surfaced to prevent having to cut into the paved surface to serve abutting
properties.
(2)
Water supply. All lots, tracts or parcels must be served by a water source. The water source shall be the city
water system. When the water main is located in the street to serve the abutting lots a water service line shall be
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
231/393
stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot before the street is surfaced. The location of each service line
shall be marked clearly on the record drawings and submitted to the governing authority.
(3)
Sanitary sewerage. Subdivisions located in city shall connect to that municipal system. When the sewer line is
located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the abutting lots, a
connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. The location of
each service line shall be marked clearly on the record drawings and submitted to the governing authority.
(4)
Curbs and gutters. Concrete curbs and gutters shall be installed along new streets and roadways. Existing public
roadways that are included in or are adjacent to the development or subdivision and serve as direct access to the
development or to subdivision lots shall be developed and improved to the same curb and gutter and sidewalk
standards as new streets. All concrete curbs shall be installed in accordance with the approved plans and standard
specifications. All streets designated and shown shall be constructed and surfaced with the requirements of this
article and with the details, drawings and specifications as published by the governing authority. A copy of the
standard specifications will be kept on file at the planning commission. Higher standards than those required by
the standard specifications may be required by the planning commission to provide adequately for unusual soil
conditions, extraordinary traffic volume or other abnormal conditions. Approval of the developers plans by the
reviewing engineer and planning commission is required.
(5)
Street grading and surfacing (local streets). Street grading, base preparation and surfacing of local streets shall
be carried out in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. Grading, base preparation, and surfacing
of local collection and arterial streets shall be installed in accordance with the standard specifications. Approval
of the developer's plans by the reviewing engineer and planning commission is required.
(6)
Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, storm sewers,
storm drains, drop inlets, bridges, and other necessary appurtenances shall be installed by the subdivider in
accordance with the plans, standard specifications, and drainage ordinance. Approval of the developer's plans by
the reviewing engineer and planning commission is required.
(7)
Signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections within a subdivision. Traffic control signs shall be
installed in accordance with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices. The planning commission and the
governing authority shall approve the location and design.
(8)
Topsoil. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to
provide at least six inches of cover on the lots and at least four inches of cover between sidewalks and curbs, and
shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
(9)
Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed in all approved subdivisions in accordance with section 117-178
(10)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
232/393
Nonpotable reuse water line. A nonpotable reuse water system shall be installed in all approved subdivisions and
other planned developments in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the planning
commission.
(11)
Streetlights and poles. Installation of streetlights and poles shall be done by the developer, and shall be approved
by the appropriate electric utility company and the planning commission. A street lighting plan, developed by the
appropriate utility company, shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
(12)
Electric and other utilities. All utilities and systems (electric, telephone, cable, etc.) shall be placed underground
by the developer, and shall be installed as approved by the appropriate utility company and the planning
commission. A variance from this requirement may be granted by the planning commission and the local
governing authority if unique conditions meeting the requirements in article X of this chapter exist.
(13)
Other required improvements. Following a detailed review of the impact of the proposed subdivision or other
planned developments described in article VIII of this chapter on the infrastructure systems of the governing
authority, other improvements either on or off the site under development may be required to be installed or paid
for by the developer. The planning commission shall determine the need and cost for all other required
improvements and shall submit a report to the governing authority for approval.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 6.1
Sec. 117-149. - Final plat revisions.
If it should become necessary to revise a final plat due to a dimensional error, a revised plat shall be submitted to
the county clerk of court for final recording after the planning commission has approved and signed the revised
plat.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 6.3)
Sec. 117-150. - Installation guarantee.
In lieu of requiring the completion of all required improvements prior to the acceptance of a final plat, the
governing authority may, at its discretion, accept a bond or guarantee from the subdivider, whereby the
subdivider shall guarantee to complete all required improvements by this article or otherwise specified by the
planning commission, to the satisfaction of the local governing authority. The amount of the guarantee shall be
120 percent of the construction cost of the required improvements. The developer's engineer shall estimate cost
for construction or a copy of the construction contract shall be provided. The amount of the guarantee must be
approved as adequate to the local governing authority or representative. The time of guarantee shall be 12
months and shall automatically renew until released by the governing authority. The guarantee shall be in the
form of one of the following alternatives:
(1)
Performance bond.
(2)
Irrevocable letter of credit and its accompanying agreement.
(3)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
233/393
Cash bond and escrow agreement.
(4)
Such other security arrangements as may be approved by the governing authority's attorney.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 6.4)
Sec. 117-151. - Inspections.
All subdivisions within the territorial jurisdiction of the governing authority shall be inspected and approved by
the planning commission's engineer or the governing authority's engineer and/or their authorized representative.
Sufficient inspections shall be made to ensure compliance with the specifications set forth in these regulations. A
registered engineer, employed by the developer, shall also certify in writing to the governing authority that he
has inspected each and all phases of the development and finds all construction, including but not limited to the
installation of all drainageways, streets, and water and sewerage systems to be in compliance with the approved
plans and specifications and the standard specification as set forth in these regulations.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 6.5)
Sec. 117-152. - Acceptance of improvements.
Upon completion of all (street, drainage, lighting, signage, water, sewer, etc.) improvements, the governing
authority may accept the dedication of streets and other improvements. Each portion of these improvements must
have also been inspected and approved by the engineer or his designated representative. These improvements
must also have been constructed in accordance with the standard specifications. Prior to acceptance of the
improvements the governing authority must obtain the engineer certificate referred to in section 117-151 and a
maintenance bond referred to in section 117-154. The acceptance of any improvements by the local governing
authority shall be recorded in the official minutes of the local governing authority.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 6.6)
Sec. 117-153. - Building permits.
No building permit in a subdivision shall be issued and no building other than a farm building shall be erected on
any lot unless the street giving access to the lot upon which the building is proposed to be placed has been
accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of, a public street.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 6.7)
Sec. 117-154. - Maintenance bond.
(a)
A maintenance bond is required for acceptance of the completed paving, curb and gutter, sidewalks, drainage,
water and sewer facilities, and other required improvements. The bond shall be written in the amount of 15
percent of the construction cost of the work. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be reviewed and
approved by the designated engineer as sufficient to cover maintenance. The maintenance bond shall guarantee
the work for a period of two years, from the date of acceptance of the improvements by the local governing
authority as shown in section 117-152
(b)
During the period of the two-year guarantee, any maintenance, replacement or repair required will be the
responsibility of the developer. The required improvements will be inspected by the developer at least 30 days
prior to the expiration of the maintenance bond. Any required maintenance shall be completed prior to release of
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
234/393
the bond. If maintenance is not completed, the bond will be forfeited to the governing authority. Upon the
expiration of the two-year period, the governing authority will assume maintenance of the accepted
improvements. Prior acceptance by the governing authority shall not relieve the developer of responsibility for
subsequent failures occurring within the period of the two-year guarantee. If, at any time during the two-year
period, the developer fails to make prompt repairs or fails to maintain the road to the satisfaction of the
governing authority, the governing authority may inform the developer and utilize bond funds or guarantee funds
as needed.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 6.8)
Secs. 117-155—117-176. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - DESIGN STANDARDS
Sec. 117-177. - Scope.
The design standards in this article shall be considered minimum requirements in the platting of all subdivisions.
The planning commission and the governing authority may require standards that exceed these minimums. All
approved minimum standards shall be on file at the planning commission.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 7.0)
Sec. 117-178. - Streets.
(a)
Conformity to existing maps or plans. The location and width of all proposed streets shall be in conformity with
official plans and maps and with existing amended plans of the planning commission.
(b)
Continuation of adjoining street system. The proposed street layout shall be coordinated with the street system of
the surrounding area. Where possible, existing major streets shall be extended to connect with adjacent
properties and the use of culs-de-sac should be avoided, except when no other option is feasible.
(c)
Access to adjacent properties. It is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property. Proposed streets
shall be extended to the boundary of such property and a temporary turn-around shall be provided, unless the
planning commission approves another system for access. Houses fronting on minor streets shall have access
from minor streets only. Each subdivision should seek to provide at least two points of access (streets) to existing
public streets where feasible, and in a subdivision with, or the potential for, 75 or more lots, two or more access
streets shall be provided, unless the development can meet the standards for a variance as defined in article X of
this chapter.
(d)
Street names. Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with other existing and named streets, shall
bear the assigned name of the existing streets. In no case shall the name of the proposed streets duplicate or be
phonetically similar to existing street names, irrespective of the use of suffix, street, avenue, boulevard, drive,
place, court, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person in laying out any new street or road to name such street or
road on any plat, by marking, or in any deed or instrument, without first getting approval of the planning
commission. The planning commission shall coordinate or cause to be coordinated with the emergency 911
department for approval of street names.
(e)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
235/393
Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through-traffic will be discouraged.
(f)
Private streets. There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Private streets are allowed in planned
developments and quality developments as described in article VIII of this chapter.
(g)
Trees. All requirements of the tree protection ordinance must be met, and the landscape and tree planting plan
should be submitted with the preliminary plat.
(h)
Railroads and highways (freeways, expressways). Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so
located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows:
(1)
In residential districts a buffer strip not less than 25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot
required in the district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This
strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be so designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for the planting
of trees and shrubs by the owner. The placement of structures hereon is prohibited."
(2)
In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses, the nearest street extending parallel or
approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practical, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure
suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.
(3)
All other streets, which are parallel to the railroad, when intersecting a street that crosses the railroad at grade,
shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance
shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by
means of appropriate approach gradients.
(i)
Reserved strips prohibited. Reserved strips at the terminus of a new street shall be prohibited.
(j)
Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets by less than 150 feet shall be prohibited.
(k)
Right angle intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable.
(l)
Cul-de-sac. A minor street having a permanent dead end or otherwise having an outlet must be provided with a
turn-around having a roadway diameter of at least 80 feet and a right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet. In no
cases shall a cul-de-sac be more than 600 feet in length. Temporary dead-end streets shall not be longer than 600
feet, and shall be provided with a turnaround having a 30-foot radius.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
236/393
(m)
Alleys. Service alleys or drives may be required in multiple dwelling, commercial and industrial developments
and shall have a minimum surface treatment width of 15 feet, but shall not be provided in one-family and twofamily residential developments, unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning
commission of the need for alleys.
(n)
Paving requirements. All streets must be prepared and paved according to the following methods or by
equivalent methods that are acceptable to the governing authority:
(1)
Subgrade. The subgrade shall be 24 inches of compacted subgrade material compacted to 95 percent density.
(2)
Base. The base shall consist of a graded aggregate base course screened 1½ inches or smaller with a thickness of
six inches after being thoroughly compacted and constructed.
a.
All materials shall be secured from an approved source and shall conform to state department of transportation's
minimum acceptable standards for this area.
b.
As soon as the base material has been spread and mixed, the base shall be brought to approximate line, grade and
cross section and then rolled with a sheep's-foot roller until the roller walks out and finally with a pneumatic tire
or general purpose roller until full thickness of the base course has been compacted thoroughly. Defects shall be
remedied as soon as they are discovered. New materials shall be added if necessary and defective portions shall
be entirely removed.
c.
The base course shall be maintained under traffic and kept free from ruts, ridge and dusting, true to grade and
cross section until it is primed.
d.
No base material shall be deposited or shaped when the subgrade is frozen or thawing or during unfavorable
weather conditions.
(3)
Pavement. Wearing surface shall consist of 1½-inch thick bituminous aggregate plant mix type "E" or "F" and
shall be placed in accordance with the latest edition of the state department of transportation standard
specifications for roads and bridges.
(4)
Curb and gutter. Concrete curbs and gutter are required on all new streets. The width of the curb and gutter shall
not be less than 24 inches, unless approved by the planning commission.
(o)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
237/393
Street right-of-way widths. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows:
(p)
Sight distance for vertical curves. Where vertical curves are used, the minimum sight distance shall be as
follows:
GENERAL MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
Minimum Rightof-Way
(feet)
Design
Speed
(mph)
Minimum
Curve
Radii
(feet)
Minimum
Stopping
Sight
Distance
(feet)
Local streets 60 30 275 200.0
Collector streets 60 35 350 240.0
Arterial streets 80 40 500 275.1
(q)
Horizontal curves. Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees occurs in the alignment of a marginal
access or minor street or road, a curve of reasonable radius shall be introduced. A curve shall be introduced at
any change in direction of a collector, industrial or commercial service street or major thoroughfare. On major
thoroughfares the state department of transportation or governing authority's engineer shall determine the
centerline radius of curvature. On collector, industrial or commercial service streets, the centerline radius of
curvature shall not be less than 350 feet. On minor streets, the centerline radius of curvature shall not be less than
150 feet, unless the topography of the land to be subdivided makes this impractical.
(r)
Street grades. Grades on major thoroughfares shall be established or approved by the governing authority
engineer. Grades on collector streets shall not exceed eight percent unless topographic conditions make this
impractical. Grades on minor residential streets shall not exceed 15 percent, unless topographic conditions make
this impractical. All streets should have a minimum grade of not less than three-tenths of one percent (0.30).
(s)
Sidewalks. Sidewalks must be installed on all streets. All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards of the standard specifications, except where unusual conditions exist which eliminate the necessity for
sidewalks, and such exceptions are specifically granted by the planning commission.
MINIMUM SIDEWALK STANDARDS
Arterial streets Minimum of 5 feet, both sides 6 feet is preferred
Collector streets Minimum of 5 feet, both sides 6 feet is preferred
Local streets Minimum of 5 feet, both sides 6 feet is preferred
Where it is deemed necessary for public safety, the planning commission may require either additional sidewalks
or wider sidewalks than listed above.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 7.1
Sec. 117-179. - Easements.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
238/393
Easements having a minimum width of 15 feet and located along the side or rear of lot lines shall be provided as
required for utility lines and underground mains and cables. Drainage easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet
in width plus an additional 15 feet adjacent to drainage easements with open ditches or the like provided for
access and maintenance. All easements for vehicular access, including ingress and egress, shall have a minimum
width of 60 feet.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 7.2
Sec. 117-180. - Blocks.
Block length and widths shall be as follows:
(1)
Lengths. Block lengths shall not exceed 600 feet nor be less than 300 feet, unless approved by the planning
commission and the governing authority.
(2)
Widths. Blocks shall have sufficient width to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth. Blocks may be one lot in
depth where single-tier lots are required to separate residential development from through vehicular traffic or
nonresidential uses.
(3)
Pedestrian ways. Crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, may be required by the planning commission where it
is deemed essential in order to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers,
transportation, or other community facilities.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 7.3
Sec. 117-181. - Lots.
All lots shall meet the minimum lot width, depth, and area requirements of the city zoning ordinance.
(1)
Setback lines. Setback distances as shown in the adopted zoning ordinance, shall be accepted as the minimum
setback required.
(2)
Building setback lines. A building line meeting the minimum front yard setback requirements of this article shall
be established on all lots.
(3)
Orientation of lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
(4)
Lots abutting public streets. Each lot shall abut upon a dedicated public street on which it has access.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 7.4
Sec. 117-182. - Driveways.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
239/393
(a)
Permits. It shall be unlawful to begin construction of any driveway and/or alter any driveway abutting on a
public street, except those driveways abutting on a state or federal highway, until a building permit for such work
has been issued. The state department of transportation shall issue permits for those driveways abutting on state
and federal highways.
(b)
Fees. The building permit fee shall be set by the governing authority.
(c)
Commercial driveways. All commercial driveways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
most current version of the state department of transportation regulations for driveway and encroachment
control.
(d)
Details. All work for which a permit has been issued shall be inspected by the designated engineer or his
representative and shall comply with the following details and specifications:
(1)
Pavement shall consist of concrete and/or bituminous plant mix type "E" or "F" and shall have a width of not less
than 12 feet.
(2)
When driveway pipes are required, the length of pipe shall not be less than 24 feet. The size and type of pipe
shall be designed in accordance with the drainage chapter.
(3)
End treatments are required in accordance with the state department of transportation regulations for driveway
and encroachment control.
(4)
Pavement will not be required for driveways that abut an existing dirt road.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 7.5)
Sec. 117-183. - General suitability.
(a)
Soils. The planning commission shall not approve a subdivision where the soil conditions have been determined
not suitable for development purposes of the kind proposed.
(b)
Flooding. Floodprone areas shall be consistent with all flood insurance regulations.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 7.6)
Secs. 117-184—117-204. - Reserved.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
240/393
ARTICLE VIII. - PLANNED AND QUALITY DEVELOPMENTS
Sec. 117-205. - Planned developments.
In order to prevent creation of traffic hazards, ensure the provision of off-street parking and the provision of
necessary utilities, plans for planned developments such as manufactured home parks, apartment complexes,
commercial complexes, and other developments where the site is not subdivided into lots and public streets shall
be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. In addition, any planned unit development as
referenced in the zoning ordinance shall conform to not only these regulations, but also all requirements stated in
the zoning ordinance under planned unit development. Such plans shall show the following information:
(1)
Scale. A plat of the property drawn to a scale of at least 100 feet to one inch.
(2)
Location. The location of the parcel of land with respect to adjacent rights-of-way.
(3)
Buildings. The shape, dimensions, and location of all buildings, existing and proposed, on such parcel.
(4)
Nature of use. The nature (commercial, industrial, etc.) of the proposed uses of the buildings and/or land.
(5)
Topography. Topography of the site by contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet. However one-foot
intervals are preferred.
(6)
Parking. The location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading space and the means of ingress and
egress to and from such space.
(7)
Drainage. The location and size of all proposed utilities and storm drainage facilities in accordance with chapter
105, pertaining to drainage.
(8)
Other information. Landscaping as required by ordinance and any other such other information as the planning
commission may deem necessary because of the physical characteristics peculiar to the particular development.
(9)
Enforcement of group development requirements. No building permits shall be issued and no connection to a
public water system or public sewer system shall be made until the plans for the planned development have been
approved by the planning commission and so noted on prints of the development plan.
(10)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
241/393
Nonpotable reuse system. The location and size of all reuse water mains, valves, fittings, and hydrants in
accordance with the design guide approved by the planning commission, unless the planning commission does
not require such a system following an analysis of the reuse demand of the proposed development.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 8.1
Sec. 117-206. - Quality developments.
(a)
Intent. It is not the intent of these regulations to freeze new developments into any single type of design. It is,
however, the intent of these regulations to ensure that all new developments shall contribute to the building of
economically sound, sustainable and desirable areas within the community with all necessary services and
facilities. The purpose of the designation of quality developments is to allow the utilization of land while
ensuring that there are little or no detrimental impacts on the environment, neighboring properties, and the public
safety, welfare and interest. The intent is that all quality developments far exceed the minimum standards defined
and encourage innovation in development that enhances and improves public safety and welfare.
(b)
Authority to modify standards. In order to provide the developer with maximum flexibility in the design and
character of new subdivisions and other planned developments, the planning commission is hereby authorized to
modify the standards and requirements, but not the intent of these regulations and zoning standards, in the case
of a plan that exhibits unique quality growth features within a planned unit, which, in the judgment of the
planning commission:
(1)
Provides significant public spaces for circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully
developed and populated;
(2)
Which exhibits unique quality features in keeping with state department of community affairs principles;
(3)
Which addresses each of the city's quality development guidelines;
(4)
Which provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will ensure conformity to and achievement of the
comprehensive development plan. Any development considered for quality development status shall be analyzed
using these principles and the guidelines listed below. The following is a list of the city's performance guidelines
against which all proposed quality developments will be analyzed:
a.
Does the proposed development provide an appropriate and significant amount of uplands dedicated to open
space, recreational, and other public uses that are available for the use and enjoyment of the residents and users
of the development and citizens of the city?
b.
Will the development as designed minimize impacts to, and preserve wetlands and floodplains?
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
242/393
c.
Has the proposal minimized the impervious surfaces in order to minimize stormwater runoff, and does it include
the use of measures such as low impact design or other strategies to reduce the quantity and improve the quality
of all runoff?
d.
Are the connectivity of open spaces and wetlands maximized in such a way as to create and preserve habit areas
for wildlife?
e.
Does the design maximize the preservation and protection of large hardwood trees and woodlands in wetlands
and uplands?
f.
Does the proposal minimize or include mitigation for impacts on the city's, and the neighboring government's,
infrastructure systems?
The planning commission shall review the proposed development in accordance with these guidelines and the
principles, and may recommend modification of standards and requirements should the proposed development
exceed the subdivision regulations and adequately address each of these principles and guidelines. The developer
or subdivider shall request that the planning commission consider the development for designation as a quality
development and provide the information required by the planning commission in order to evaluate the request
for the designation and the modification of any standards or requirements.
(c)
Maintenance of spirit of regulations. Any development or subdivision approved under this section shall maintain
the objectives, purposes, and intent of these regulations. To this end, the planning commission may recommend
modification to the standards and requirements of these regulations and the standards defined in the city zoning
ordinance.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 8.2
Secs. 117-207—117-235. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. - TYPICAL DETAILS
Sec. 117-236. - Details.
The adopted driveway detail and roadway cross sections shall be adhered to. All other construction details will
either conform to details as established by the governing authority in accordance with the state department of
transportation standard specifications and details.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 9.1
Editor's note—
The minimum adopted driveway details and roadway cross sections is not set out herein but is on file in the
planning commission offices.
Secs. 117-237—117-265. - Reserved.
ARTICLE X. - VARIANCES AND EXCEPTIONS
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
243/393
Sec. 117-266. - Variances.
When, due to a particular hardship experienced by an owner of a tract of land, such as inadequate size, shape,
drainage, etc., it is impractical for a developer to comply with the interpretations of the design requirements of
these regulations, the planning commission shall be authorized to vary such requirements provided the intent and
purpose of these regulations are not violated. Such variations, and the reasons for granting them, shall be entered
into the minutes of the planning commission. The conditions for granting the variance are as follows:
(1)
There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to this particular piece of property because of its
size, shape or topography;
(2)
The application of the standards to this particular property would create an unnecessary hardship;
(3)
Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and
(4)
Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of
the ordinance.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 10.1
Sec. 117-267. - Exceptions.
(a)
Authorized. In order to promote the public welfare and enhance the safety and health of the public, it may be in
the best interests of the governing authority to modify or provide exceptions to certain development and design
standards. The planning commission shall be authorized to consider exceptions to such requirements, provided
the intent and purpose of these regulations are not violated. All exceptions, and the reasons for granting them,
shall be entered into the minutes of the planning commission and also the approving governing authority.
(b)
Private street exception. Private streets may be considered as an exception by the planning commission and may
be permitted by the planning commission with the approval of the city, if they meet all of the following
conditions:
(1)
Private streets shall meet the requirements of this chapter regarding preliminary and final plat, as well as
receiving all required permits and construction inspection of infrastructure.
(2)
A property owners' association must be created to maintain all private streets, and be filed with the clerk of
superior court. The book and page in which property owners' association's covenants, declaration, and
restrictions are recorded shall be shown on the final plat of the subdivision and, as a minimum, shall provide for:
mandatory and automatic membership in the property owners' association before any individual properties are
sold; all owners to have equal access and right to use all shared private facilities; perpetual and continued
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
244/393
maintenance of the private streets and any open space; tax liability in the case of default; the method of
assessment of dues; maintenance and related costs; and restoration in the event of damage or destruction.
(3)
Private streets in subdivisions shall be opened and improved according to the design standards established for
public streets.
(4)
A maintenance bond to be renewed every three years with the city as the beneficiary is required for the
completed paving, curb and gutter, sidewalks, drainage, water and sewer facilities, and other required
improvements. The bond shall be written in the amount of 25 percent of the construction cost of the work. The
amount of the maintenance bond shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission's engineer as
sufficient to cover maintenance. The bond may be released or reduced only if the governing authority accepts
any or all improvements for maintenance. If at any time, the property owners' association fails to make prompt
repairs or fails to maintain the road and other improvements to the satisfaction of the governing authority, the
governing authority may inform the association and utilize bond funds or guarantee funds as needed.
(5)
All private streets and street name markers shall be maintained by the property owners' association within such
subdivisions and the governing authority have no responsibility whatsoever for maintenance and repair, unless
dedicated and accepted by the governing authority.
(6)
All lots or parcels abutting any private street subsequently sold following this exception shall include a
disclosure that the street is not a public street, and the street shall be maintained by the owners of the property
within such subdivisions and the governing authority have no responsibility whatsoever for maintenance and
repair, until and unless improved to approved street standards and dedicated and accepted by the governing
authority.
(7)
This section requires the preservation and maintenance of private streets and other open space through a property
owners' association, and if the property owners' association fails to maintain the private streets and common
property in a reasonable condition, the governing authority shall serve written notice upon the property owners'
association and upon each individual property owner, setting forth the manner in which the organization has
failed to maintain common open space and private streets in a reasonable condition. The notice shall include a
demand that these deficiencies of maintenance are corrected within 30 days of the notice. If the deficiencies are
not corrected within 30 days, the city, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the
development and to prevent the common open space and private streets from becoming a public nuisance, may
enter upon the common open space and private streets and maintain it for one year and thereafter until the
association is prepared to provide maintenance. The cost of this maintenance by the city shall be assessed against
the perpetual maintenance bond established and funded by the property owners' association or, if the bond is not
sufficient, the cost shall be assessed against all properties within the developments that have a right of enjoyment
of the common open space and private streets, and shall become a lien upon the properties.
(8)
Private streets shall always remain open for police, fire, ambulance, and other vehicles of all government
agencies.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 10.2
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
245/393
Secs. 117-268—117-297. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
Sec. 117-298. - Filing and recording.
No plat of the subdivision within the city shall be filed or recorded by the clerk of the court until the final plat
shall have been submitted to and approved by the governing authority and such approval entered in writing on
the final plat by the secretary of the planning commission.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 11.1
Sec. 117-299. - Improvements, streets.
The governing authority or other public authority shall not hereafter accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave,
or light any street or lay or authorize the laying of any water mains, sewers, connections, or other public facilities
or utilities in any street, unless it has been accepted as, opened as, or otherwise received the legal status of, a
public street or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on the final plat
approved by the planning commission. The governing authority may locate and construct or may accept any
other street; provided the ordinance or resolution or other measure for such approval be first submitted to the
planning commission for its approval or disapproval as provided for in the procedure on plats and, upon
approval, any such street shall have the status of an approved street as fully as though it had been originally
shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 11.2
Sec. 117-300. - Street names.
No street or road shall hereafter be named on a plat or in a deed or other instrument without approval by the
planning commission. The planning commission may, after reasonable notice in a newspaper having general
circulation in the county, recommend to the governing authority, a change in the name of any street or road in the
county:
(1)
When there is duplication of names or other conditions which tend to confuse the public;
(2)
When it is found that a change may simplify marking or identification of streets; or
(3)
Upon any other good and just reason that may appear to the governing authority.
After reasonable opportunity for a public hearing and approval of the name change, the governing authority shall
issue its certificate designating the change, which shall be recorded with the clerk of the court, and the name
shall thereafter be the legal name of the street or road.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 11.3
Sec. 117-301. - Schedule of filing fees.
The schedule of fees as published by the planning commission and the governing authority shall be paid in
connection with applications under these regulations.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 11.4
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
246/393
Sec. 117-302. - Maintenance of common areas and private facilities.
(a)
If any development includes private facilities and common areas, a property owners' association must be created
to maintain all private facilities and areas, and be filed with the clerk of superior court and, as a minimum, shall
provide for: mandatory and automatic membership in the property owners' association before any individual
properties are sold; all owners to have equal access and right to use all shared private facilities; perpetual and
continued maintenance of the private facilities and any open space; tax liability in the case of default; the method
of assessment of dues; maintenance and related costs; and restoration in the event of damage or destruction.
(b)
Where this article requires or allows the preservation and maintenance of private facilities and other open space
through a property owners' association, and if the property owners' association fails to maintain the private
streets and common property in a reasonable condition, the governing authority shall serve written notice upon
the association and upon the individual property owners, setting forth the manner in which the organization has
failed to maintain common open space and private streets in a reasonable condition. The notice shall include a
demand that these deficiencies of maintenance are corrected within 30 days of the notice. If the deficiencies are
not corrected within 30 days, the city, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the
development and to prevent the common open space and private facilities from becoming a public nuisance, may
enter upon the common open space and private facilities and maintain it for one year and thereafter until the
association is prepared to provide maintenance. The cost of this maintenance by the city shall be assessed against
the properties within the developments that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space and private
facilities, and shall become a lien upon the properties.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 11.4
Sec. 117-303. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and land disturbing activity permit.
If required by chapter 115, pertaining to soil erosion and sedimentation control, a soil erosion and sedimentation
control (E and S) plan shall be submitted to the director of the consolidated planning commission. The E and S
plan may be submitted prior to the time of filing the development's construction or site plans. A copy of the E
and S plan shall be submitted as a part of the filing of any construction plans or the site plans when they are
required. A land disturbing activity permit shall be obtained from the director of the consolidated planning
commission following or concurrent with, receiving plan approval from the Coastal Soil and Water Conservation
District. Land disturbing activities shall not begin prior to the issuance of a land disturbing activity permit.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 11.5
Secs. 117-304—117-324. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Sec. 117-325. - Filing or recording.
The filing or recording of a final plat of a subdivision without the approval of the governing authority as required
by these regulations, or the filing and recording of any sketch plan or preliminary plat as a record plat is hereby
declared a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable as provided by law.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 12.1
Sec. 117-326. - Recording official.
The clerk of court shall not accept, file, or record any sketch plan or any preliminary plat as a record plat, or any
final record plat involving any area subject to these regulations which have not been approved by the governing
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
247/393
authority. Should any public official violate the provisions of this section he shall in each instance be subject to
the penalty provided in this article and the governing authority shall have such rights and remedies as to
enforcement or collection as provided and may enjoin any violations thereof.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 12.2
Sec. 117-327. - Transfer of lots in unapproved subdivisions.
The owner or agent of any land to be subdivided who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such
land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat or subdivision of such land before such final plat
has been approved by the governing authority and recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in and for the
county, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in the discretion of the
court; and the description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the
process of selling or transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the
transaction from these penalties. The governing authority may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by
appropriate action.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 12.3
Sec. 117-328. - Erection of buildings.
Any building erected in violation of these regulations shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the building
official or the governing authority's attorney or other official designated by the governing authority may bring
appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. A building or structure shall be
substandard when it does not meet the requirements of the standard building code, the National Electrical Code,
or the Standard Plumbing Code, or any other code or ordinance of the city which shall apply.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 12.4
Sec. 117-329. - Street names.
It shall be unlawful for any person in laying out any new street or road to name such street or road on any plat,
by any marking or in any deed or instrument without first getting the approval of the governing authority. Any
person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 12.5
Sec. 117-330. - Penalties.
The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or
negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land
before such plat has been approved by the governing authority and recorded in the office of the clerk of the court
in the county, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by
law; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process
of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 12.6
Secs. 117-331—117-348. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. - IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
Sec. 117-349. - Guideline.
The following is a guideline for minimum guarantees that can be accepted:
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
248/393
(1)
The applicant shall be the developer.
(2)
The beneficiary shall be the city.
(3)
The governing authority must be able to draw on the letter of credit when a signed statement from the governing
authority is shown to the lending institution. Such statement must certify that the developer is in default of the
accompanying agreement. The statement must also show the amount of money due as a result of such default.
(4)
Credit must be automatically extended for an additional period of one year from the present and each future
expiration date unless the governing authority is notified not less than 45 days in advance of an expiration date.
The letter of credit shall not be withdrawn or reduced until all required improvements are completed and
accepted by the local governing authority.
(5)
The governing authority must be able to draw the outstanding balance of money upon presentation of a signed
statement by the governing authority as a cash bond to secure continued adherence to the terms of the agreement.
This clause would be utilized in the event the lending institution chooses not to extend the expiration date and
improvements are not complete.
(6)
The lending institution will receive the original letter of credit marked "Cancel" upon tender of payment or upon
completion of improvements to the satisfaction of the governing authority.
(7)
The lending institution must agree to be responsible for the governing authority's court cost and attorney fees in
the event the governing authority initiates a suit under the letter of credit.
(8)
The letter of credit must state that the letter of credit is specifically governed by the Uniform Commercial Code
(or similar code) in force in the state. Other types of bonding, guarantees, sureties, and other similar security
arrangements may be accepted if approved by the governing authority's attorney. An example of an accepted
letter of credit is shown as follows.
(Bank letter head)
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
Date:
Letter of Credit:
Address to: City of Walthourville
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
249/393
We hereby establish our Letter of Credit Number ____________ in your favor for the account of (Name of
Developer), for the sum or sums of U.S. dollars not exceeding a total of (amount of money) available by your
drafts at sight on (Name of Bank) accompanied by the following:
(1)
A statement signed by the beneficiary indicating that payment has been requested and is due.
(2)
Certification that the funds are required related to (type of work) re: (name of subdivision), or required as a cash
bond to secure contained adherence to terms.
Drafts must be negotiated (or presented to drawee bank for payment) on or before (date), or any extended date.
This letter of credit shall be automatically extended for an additional period of time of one year from the present
or each future expiration date unless we have notified you in writing, not less than forty-five (45) days before
such expiration date, that we elect not to renew this letter of credit. Our notice of such election shall be sent
certified mail to the above address.
All drafts must be marked "Draw under name of bank", Letter of Credit Number: (Number).
This credit is subject to the Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits (1974 Revision)
International Chamber of Commerce Brochure No. 290.
We hereby agree with you that drafts under and in compliance with this credit shall be duly honored on due
presentation to the drawee.
(Bank Officer)
(Title)
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 13.1)
Secs. 117-350—117-371. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 117-372. - Secretary of commission.
The secretary of the consolidated planning commission shall administer this chapter.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 14.1)
Secs. 117-373—117-402. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 117-403. - Interpretation.
The regulations expressed in this document shall be considered as the minimum provisions for the protection of
the health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, and welfare of the general public.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 15.1)
Sec. 117-404. - Conflict with other laws, ordinances, or regulations.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
250/393
Whenever the requirements made under authority of these regulations impose higher standards than are required
in any other stature or local ordinance of regulation, provisions of these regulations shall govern.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 15.2)
Sec. 117-405. - Amendments.
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on any amendment to these regulations prior to its
adoption, notice of which shall be given not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing date. The
notice of hearing shall be made in a newspaper having general distribution in the area of jurisdiction.
(Ord. of 11-13-2007, § 15.5)
Chapter 119 - TREE PROTECTION AND LAND CLEARING
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 119-1. - Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Land Clearing and Tree Protection Ordinance for the City of
Walthourville, Georgia."
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § I, 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-2. - Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the city.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § II, 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-3. - Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter, pertaining to land clearing and tree protection is to:
(1)
Lessen air pollution and carbon dioxide levels in the air, and promote clean air quality by increasing dust
filtration;
(2)
Reduce noise, heat, and glare;
(3)
Prevent soil erosion; prevent rivers, canals, ditches, and other waterways from silting; prevent reductions in the
drainage holding capacity of land; improve surface drainage and minimize flooding;
(4)
Minimize increases in temperatures on lands with natural and planted tree cover;
(5)
Maintain moisture levels in the air of lands with natural tree cover;
(6)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
251/393
Reduce noise, heat and glare, and ensure that these and other distractions of movement in one area do not
adversely affect activity within other adjacent areas;
(7)
Emphasize the importance of trees and vegetation as both a visual and physical buffer;
(8)
Protect and enhance the aesthetic qualities of the community to ensure that tree removal does not reduce property
values;
(9)
Minimize the cost of construction and maintenance of drainage systems necessitated by the increased flow and
diversion of surface waters;
(10)
Maintain, wherever possible, a minimum of 50 percent canopy cover across the city.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § III, 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-4. - Exemptions.
The following developments are exempted from compliance with the clearing and tree provisions of these
regulations:
(1)
Utility easements for power lines, pipelines, or similar facilities, except where such utilities cross tree easements,
set-asides or natural buffers.
(2)
Those portions of airports and heliports which require clear areas for safety purposes, including runways and
taxiways, approach and departure clear zones.
(3)
Land zoned and used for agricultural purposes for the duration of such use, provided that property rezoned for
purposes other than agriculture shall be subject to the requirements in section 119-27
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § IV, 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-5. - Definitions.
For the purposes of these regulations, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows. The term
"used for" shall include the terms "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," and "occupied for."
Administrator. Reserved.
Buffer means any visual buffer or screening required by any pertinent section of the city zoning regulations.
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls that encloses a space and intended for
the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or
nature or as further defined in the building code of the city.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
252/393
Building permit applicant means the person who applies for a building permit.
Caliper means the diameter or thickness of the main stem of a young tree or sapling as measured at six inches
above ground level. This measurement is used for nursery-grown trees having a diameter of four inches or less.
Canopy trees means large, preferred trees which provide a canopy over streets and other paved areas. At
maturity, such a canopy tree will achieve a canopy spread of 40 or more feet in diameter. Using a radius of 20
feet for calculation purposes, the canopy cover area for one mature tree will be equal to 3.1416 feet by (20)2 feet
or 1,257 square feet. Total canopy coverage for one acre of land would be equal to 43,560 divided by 1,257, or
35 large canopy trees.
City arborist. Reserved.
Clearing means the removal of vegetation of two-inch DBH or greater.
Development means the act, process or state of erecting buildings or structures, or making improvements.
Diameter, breast height (DBH) means the diameter or width of the main stem of a tree as measured 4.5 feet
above the natural grade at its base. Whenever a branch, limb, defect or abnormal swelling of the trunk occurs at
this height, the DBH shall be measured at the nearest point above or below 4.5 feet at which a normal diameter
occurs.
Director of inspections means the director of the inspections department.
Exceptional tree means any tree determined by the mayor and city council, as provided for herein, to be of
notable historic interest, high aesthetic value, or of unique character because of species, type, age, or size.
Fifty percent canopy cover means a canopy expected to be achieved over a 30-year period by the planting of
large, preferred trees or the retention of existing canopied trees which result in a minimum of 50 percent cover
across the city. Fifty percent canopy cover will be approximately 18 large, preferred trees per acre, quantified as
1,600 tree quality points per acre.
Greenspace means any area retained as permeable unpaved ground and dedicated to supporting vegetation.
Greenspace plan means a map and/or supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where
vegetation (greenspace) is to be retained or planted in compliance with these regulations.
Landscape plan means a map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where
vegetation is to be retained or provided in compliance with these regulations, the types of vegetation, and how
such vegetation will be provided. The landscape plan also includes any buffer elements.
Landscape quality point means a unit of measurement which quantifies the relative value of shrubs, ground
cover, and vines which are planted or retained on a given site. Landscape quality points are also given to small
and medium trees which are planted on the site. A landscape quality point, like a tree quality point, quantitatively
expresses the desirable qualities of the species with regard to the size, density and landscape attributions.
Plot plan means a map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where the building,
driveway, utility corridors and easements are to be located and where greenspace is to be retained or planted in
compliance with these regulations.
Pre-construction means the period of time prior to work being initiated, including clearing, grading, grubbing,
bush hogging, etc., on the site.
Pre-design means the period of time before a conceptual design plan is approved by the Metropolitan Planning
Commission.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
253/393
Preliminary plan means a map which shows the proposed design for a subdivision, as specified in the city
subdivision regulations.
Quality points factor means a decimal fraction that is assigned to each tree species in the tree lists and is used as
a multiplier in calculating the tree quality points for any tree retained on a site. The factor helps to translate the
diameter breast height into the area of canopy cover for the tree.
Set-aside means a piece of land dedicated to open space by the developer or owner. Examples of set-asides
include wetlands, parkland, recreation areas, medians of boulevards, etc.
Sketch plan means a conceptual layout for a subdivision as specified in the city subdivision regulations.
Species diversity means a planting or retention of diverse tree species on a site or within the community to
prevent dominance by any single type of tree. The purpose of this diversity is to prevent the destruction of the
entire urban forest in the event of disease or pestilence.
Tree easement means an easement, not less than ten feet in width and not in conflict with any other planning
requirements under the zoning and subdivision regulations, for the public planting and or maintenance of canopy
street trees exclusive of utility, drainage or other easements. Administrative approval is required for easements
greater than ten feet in width.
Tree establishment plan means a map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where
existing trees are to be planted in compliance with the requirements of these regulations, the types of trees and
their corresponding tree quality points.
Tree fund means a fund set up by the city for the purpose of planting required trees. An owner, developer, and/or
building permit applicant may contribute to such a fund.
Tree protection plan means a map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where
existing trees are to be retained in compliance with the requirements of these regulations, the types of trees, and
the corresponding tree quality points.
Tree protection zone means the area surrounding a preserved or planted tree that is essential to that tree's health
and survival, and is protected within the guidelines of these regulations.
Tree quality point means a unit of measurement which quantifies the relative value of trees that are planted or
retained on a given site. Tree quality points quantitatively express the desirable qualities of the species with
regards to size for each tree that is retained on a site. For planted trees, tree quality points are an expression of
species desirability and the expected mature size of each tree.
Vegetative practices means measures to stabilize erodible or sediment producing areas by covering the soil with
plantings, such as:
(1)
Permanent seeding, sprigging, or planting producing longterm vegetative cover;
(2)
Short-term seeding, producing temporary vegetative cover; or
(3)
Sodding areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § V, 12-14-1999)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
254/393
Sec. 119-6. - General provisions.
(a)
Permit required for clearing. Except as herein provided, a property owner shall not clear (as defined in section
119-5) or permit the clearing of property without first obtaining a clearing permit as provided for in article III of
this chapter.
(b)
Tree/landscape quality points required. Land cleared for development or land being proposed for development
shall be provided with not less than 1,600 tree quality points per acre on a given site, excluding trees in existing
rights-of-way. Commercial, industrial and multifamily developments shall provide an additional 400 landscape
quality points. When a commercial, industrial or multifamily development is to contain a parking area, then
within the boundaries of such parking area, there shall be provided not less than 1,200 tree quality points per
acre, exclusive of landscape quality points.
(c)
Land clearing and tree protection activities. All land clearing, tree protection, tree establishment and landscaping
shall be done in a manner consistent with the good plant husbandry practices as approved by the administrator.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § VI, 12-14-1999)
Secs. 119-7—119-26. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS FOR GREENSPACES, TREE PROTECTION, TREE
ESTABLISHMENT AND LANDSCAPING
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 119-27. - Tree protection and tree establishment.
(a)
Protection of preserved or planted tree. Tree protection zones shall be established and maintained on a site for all
trees, preserved or planted, for which tree quality points are to be claimed. The following provisions apply to
such zones and the trees within them:
(1)
A tree protection plan and details shall accompany all applications for land clearing and/or land disturbing
activities identifying where and how existing trees are to be protected during clearing and construction of the
project. Such plan and details shall be approved by the administrator upon a finding that the plan adequately
addresses the problems of the site in protecting the existing trees.
(2)
The area within any tree protection zone must remain open and unpaved. The use of perforated pavers may be
allowed subject to the approval of the administrator.
(3)
No vehicles shall be parked, or construction material stored or substances poured or disposed of or placed within
any tree protection zone at any time during clearing or construction of the project.
(4)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
255/393
No change in grade within the tree protection zone shall be allowed around existing trees except for a maximum
addition of two inches of mulch unless approved by the administrator.
(5)
Tree wells or tree walls (islands) shall be constructed as needed to protect preserved trees from grade changes
which result in changes of water supply to the tree protection zone. Adequate means for drainage of excess
moisture from the tree protection zone shall be provided if tree wells or tree walls are constructed.
(6)
All retained or planted trees shall be protected or situated so as to prevent damage from environmental changes
(such as lowered water table) or land disturbance resulting from any building or facility construction within or
immediately adjacent to the critical root zones of the tree.
(7)
No artificial plants, trees, or like materials shall be counted toward meeting the standards of these regulations.
(8)
For planted trees, the following tree protection standards and requirements shall apply:
a.
The minimum size tree protection zone centered upon the planted tree shall be as specified in table 1.
TABLE 1
MINIMUM TREE PROTECTION ZONE
Mature Tree Size (in feet) Minimum Tree Protection Zone
Square Rectangular Circular
Small* (less than 25') 4' ;times; 4' — 4.5' diameter
Medium* (25' - 40') 6' ;times; 8' 6' ;times; 11' 9' diameter
Large* (40' +) 20' ;times; 20' 16' ;times; 25' 22.5' diameter
*A listing of small, medium and large trees is found within the tree quality points list.
b.
No tree shall be planted closer to a building foundation or water, sewer, or natural gas line, than as follows:
1.
Five feet for a small tree species.
2.
Ten feet for a medium tree species.
3.
Ten feet for a large tree species.
c.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
256/393
No tree shall be planted under overhead utility distribution lines if the average mature height of the tree is greater
than the lowest overhead wire.
(9)
Irrigation requirements. Except as provided for herein, irrigation shall be provided for tree protection zones in
the following manner:
a.
A permanent water source shall be installed not less than 100 feet from each tree protection zone, but it shall not
encroach more than 12 inches into any tree protection zone.
b.
All trees within a tree protection zone must have a permanent water source within 100 feet, or at the perimeter of
the tree protection zone, if that tree protection zone has a radius of more than 100 feet.
c.
The minimum permanent water source shall be a hose bib capable of delivering a minimum of three gallons per
minute.
d.
All irrigation systems connected to any potable water supply shall prevent contamination of the potable water
supply according to city standards; provided however, irrigation shall not be required where:
1.
Existing individual trees or clumps or groups of existing trees or wooded areas are to be preserved and grading,
filling or other land disturbing activities have not disturbed the natural groundwater supply to such trees; or
2.
For planted trees it is determined by the administrator that the natural condition is sufficient to sustain tree
growth.
(b)
Standards and specifications.
(1)
Assignment of tree quality points to preserved or planted trees.
a.
All preserved trees must be greater than four inches DBH to qualify for tree quality points.
b.
All large trees, except for conifers, must be at least two-inch caliper to qualify for tree quality points when
planted on the site.
c.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
257/393
All coniferous (Pines, Cedars, Cypress, etc.) trees and all medium or small trees must be a minimum of one-inch
caliper to qualify for tree quality points when planted on the site.
d.
If multitrunk trees are planted or preserved, the largest trunk only shall qualify for tree quality points.
e.
All planted trees shall conform to the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock by the
American Association of Nurserymen. Topped trees shall not be considered for tree quality points.
f.
Lifting or moving trees without adequate support to the root ball shall be sufficient grounds to reject the trees for
tree quality points award.
g.
Greater than 50 percent scaffold limbs per tree exhibiting included bark shall be cause for rejection of the tree.
(2)
Tree quality points for planted trees. Quality points are assigned to newly planted trees as defined in the
following table. The species lists are contained in the tree quality points list.
TABLE 2
TREE QUALITY POINTS FOR PLANTED TREES
Mature Size (in feet) Species Quality Rating
Acceptable Recommended Preferred
Small* (less than 25') 3 5 10
Medium* (25' - 40') 5 15 30
Large* (40' +) 15 40 90
*A listing of small, medium and large trees is found within the tree quality points list.
(3)
Tree quality points for preserved trees. Quality points for trees preserved on the site are directly related to the
tree species quality and the tree protection zone that must be provided for the tree. For preserved trees, tree
quality points are calculated by squaring the tree's diameter at breast height (DBH) and multiplying this number
by the applicable quality points factor.
(DBH) 2 ;times; (quality points factor) = tree quality points
The quality points factor is found in the following table or the tree species lists:
TABLE 3
TREE QUALITY POINTS FACTOR
Tree Quality Rating Quality Points Factor
Acceptable 0.5
Recommended 0.75
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
258/393
Preferred 1.5
Exceptional 2.5
(4)
Standards for preserved stands of trees.
a.
Tree quality points and landscape quality points for retained stands of trees. The preservation of mature native
stands of trees and understory vegetation shall have the value of 0.25 tree quality points and 0.10 landscape
quality points per square foot of preserved area.
b.
Specifications.
1.
The administrator shall visit the site in order to verify that the stand contains native or extant trees of sufficient
size, quantity and quality to warrant preservation as a stand. The administrator shall review the types of tree
species present, the quantity of trees within each species, the degree of crown closure and their condition. Stands
found by the administrator to contain an insufficient number of mature native trees shall not qualify for quality
points under stand calculations. Individual trees, found by the administrator to be unacceptable as a preserved
stand, may qualify for tree quality points on an individual basis if the critical root systems of individual trees
remain intact.
2.
The stand shall be integrated into a tree protection, tree establishment, and landscape plan.
3.
All existing vegetation shall be left within the preserved stand with the exception of hazardous trees. No clearing
of underbrush shall be allowed.
4.
The stand shall be protected during the construction period using the same standards and specifications as
required for a tree protection zone.
5.
The stand shall be considered a set-aside and shall be shown within a permanent, recorded tree conservation
easement.
(5)
Palm-type trees. For palm-type trees, two tree quality points will be assigned per foot of stem height up to ten
feet, regardless of whether the tree is preserved or planted on the site.
(6)
Points for small and medium trees, shrubs. Landscape quality points for small and medium trees, shrubs, and
ground cover and vines.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
259/393
1.
Landscape quality points shall be given for planted medium and small trees, shrubs, ground cover and vines on
new commercial, industrial and multifamily developments. Tree quality points for preserved medium and small
trees may also qualify towards the 400 landscape quality point per acre requirement. To qualify, shrubs shall be a
three gallon container size or larger. If the shrub is incorporated into a buffer, it shall be capable of meeting the
height requirements of the buffer within a 12-month period.
2.
All planted trees shall conform to the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock by the
American Association of Nurserymen. Topped trees shall not be considered for tree quality points.
3.
Lifting or moving trees without adequate support to the root ball shall be sufficient grounds to reject the trees for
tree quality points award.
The following includes types of material acceptable for landscape quality points:
TABLE 4
REQUIRED LANDSCAPING POINTS PER ACRE*
Type Points for Planted Material Points for Preserved
Medium trees 30 pts for preferred trees 1.50 factor
15 pts for recommended
trees
0.75 factor
5 pts for acceptable trees 0.50 factor
Small trees 10 pts for preferred trees 1.50 factor
5 pts for recommended
trees
0.75 factor
3 pts for acceptable trees 0.50 factor
Evergreen shrubs
Large (6-12' high) 5.0 points each
Medium (4-6' high) 2.5 points each
Small (Under 4' high) 1.0 points each
Deciduous shrubs
Large (6-12' high) 2.5 points each
Medium (4-6' high) 1.0 points each
Small (Under 4' high) 0.5 points each
Evergreen ground cover 0.1 each
in one
gallon size
or greater
or 0.1 for
4 square
feet of
planted
area
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
260/393
where a
small
container
is used.
Evergreen vines:
When used as a ground cover 0.1 each
in one
gallon size
or greater
or 0.1 for
4 square
feet of
planted
area
where a
smaller
container
is used.
When used as a shrub Same as
for
evergreen
shrub
points
(with a
minimum
of a 3
gallon
container).
(c)
Continuing obligation for maintenance. The following maintenance standards apply to all trees which are
planted or preserved on a site in order to meet the minimum tree and landscape quality point requirements of this
section. Other trees on the site are exempt from these requirements.
(1)
Any damage or injury occurring to a preserved tree, by determination of the administrator, sufficient to cause the
tree to die within five years or develop into an irreparable hazard tree, shall be removed and shall lose tree
quality points. It shall also be replaced on the site in like tree quality points.
(2)
Damage not considered by the administrator to be fatal to the tree or hazardous to the public shall be
immediately repaired but shall result in a proportional decrease in tree quality points. Assessment of damage and
repair of trees shall be made by the administrator.
(3)
It is the responsibility of the owner to water and fertilize trees in order to maintain tree health and vigor. Failure
to maintain the required number of tree quality points shall be a violation of this chapter.
(d)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
261/393
Trees on adjacent city property.
(1)
A property owner responsible for any land disturbing activity within proximity to the critical root zone of a tree
located on city property shall provide for the protection of such tree to the standards described in these
regulations. All work on city rights-of-way requires a permit from the city. Violations are subject to an
immediate stop work order.
(2)
If a tree is recommended for removal from the city right-of-way by other city agencies the administrator shall be
brought into the review process. Any removals of trees on city property shall be coordinated with the
administrator. Mitigation of such tree removal shall be coordinated with the administrator.
(3)
A property owner responsible for a land disturbing activity that causes damage to a tree on city property which
affects the health or growth of such tree, or removes a tree, shall compensate the city for such tree loss or
damage as set forth as follows:
a.
The administrator shall establish the tree quality points for the removed or damaged tree. The property owner
responsible for the land disturbing activity which caused the removal or damage to such tree shall compensate
the city for such tree loss or damage under one of the following options, subject to the approval of the
administrator:
1.
Plant or preserve additional trees on the development site that equals or exceeds the value of the tree quality
points that were assessed for the removed or damaged tree.
2.
Plant trees on adjacent city rights-of-way that equal or exceed the value of the tree quality points that were
assessed for the removed or damaged tree. The property owner shall coordinate with the administrator to select
the species, set up a plant acceptance date and have the administrator observe the planting of the tree.
3.
Donate a gift-in-kind to the city tree fund that equals or exceeds the value of the tree quality points that were
assessed for the removed or damaged tree.
4.
Meet any equivalent combination of the above as approved by the administrator.
b.
Upon approval by the administrator of the method for compensating the city for the subject tree loss, the owner
of the development shall submit a revised tree protection and tree establishment plan which incorporates the
approved tree compensation plan to the administrator for approval.
(e)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
262/393
Property zoned C-1. Within the C-1 district, as designated on the official zoning map for the city, property is
exempt.
(f)
Designation of exceptional trees. Trees designated exceptional shall thereafter be considered a public landmark
and shall not be destroyed or endangered.
(1)
Procedure. All nominations for exceptional tree designation shall be reviewed by the administrator who shall
make recommendation on such nomination to the mayor and city council. The mayor and city council may, on
their own initiative or upon petition, designate a tree as "exceptional," as defined herein.
(2)
Criteria. The designation of an exceptional tree shall be based upon an evaluation of the tree in relation to one or
more of the following criteria:
a.
The tree is demonstrated to have an association with a documented historical event, or is located on an historic
site.
b.
The tree has unusually high aesthetic value.
c.
The tree is of unique character because of its age, species, variety, location, or because of the size and
development of its crown, trunk, or main stem.
d.
The designation of an exceptional tree shall also meet all of the following criteria:
1.
The tree is free of disease, pests and other serious injury.
2.
The tree has a life expectancy of more than ten years.
3.
The tree is free from structural defects which would present a hazard to the public.
(3)
After designation. Upon designation as an exceptional tree, the tree shall be protected from land-clearing
activities as provided in this article, and the tree quality points assignment shall be based upon a quality points
factor of 2.5 (60 percent more tree quality points than a preferred tree of equal DBH).
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § VII(1), 12-14-1999)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
263/393
Sec. 119-28. - Timber harvesting requirements for property not zoned for agricultural purposes.
(a)
Applicability. All properties, other than those zoned and used for agricultural activities, which propose timber
harvesting or clear cutting shall comply with the following provisions:
(b)
Procedures.
(1)
Permits required for timber harvest. A land clearing permit is required prior to the timber harvest.
(2)
Plans required for timber harvest. A plan for development of the land and a harvest plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the administrator prior to the issuance of a land clearing permit.
(3)
Timber Harvest and Reforestation Plan.
a.
The Timber Harvest and Reforestation Plan shall identify areas where trees are to be retained on site, along with
the density, species and tree quality point value.
b.
All required buffers shall be retained or installed as per the buffer requirements in the city zoning regulation.
c.
The Timber Harvest and Reforestation Plan shall be prepared by a registered forester and shall be reviewed by
the administrator.
(4)
Reforestation and tree protection standards. A minimum of 1,600 tree quality points per acre shall remain on the
parcel after the timber harvest, utilizing one or more of the following methods:
a.
Residual stands of trees. Tree quality points may be given to residual stands of trees which are existing on the
site and are protected during the harvesting process.
b.
Buffer areas. Tree quality points may be given to trees located within buffer areas.
c.
Reforestation areas. Where the site is to be used for continual timber growth or silvaculture, such land shall be
considered a reforestation area. In order to comply with the provisions of this section, a tree establishment plan
shall be submitted. This shall consist of the establishment of native tree seedlings using traditional forestry
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
264/393
methods and best management practices. A minimum of 600 seedlings per acre shall be planted on the site by the
end of the first planting season following the timber harvest. A minimum survival rate of 350 trees per acre will
be maintained after the first complete growing season.
d.
If an insufficient number of tree quality points are left on the site following the timber harvest, a tree
establishment plan shall be submitted to the administrator showing the location of the trees to be planted, the
species, size, and tree quality point listing.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § VII(2), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-29. - Underbrushing procedures.
On tracts of land containing 20 or more acres, the administrator may approve underbrushing of greater than twoinch-diameter trees upon finding that:
(1)
Sufficient tree cover exists such that the removal of such trees will not impair the ability of the site to comply
with the requirements of these regulations; and
(2)
The removal of such trees is not in conflict with the purpose and intent of these regulations.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § VII(3), 12-14-1999)
Secs. 119-30—119-50. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 119-51. - Applicability.
Except as herein provided, a greenspace plan shall be submitted for all proposed commercial, industrial or
multifamily development. Such plan shall include a tree protection, tree establishment and landscape plan. Such
plans shall conform to the standards and requirements of these regulations.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § VIII(1), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-52. - Greenspace design principles and standards.
(a)
Greenspace. A minimum of 20 percent of the total land area of the development shall be devoted to greenspace.
(b)
Sidewalks, curbing, other impermeable surfaces. Sidewalks, curbing, or any other paved or impermeable
surfaces within the greenspace area shall not count towards the 20 percent minimum greenspace requirement.
(c)
Clusters of trees. Existing clusters of trees shall be retained wherever possible.
(d)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
265/393
Locations for planting/preserving trees and landscaping.
(1)
Street trees. Street trees may be planted or preserved within the front yard development setback if they can be
placed within a tree easement established pursuant to the provisions of the city subdivision regulations, provided
such tree in the tree easement does not conflict with any existing utility, drainage or other easements. Street trees
within tree easements will be maintained by the city.
(2)
Front yard development setback. Understory and canopy trees may be preserved and/or planted in this area. A
portion of the 400 landscape quality points/acre may be planted in this area to correspond with city buffer
requirements so as to screen parking areas from adjacent roadways.
(3)
Parking areas.
a.
Tree quality points required in parking areas. A minimum of 1,200 tree quality points/acre in canopy trees shall
be planted and/or preserved within landscaped islands and medians located between parking bays. Vegetation
qualifying for landscape quality points may also be planted in these areas.
b.
Size and location of parking islands. Canopy trees planted in parking islands shall have 400 square feet of
unpaved soil for root development. The standard tree island shall be 20 feet by 20 feet; provided, however, that
where the islands are an extension of a ten wide landscape median, the islands may be reduced in width to 16
feet. Islands shall not be separated by more than 12 parking spaces, including the landscaped ends of drive aisles.
(4)
Buffers. Existing and/or planted canopy, understory trees, and planted evergreen shrubs may be incorporated into
buffer areas as defined in the city zoning ordinance. Landscape and/or tree quality points shall be counted for
planting in buffer areas, if such vegetation meets the principles and standards in section 119-27
(5)
Areas adjacent to buildings. Planting adjacent to buildings shall be eligible for tree and landscape quality points
if it meets the principles and standards of section 119-27 of these regulations.
(6)
Set-asides and/or stands of trees. Set-aside areas made up of existing stands of trees and understory vegetation
shall be eligible for tree and landscape quality points if they meet the principles and standards of section 119-27
of these regulations.
(e)
Landscaping standards.
(1)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
266/393
Landscape quality points requirement. The required 400 landscape quality points per acre shall be provided
through the planting of medium trees, small trees, shrubs, ground cover and/or vines on the site.
(2)
Locations for landscape quality points. Such plantings may be located in the following areas:
a.
Front yard development setback.
b.
Parking areas: islands and medians.
c.
Buffers.
d.
Areas adjacent to buildings.
e.
Set-asides and/or stands of trees.
(f)
Special cases.
(1)
Insufficient space for trees and/or landscaping on site.
a.
Where circumstances prevent locating the required 1,600 tree quality points/acre on the site, such trees shall
either be located as close to the site as practicable with approval from the administrator or a contribution made to
the city tree fund for the planting and maintenance of such trees elsewhere in the community. However, it must
be demonstrated first that the trees and landscaping cannot be accommodated on the site.
b.
Where circumstances prevent locating the required 400 landscape quality points/acre on the site, a contribution
may be made to the city tree fund for the planting and maintenance of trees within the community.
(2)
Car/boat/trailer sales lots. The requirement of canopy cover in the outdoor display, sales and storage areas may
be waived for such uses only if the requirements have been met elsewhere on the site. The required 400
landscape quality points per acre, however, shall be provided in this area to break up large expanses of pavement.
a.
Employee and customer parking areas shall be clearly delineated to separate them from outdoor display, sales,
and storage areas. Such parking areas shall provide a minimum of 1,200 tree quality points per acre in canopy
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
267/393
trees and 400 landscape quality points per acre in landscaping.
b.
Porous paving may be used within outdoor display, sales and parking areas to provide root growth area for new
and existing trees.
(3)
Cellular phone towers. Because of the size and location of many cellular tower sites, which makes required
landscaping on the site often impractical, the administrator may approve of the following three alternatives:
a.
Planting large canopy trees within the front yard setback along the roadways if there are no conflicting utility
locations. The required tree and landscape quality points may be combined together to provide tree quality points
for the site.
b.
When utilities or site constraints do not allow planting within the front yard setback, plantings may be approved
off-site at other locations within the immediate neighborhood. Trees may be planted either in the city right-ofway where there are no utilities or in street tree easements on private property.
c.
When there are no viable locations either on site or within the immediate vicinity, a contribution may be made to
the city tree fund.
(4)
Stormwater detention areas. Where planting within a stormwater detention area will help it function more
efficiently and help make the detention area more visually attractive, such plantings are permitted subject to the
following conditions:
a.
Planting in or near detention basins.
1.
The centerline of the swale of a storm drainage easement shall be kept free of debris and planting, with the
exception of grasses or ground cover material which stabilizes the bare soil. This area shall be maintained so that
the flow of water is not impeded. Plantings of shrubbery and trees shall be kept a minimum of ten feet, or as
approved by the administrator, from the centerline of the swale so as to keep the area clear for water flow.
2.
The area immediately surrounding drainage structures such as grates, inlets, weirs, etc., shall be kept free from
plantings and mulch to keep debris from clogging the structures and impeding the flow of water. All trees and
shrubs shall be kept a minimum of ten feet away from such structures.
3.
The centerline of stormwater detention basins (considered the area of the swale) shall be kept free of debris and
planting, with the exception of grasses or ground covers which help to stabilize the soil.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
268/393
4.
Trees shall be kept a minimum distance of ten feet from the centerline of the basin, or one-third the width of the
basin floor, whichever is greater.
5.
Shrubbery shall be excluded from the basin floor and banks. Shrubs may be planted at the top of the basin where
there is no likelihood of the rootballs lifting out of the ground when the basin is filled with water.
b.
Vegetation for drainage basin areas. Species of vegetation to be planted in or near detention basins and
drainageways are to be reviewed and approved by the administrator.
(g)
Development and expansion of existing property. One thousand six hundred tree quality points per acre and 400
landscape quality points per acre shall be provided for that portion which is being developed.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § VIII(2), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-53. - Requirements for land clearing permit.
(a)
A pre-design site visit shall be scheduled between the owner/agent and the administrator. This meeting may be
waived by the administrator at the request of the owner if it is determined that there are no natural features on the
site.
(b)
The owner/developer shall submit the tree protection, tree establishment and the landscape plans, together with
other required drawings, for review by the administrator.
(c)
For projects where lawn sprinklers or an irrigation piping system are to be installed, the landscape, tree
establishment and tree protection plans shall be prepared.
(d)
The owner/developer shall coordinate the location of utilities with the utility companies and the administrator
prior to the issuance of a land clearing permit. If there is a potential tree and utility conflict, a new tree
establishment plan and/or tree protection plan shall be submitted to the administrator showing the new, proposed
utility locations or tree locations.
(e)
A pre-construction meeting shall be scheduled among the owner, agent, contractors, appropriate city staff and the
administrator prior to issuance of land clearing permits. This meeting shall establish the location of temporary
buildings or trailers, temporary utilities, installation of tree protection and erosion control devices, storage of
materials, etc. Twenty-four hours' notice shall be given to schedule the site visit.
(f)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
269/393
Tree protection shall be installed by the owner/agent and inspected by the administrator prior to issuance of a
land clearing permit,
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § VIII(3), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-54. - Land clearing and tree protection requirements for certificate of occupancy.
(a)
Certification that trees and landscaping have been properly installed and protected shall be made in writing by
the registered professional who prepared the final tree protection, tree establishment and landscape plans. The
certification letter shall be submitted to the administrator as part of the close-out documents for a certificate of
occupancy.
(b)
The administrator shall make a final inspection of trees and landscaping for completeness prior to issuance of the
certificate of occupancy.
(c)
A temporary performance bond shall be posted by the owner for tree and/or landscape installation which cannot
be planted because of continued construction, improper planting season, etc. A bond or letter of credit in the
amount of money necessary to complete the work shall be posted with the city inspection department. A deadline
for completion of work shall be scheduled with the administrator in writing, prior to the issuance of a temporary
certificate of occupancy.
(d)
When the administrator makes a final inspection of the trees and landscaping at the scheduled completion of
work, if work has been completed, the temporary performance bond shall be refunded or applied towards the two
year landscape establishment bond at the request of the owner. If the tree and/or landscaping is not complete at
the scheduled deadline, the temporary performance bond shall be withheld based upon the amount of work
incomplete.
(e)
Posting of a two-year landscape establishment bond shall take place prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy. The bond shall be submitted to the administrator for tracking purposes for closure of files and
tracking of the two-year landscape bond release.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § VIII(4), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-55. - Release of bond.
At the end of the two-year landscape establishment period, the administrator shall inspect the site and shall make
a determination of whether or not the required trees and landscaping are healthy and have a reasonable chance of
surviving to maturity. Upon such a finding, the bond shall be released. In absence of such a finding, the bond or
other posted security shall not be released and the owner of the property shall be notified to replace the unhealthy
trees and landscaping or take other appropriate action as approved by the administrator. Upon failure of the
owner to comply with the administrator's decision regarding such trees, the city shall use the bond to the extent
necessary to bring the property into compliance with the provisions of these regulations. Final inspection shall be
scheduled within ten working days' notice.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § VIII(5), 12-14-1999)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
270/393
Secs. 119-56—119-76. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - NEW SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 119-77. - Applicability.
These provisions shall apply to new single-family residential subdivisions.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § IX(1), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-78. - Greenspace design principles and standards in single-family residential development.
(a)
Tree quality points required. Reserved.
(b)
Plans required.
(1)
For rights-of-way and drainage and utility easements. Except as herein provided, in order to obtain a land
clearing permit for rights-of-way and easements, a greenspace plan shall accompany each preliminary plan for
review. Such plan shall conform to the standards and requirements of these regulations.
(2)
For individual lots. Reserved.
(c)
Requirements for utilities crossing the tree easement. Utilities crossing the tree easement shall be located outside
of the critical root zone of trees, unless otherwise approved by the administrator. Utility locations shall allow for
the unobstructed planting of street trees at a separation of 40 to 60 feet.
(d)
Tree requirements within new single-family subdivisions.
(1)
Planted street trees. Canopy street trees shall be planted within tree easements. Such trees shall be no less than
four inches in caliper at time of installation. Trees shall be planted 40 to 60 feet apart, along all street frontages
within or abutting the subdivision. Each planted street tree shall have a value of 90 tree quality points.
(2)
Existing trees. Existing trees, for which tree quality points are sought, may be protected within tree easements as
street trees provided that they are protected prior to clearing, as demonstrated in section 119-27
(3)
Trees on individual lots, other than within street tree easements. Reserved.
(4)
Trees within set-aside area. Reserved.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
271/393
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § IX(2), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-79. - Procedures for obtaining a land clearing permit for street rights-of-way and utility and drainage
easements.
A land clearing permit is required as a prerequisite for clearing rights-of-ways and drainage and utility easements
in a new residential subdivision.
(1)
A pre-development site visit shall be scheduled between the owner/agent and the administrator. This meeting
may be waived by the administrator at the request of the owner.
(2)
After approval of the sketch plan, the centerlines and rights-of-ways of the proposed roadways shall be staked at
50-foot stations to enable field review by the administrator.
(3)
The developer shall show how the required streetscape is to be met in the subdivision or phase of subdivision for
which the land clearing permit is sought. This may be shown on a separate greenspace plan or on one of the other
construction drawings, and shall be submitted to the administrator for review. The greenspace plan shall show
any set-aside areas and trees to be protected, the number of required street trees to be provided.
(4)
Tree protection for set-asides and/or for any tree proposed for streetscape adjacent to rights-of-ways or
easements where clearing is to occur shall be installed by the developer and inspected by the administrator prior
to issuance of a land clearing permit.
(5)
The owner/developer shall contribute to the tree fund established by the city for the planting of new street trees.
where existing trees within the tree easement are acceptable and can be preserved the amount of the contribution
or the requirement for planted street trees shall be adjusted appropriately, based upon the critical root zone and
applicable tree quality points. The following provisions shall apply:
a.
The owner/developer shall contribute a specified dollar amount for each linear foot of property frontage for the
establishment of street trees as set in the fee schedule.
b.
Planted street trees shall be large preferred trees a minimum of four-inch caliper in size. The administrator shall
determine the species of street trees on each street and shall coordinate the species with the developers of private
streets. The street trees planted by the city shall be installed at substantial completion of the subdivision so as to
prevent such trees from construction damage.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § IX(3), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-80. - Requirements for certificate of occupancy.
The building permit applicant shall certify in writing that the existing trees were properly protected and are likely
to survive, as per the requirements of section 119-27.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
272/393
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § IX(5), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-81. - Withholding the certificate of occupancy.
(a)
If required trees are not planted or preserved according to the provisions of these regulations, the administrator
shall deny a certificate of occupancy until the situation is resolved.
(b)
Upon a showing of an unusual hardship by the building permit applicant, he may be issued a certificate of
occupancy even though all elements of the greenspace component of the plot plan have not been met. A certified
check deposit for the amount of money necessary to complete the work, plus an additional amount, specified in
the city's fee schedule, shall be deposited with the city inspections department. A time of completion, not to
exceed six months, shall be set up between the building permit applicant and the inspections department. At the
scheduled completion date, the administrator shall inspect the site for compliance. If the site complies, the
deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. If the work is still not complete, the deposit shall be forfeited and the
property brought into compliance with the provisions of these regulations.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § IX(6), 12-14-1999)
Secs. 119-82—119-101. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 119-102. - Application for land-clearing activities permits.
(a)
Submission requirements.
(1)
Application. Applications for permits for land-clearing activities shall be submitted by the landowner or an
authorized agent on a form provided for this purpose. Such application shall be submitted to the city inspections
department along with all required attachments. Each land-clearing activities permit application shall include the
data items, plans, and other documents as long as clarity is maintained. Complete applications shall be
transmitted to the administrator for review. The administrator shall certify approved applications for the issuance
of permits.
(2)
Project description and plans. Such description shall include:
a.
Purpose of the requested permit;
b.
Map showing existing and proposed land uses, buildings, parking, and other pertinent elements of development;
c.
A boundary survey which shall include the location of all easements, building setback lines, nearby zoning
district boundaries;
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
273/393
d.
Anticipated starting and completion dates for each phase of the project; and
e.
A location map at a scale of one inch equals 1,500 feet or larger, showing the location of the property within the
city.
(b)
Phasing of a project. If a tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each
phase as appropriate.
(c)
Time limit on approval. A permit shall be valid for 12 months. In the event that the permittee has not begun the
permitted work within 12 months the permit shall lapse and a new permit must be obtained before work can
begin. Once work is begun under a valid permit the permittee may continue the permitted work until the work is
completed. Any permit, including grandfathered projects, will automatically lapse after 12 months of inactivity,
unless the developer has obtained an extension from the director of inspections.
(d)
If a permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant in writing.
(e)
The administrator may waive the requirement for one or more of the plans listed in subsection (a) of this section,
upon finding that three or fewer trees are being proposed for removal, no grading is to occur, and such removal
will not be contrary to the purpose of these regulations.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § X(2), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-103. - Establishment of a tree fund.
There is hereby created a city tree fund for the purpose of establishing city trees in public areas in lieu of
compliance with requirements for commercial, industrial and multifamily development. The city will adopt and
publish a fee schedule for:
(1)
The bond and for contributions to the city tree fund in lieu of compliance;
(2)
The fee per linear front foot in the subdivision; and
(3)
A tree quality point index.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § X(3), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-104. - Appeals and variances.
(a)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
274/393
Appeals procedures. Appeals from the decisions of the administrator or requests for variances from the
provisions of this chapter shall be made to the city council on the forms provided for such purpose by the
administrator. All such appeals or requests shall be heard at a time consistent with the established procedure for
placing items on the agenda of the city council.
(b)
Conditions for granting variances from this chapter. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief.
(c)
Variance criteria. Variances shall only be granted upon:
(1)
A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2)
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
(3)
A determination that the granting of a variance will not adversely impact the intents and purposes of these
regulations.
(d)
Additional restrictions, standards. In consideration of variances and appeals and the purposes set forth for these
regulations, the commission may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be
necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and
use of property in the general neighborhood.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § X(4), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-105. - Penalties for violations.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation
of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance, shall constitute a violation of this
chapter. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as a misdemeanor, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this
chapter shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § X(5), 12-14-1999)
Sec. 119-106. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 99-12-01, § XI, 12-14-1999)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
275/393
Chapter 121 - WATER POLLUTION
Sec. 121-1. - Short title and purpose.
(a)
This chapter shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance."
(b)
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by
the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply
sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which
may be maintained within such zones.
(Ord. No. 98-11-1, § 1 , 11-24-1998)
Sec. 121-2. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
(1)
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitation
reversible illness; or
(2)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, are
disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon.
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves, and other attachments.
(Ord. No. 98-11-1, § 2 , 11-24-1998)
Sec. 121-3. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone.
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as
all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of
which is 100 feet.
(Ord. No. 98-11-1, § 3 , 11-24-1998)
Sec. 121-4. - Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones:
(1)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
276/393
Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum
residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than
one acre; and
(2)
Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary
open land use.
(Ord. No. 98-11-1, § 4 , 11-24-1998)
Sec. 121-5. - Prohibited uses.
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or
not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 121-4:
(1)
Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides;
(2)
Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto;
(3)
Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted
under section 121-4
(4)
Sanitary landfills;
(5)
Hazardous waste disposal sites;
(6)
Stormwater infiltration basins;
(7)
Underground storage tanks;
(8)
Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead.
(Ord. No. 98-11-1, § 5 , 11-24-1998)
Sec. 121-6. - Administration.
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this chapter,
including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties,
shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning chapter for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may
from time to time be amended.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
277/393
(Ord. No. 98-11-1, § 6 , 11-24-1998)
Chapter 123 - WETLANDS
Sec. 123-1. - Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Jurisdictional wetlands means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Jurisdictional wetlands determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344, as amended.
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the
discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in
section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophilic vegetation. The term "wetlands"
generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the city.
Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city as indicated on the wetlands
map; provided, however, that the wetlands map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional
wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local
government action under this chapter does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting
requirements.
(Ord. No. 01-01-02, § 5-100, 1-23-2001)
Sec. 123-2. - Permitting determination.
The county planning and zoning shall compare proposals for land disturbance or development with the
generalized wetlands map and decide whether local permitting should proceed or to be deferred pending a U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers determination. Upon review of project proposals submitted, one of two actions should
result:
(1)
A local permit is issued without requiring jurisdictional wetlands determination by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. This action should be taken when the activity being proposed meets either of the following tests:
a.
It is not the type of activity that would cause the alteration of wetlands; or
b.
The proposed location of the activity is not near or within a protected wetland boundary as shown on the
generalized wetlands map adopted by the local government.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
278/393
(2)
The local permit is deferred pending a jurisdictional wetlands determination by the Corps of Engineers. This
action should be taken when the activity being proposed fails both the above tests (.i.e., it is a type of activity
that would cause alteration of wetlands, and the proposed location of the activity is near or within a wetland
boundary.) In this case, the local permit is issued only after a letter of permission or section 404 permit is
obtained from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
(Ord. No. 01-01-02, § 5-101, 1-23-2001)
Appendix A - ZONING
FOOTNOTE(S):
(11) Editor's note— The zoning ordinance was adopted on July 23, 1975. It is set out herein as it appears in the
pamphlet, and as amended. Amendatory enactments are cited in parentheses following amended provisions.
Missing section numbers and captions have been inserted in brackets by the editor.
ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTION AND ENACTMENT
Sec. 1.1. - Title.
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of Liberty County, Georgia."
Sec. 1.2. - Enactment.
Whereas the board of commissioners of Liberty County has acted pursuant to the authority as amended by the
regular 1973 session of the General Assembly of Georgia, the following ordinance to be known as the "Zoning
Ordinance of Liberty County, Georgia," is hereby adopted and ordained effective the twenty-third day of July,
1975. As part of this ordinance so enacted into law is the "Official Zoning Map of Liberty County," said map
being identified by the inscription, "Zoning Map of Liberty County" adopted on the twenty-third day of July,
1975; and signed by the clerk of the board of commissioners.
Sec. 1.3. - Purposes.
The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth are made in accordance with the comprehensive land use
plan of Liberty County, with consideration for the character of the county, its various parts and structures, and in
order to promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the county, and
of the public generally. The danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property or
other dangers. The ordinance is also intended to support the following community development objectives:
Appearance. To improve the appearance and utility of the land and structures in the county and to control the
filling of flood plains, misuses of marshlands and stream banks, use of signs, and screening of junkyards and
other areas of bad appearance.
Education. To help maintain public and private school systems, capable of maximizing a student's potential,
including large administrative districts with diversified educational opportunities. To better educate people of all
ages, races, incomes, mental capabilities and physical handicaps.
Transportation. To create an integrated transportation system, by using public transportation to its maximum
effectiveness, and integrating it with private transportation, and to prepare and obtain acceptance of a continuing
transportation system for the county, and particularly to assist low income groups and elderly citizens in
obtaining better transportation to jobs and shopping areas.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
279/393
Recreation and tourism. Provide sufficient recreation facilities, particularly at the community level, and promote
tourism to the greatest extent possible.
Pollution. Eliminate or reduce major sources of pollution.
Flooding. To provide additional flood protection for critical areas, and to discharge development in flood prone
areas that would be damaged by flooding.
Housing. To provide an adequate supply of safe and sanitary housing in a decent environment for all income
groups, regardless of race, color or background, including the rehabilitation of existing structures.
Crime prevention. To reduce the incidence of crime to the extent possible.
Economics. To increase the tax base by providing land for commercial and industrial growth where feasible, and
minimize the conflict between industrial and commercial growth and residential or public development.
Utilities. To promote the provision of public and private utilities.
Land Use and Comprehensive Plans. To use the zoning ordinance as a tool to help implement the land use and
comprehensive plans.
Health. To improve the health of the residents of the county by controlling pollution, separating new residences
for adequate light, sun and air, and providing adequate treatment facilities at the lowest possible cost.
Compliance. Except as hereinafter provided, no land, building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used, and
no building or part thereof or other structure shall be located, erected, reconstructed, extended, enlarged,
converted, altered or moved except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it
is located, and in conformity with all duly ordained ordinances, resolutions and subdivision regulations of the
county. No yard space or minimum area required for a building or use shall be considered as any part of the yard
space or minimum area for another building or use.
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS
Sec. 2.0. - Schedule.
For the purpose of the administration and enforcement of this ordinance, and unless otherwise stated in this
ordinance, the following words shall have a meaning as indicated herein. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense; words used in the singular number shall include the plural number; words used in the
plural number shall include the singular number; the word "shall" is mandatory, not directory.
2.1.
Accessory building. A secondary residence, garage, or other building or structure subordinated to and not
forming an integral part of the main or principal building on a lot or parcel but pertaining to the use of the main
building.
2.2.
Advertising signs. A surface whereon advertising material is set in public view, including reference to any use of
premises whereon it is displayed or posted.
2.3.
Alley. A narrow thoroughfare dedicated or used for public passageway up to twenty (20) feet in width, which
usually abuts the rear of the premises, or upon which service entrances or buildings abut, and which is not
generally used as a thoroughfare by both pedestrians and vehicles, which is not used for general traffic, and
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
280/393
which is not otherwise officially designated as a street. A way which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
2.4.
Alterations. Any change in the arrangement of a building, including any work affecting the structural parts of a
building; or an enlargement; or any change in writing, plumbing, heating, or cooling system; and includes the
words "to alter" and "alter."
2.5.
Apartment building. A building which is used or intended to be used as a home or residence for more than two
(2) families living in separate quarters.
2.6.
Automotive sales and services. The sale or storage of new or used automobiles, including paint and body repair
shops.
2.7.
Deleted.
2.8.
Boat house. A house or shed for sheltering one or more boats.
2.9.
Boundary of district. The centerline of a street or right-of-way or the centerline of an alleyway between the rear
or side property lines, or, where no alley or passageway exists, the rear or side property lines of all lots bordering
on any zoning district limits or any zoning district boundary shown on the maps adopted by section 4.2
2.10.
Buildable area. That portion of any lot which may be used or built upon in accordance with the regulations
governing the given zoning district within which the particular lot is located, once the various front, side and rear
yard requirements required for the district have been subtracted from the total lot area.
2.11.
Building. A building is any structure having a roof entirely separated from any other structure by space or by
walls, having no communicating doors or windows or any similar opening, and being erected for the purpose of
providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind, and having a foundation to
which it is anchored.
2.12.
Building height. The height of a building with a gabled or hip roof shall be the vertical distance measured from
the average elevation of the finished building site to the top of the roof of the uppermost story or to the deck line
of a mansard roof. The height of a building with a flat or nearly flat roof, less than seven (7) degrees from the
horizontal, shall be measured from the footing as stated above to the highest point of the roof.
2.13.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
281/393
Building line. A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way and nearest
extreme projection of a building (including all areas covered by any vertical projections to the ground or
overhang, walls, roof, or any other part of the structure).
2.14.
Building site. The ground area of a building or buildings together with all open spaces surrounded by said
building or buildings.
2.15.
Building and zoning inspector. Any person hired by the local governing authority to inspect, determine
compliance with, and render minor decisions concerning the compliance of structures and lots within a
municipality, to the ordinances of that municipality.
2.16.
Camper. A motor home, tent, trailer, or other self-contained vehicle designed for recreational purposes.
2.17.
Care homes. Includes rest and nursing homes, convalescent homes and boarding homes for the aged; established
to render nursing care for chronic or convalescent patients, but excludes facilities for care of active or violent
patients such as feebleminded or mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics, senile psychotics, or drug addicts.
2.18.
Centerline, highway. The line running parallel with the highway right-of-way which is half-way the distance
between the extreme edges of the official right-of-way width as shown on map approved by the county tax
assessor.
2.19.
Certified survey. A survey, sketch, plat, map, or other exhibit is said to be certified when a written statement
regarding its accuracy or conformity to specified standards is signed by the specified professional engineer,
registered surveyor, architect, or other legally recognized person.
2.20.
Church. A legally approved structure and its accessory buildings used and approved on a permanent basis,
primarily for the public worship of God.
2.21.
Club, private. An organization or association of persons for some common purpose, such as, but not necessarily
limited to, a fraternal, social, educational or recreational purpose; but not including clubs organized primarily for
profit or to render a service, which is customarily carried on as a business. Such organizations and associations
must be incorporated under the laws of Georgia as a non-profit corporation and such corporations' major purpose
shall not be for the purpose of serving alcoholic beverages to its members or others. This may not be located on,
or operated by, or in connection with any commercial use.
2.21.a.
Conditional use. Those uses allowed within a district, only after specific requirements are met. The local
governing authority at its discretion may require additional restraints, restrictions, qualifications, or limiting
factors upon a specific use so that it becomes acceptable.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
282/393
2.22.
Density. The number of units or buildings per acre, or the number of people per unit, building, acre or mile, the
quantity of people, structures, or units within a specified area.
2.23.
Depth of lot. The depth of a lot is the depth between its mean front street line and its mean rear line, measured
along the median between the two (2) side lot lines.
2.24.
Dwelling, condominium. A building or series of buildings on the same lot or portions thereof containing more
than one dwelling unit under separate ownership with joint ownership of common open spaces.
2.25.
Dwelling, duplex. A residential building designed for, or used as, the separate homes or residences of two (2)
separate and distinct families, but having the appearance of a single family dwelling house. Each individual unit
in the duplex shall comply with the definition for a one family dwelling.
2.26.
Dwelling, group. A building or portion of a building occupied or intended for occupancy by several unrelated
persons or families, but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons or
families. The term "group dwelling" includes, but is not limited to, the terms "rooming house," "apartment
hotel," "fraternity house" or "sorority house," "YMCA" or "YWCA." A hotel, motel, or tourist home shall not be
deemed to be a group dwelling as herein defined.
2.27.
Dwelling, one-family. A private residential building used or intended to be used as a home or residence in which
all living rooms are accessible to each other from within the building, and in which the use and management of
all sleeping quarters, all appliances for sanitation, cooking, ventilating, heating, cooling, or lighting are designed
for the use of one family only on a minimum of a single lot.
2.28.
Engineer. Any person having an acceptable degree from a recognized institution of higher learning who is
capable of determining the correct manner in which to construct roads, streets, highways, water and sewerage
systems, drainage system, structures or other technical related areas. The person to be a municipal engineer must
be recognized by the State of Georgia as one.
2.29.
Estate. Any residential site comprising five (5) acres or more shall come within the meaning of the word "estate."
2.30.
Family. One person, or a group of two (2) or more persons living together, and inter-related by bond or
consanguinity, marriage, or legal adoption occupying a dwelling unit designed as a single family unit, with a
single set of kitchen facilities. The persons thus constituting a family may also include gratuitous guests and
domestic servants.
2.31.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
283/393
Flood prone areas. That land adjacent to a creek, stream, river, channel, canal or other body of water that is
designated as a floodplain or flood prone area by a governmental agency.
2.32.
Floor area. The sum of the gross floor area for each of the several stories under roof, measured from the interior
limits or faces of a building or structure.
2.33.
Floor area ratio. Floor area of building or buildings on any lot divided by the area of the lot.
2.34.
Frontage. The distance or width or a parcel of land abutting a public right-of-way and as measured upon such
right-of-way.
2.35.
Garage, community. A structure or series of structures under one roof, and under one ownership, for the storage
of vehicles by three (3) or more owners or occupants of property in the vicinity where said structure has no
public shop or mechanical services in connection therewith.
2.36.
Garage, private. A structure for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal building, situated on the
same lot as the principal building for the storage of motor vehicles with no facilities for mechanical service.
2.37.
Garage, public. A structure for the storage, care, repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles, or a structure containing
a public shop, or where automobile mechanical service is provided.
2.38.
Gas station. A structure designated or used for the retail sale or supply of fuel, lubricants, air, water, and other
operating commodities for motor vehicles and including the customary spacing and facilities for the installation
of such commodities on, or in, such vehicles, but not including space or facilities for the storage, painting, repair,
refinishing, body work, or other servicing of motor vehicles.
2.39.
Governing authority. The mayor and council of a city or town or the board of commissioners of the county in
which that city or town is located.
2.40.
Highway. Any public thoroughfare of paving twenty-two (22) feet or wider including streets, which affords
primary access to abutting property, and any thoroughfare of less width which is not classified as an alley
(street).
2.41.
Hospital. An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients, and medical and surgical care of the
sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities, central service facilities, and
staff offices.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
284/393
2.42.
Hotel. A building occupied as the more or less temporary residence of individuals who are lodged, with or
without meals, and in which there are ten (10) or more sleeping rooms with entrances through a common lobby
or office.
2.43.
House trailer. House trailer or mobile home means any vehicle or similar portable structure which was
constructed with wheels so as to permit its being used as a duly licensable conveyance upon the public street,
whether or not its wheels have been removed, and constructed to permit occupancy as a dwelling.
2.44.
Junk. Old and dilapidated automobiles, trucks, tractors, and other such vehicles and parts thereof, wagons and
other kinds of vehicles and parts thereof, scrap building material, scrap piping, bottles, glass, old iron,
machinery, rags, paper, excelsior, hair, mattresses, beds or bedding, or any other kind of scrap or waste material
which is stored, kept, handled, or displayed within the county limits.
2.45.
Junkyard. Any land or building used for commercial, storage and/or sale of paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap
or discarded materials, or for the dismantling, storage or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in
running condition, or of machinery or parts thereof, but not to be used as a dump.
2.46.
Lot. Parcel of land shown on a recorded plat or on the official county zoning maps, or any piece of land
described by a legally recorded deed.
2.47.
Lot, corner. Any lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersections or intersecting
streets or public highways. If the angle or intersections of the direction lines of two (2) highways is more than
one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, the lot fronting on said intersection is not a corner lot.
2.48.
Lot, interior. Any lot which is not a corner lot that has frontage only on one street other than an alley.
2.49.
Lot lines, front. In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the front lot line is the line separating such lot
from such street. In the case of a corner lot, that part of the lot having the narrowest frontage on any street shall
be considered the front lot line. In the case of any other lot, one such line shall be elected to be the front lot line
for the purpose of this ordinance, provided it is so designated by the building plans which meet the approval of
the building and zoning inspector.
2.50.
Lot lines, rear. The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the
case of a lot pointed at the rear, or any odd-shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be determined by the building and
zoning inspector.
2.51.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
285/393
Lot lines, side. A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line
separating a lot from another lot, or lots, is an interior side lot line.
2.52.
Lot, through. Any lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets or other thoroughfares.
2.53.
Mapped streets. A mapped street is any approved street shown on an official map or the projection of any
existing street through an unsubdivided parcel of land, whether the street is dedicated or in existence or not.
2.54.
Marshland. All land subject to tidal action which is comprised of generally unstable soil materials commonly
known as hard or soft marsh, which in its natural state is vegetated with marsh grass, reeds and similar growth
and is usually characterized by poor load bearing capacity. Marshland lies below an elevation of five and sixtenths (5.6) feet above mean sea level.
2.55.
Manufactured house. A non-self-propelled vehicle or conveyance that is towable and supported on its own
chassis, permanently equipped to travel upon the public highways, that is used, either temporarily or
permanently, as a residence or living quarters. Such unit shall be considered a manufactured house whether or
not the wheels have been removed and whether or not set on jacks, skirts, masonry blocks, or other foundation.
2.55.1.
Manufactured house. A structure or component thereof, designed primarily for residential occupancy which is
wholly or substantially made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities and assembled on a
building site, into a dwelling unit supported on a permanent foundation. Manufactured houses shall meet the
rules of the state board of community affairs, factory built dwelling units (Official Code of Georgia Annotated,
section 8-2-110 et seq.) [O.C.G.A., § 8-2-110 et seq.].
2.56.
Motel or motor hotel. A building or group of two (2) or more buildings designed to provide sleeping
accommodations for transient or overnight guests with no common entrance or lobby. Each building shall
contain a minimum of ten (10) residential units or rooms which generally have direct, private openings to a
street, drive, or patio, etc.
2.57.
Non-conforming lot. Any lot which is smaller than the minimum dimensions, area, or other regulations of the
district in which the lot is located.
2.58.
Non-conforming use. Use of any property or premises in any manner which does not comply with the regulations
provided for the district in which the property or premises is situated, if such use was originally legally
established at the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereof.
2.59.
Parking space. That area required for the parking or storage of one automobile, including necessary aisle or
driveway space providing access thereto.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
286/393
2.60.
Planning commission. An appointed body of people by the local governing authority whose responsibilities
include the guidance of growth and development within the municipality and interpreting of the various
municipal regulatory ordinances.
2.61.
Principal building. The building situated or to be placed nearest the front property line and the use of which
conforms to the primary use permitted by the zone classification in which it is located.
2.62.
Professional services. The conduct of business in any of the following or related categories: law; architecture;
accounting; engineering; medicine; dentistry; optometrics; osteopathy; chiropractics; optician; planning, or
consulting of the nature of the aforestated categories and which do not include outside storage space for business
vehicles or equipment.
2.63.
Public body. Any government or governmental agency of the county, the State of Georgia, or the United States
Government.
2.64.
Public use. Use of any land, water, or buildings by a municipality, public body or board, commission or
authority, county, state or the federal government, or any agency thereof for a public service or purpose.
2.65.
Repairs. Restoration of portions of a building to its condition as before decay, wear or damage, but not including
alteration of the shape or size of any portion.
2.66.
Residential. The term "residential" or "residence" is applied herein to any lot, plot, parcel, tract, area, or piece of
land and/or any building used exclusively for family dwelling purposes or intended to be used, including
concomitant uses specified herein.
2.67.
Restaurant. A building, room or rooms where food is prepared and served to a group of families, a club, or to the
public and for consumption within the enclosed structure.
2.68.
Right-of-way line. The outside boundaries of a highway right-of-way, whether such right-of-way be established
by usage, dedication or by the official right-of-way.
2.69.
Rooming house. (The terms "rooming house," "boarding house," "tourist home," "cooperative house," and
"lodging house" are used synonymously in this ordinance.) A building, other than a hotel or dormitory, where,
for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, lodging or lodging and meals are provided for
more than three (3) persons not related to the owners of the structure.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
287/393
2.70.
Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms, forming a single habitable unit used for living and sleeping, but
which does not contain cooking or eating facilities.
2.71.
Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, rear or side lines of the lot and the
front, rear or side lines of the building. When two (2) or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior
property line so grouped shall be used in determining offsets. When a lot abuts on a street or road which has a
right-of-way of less than sixty (60) feet, the minimum setback for front, rear, or side yard shall be increased by
the number of feet required to provide the same number of feet from the center of the road or street, as if said
road or street had a right-of-way of sixty (60) feet.
2.72.
Site. An area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded subdivision plat or in a
legally recorded deed.
2.73.
Special exception. A use, specifically designated in this ordinance, that would not be appropriate for location
generally or without restriction throughout a given zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area,
location, or relation to the neighborhood, would, in the opinion of the governing authority, promote the public
health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare.
2.74.
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above
it; or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it.
2.75.
Street. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of
access to abutting properties.
2.76.
Structural alterations. Any change in the shape or size of any portion of a building or of the supporting members
of a building or structure such as walls, columns, beams, arches, girders, floor joists, or roof joists.
2.77.
Surveyor. A person who determines or delineates the form, extent, position, distance or shape of a tract of land
by taking linear and angular measurements, and by applying the principles of geometry and trigonometry.
2.78.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires rigid location on the ground or attachment
to something having a permanent location on the ground; provided, however, that utility poles, fences and walls
(other than building walls) shall not be considered to be structures.
2.79.
Subdivision. "Subdivision" means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land for residential purposes into two (2) or
more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
288/393
building development and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and
includes resubdivision and, where appropriate, to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided;
provided, however, that the following exceptions are included within this definition only for the purpose of
requiring that the local planning commission be informed and have record of such subdivisions:
(a)
The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not
increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the governing authority;
(b)
The division of land into six (6) or less parcels where no new street is involved and the resultant lots are equal to
the standard of the municipality or county in which the division of land is being made.
Plats of such exception shall be received as information by the planning commission which shall indicate such
fact on the plats.
2.80.
Trailer. A non-self-propelled vehicle or conveyance permanently equipped to travel upon the public highways
that provides temporary use as a residence or living quarters or office; serves as a carrier of people, new or used
goods, products or equipment; or is used as a selling, advertising or display device, whether or not the wheels
have been removed and whether or not set on jacks, skirts, masonry blocks, or other foundation.
2.81.
Trash. Cuttings from vegetation, refuse, paper, bottles, and rags.
2.82.
Use. The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or a
building is or may be occupied or maintained.
2.83.
Variance. A modification of the strict terms of this ordinance granted by the governing authority where such
modification will not be contrary to the public interest; and where, owning to conditions peculiar to the property
and not as the result of any action on the part of the property owner, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would
result in unnecessary and undue hardship; and where such modification will not authorize a principal or
accessory use of the property which is not permitted within the zoning district in which the property is located.
2.84.
Vehicle. A conveyance for persons or materials.
2.85.
Waterfront. Any site shall be considered as waterfront property provided any or all of its lot lines abut on or are
contiguous to any body of water including creek, canal, river, or any other body of water, natural or artificial,
including marshland, not including a swimming pool, whether said lot line is front, rear, or side.
2.86.
Yard. An open space on the same lot with a building; said space lies between the building and nearest lot or street
line.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
289/393
2.87.
Yard, front. That area of open space to the front of the platted lot, the area immediately adjacent to the street side
of the lot. If streets bound on two (2) sides of the lot, the narrower portion fronting on a street shall be declared
the front. (See Lot line, front).
2.88.
Yard, rear. That area of open space that is opposite the area delineated as the front. That area of greatest distance
from the street. (See Lot line, rear).
2.89.
Yard, side. That area of open space that is immediately adjacent to the side lot lines. (See Lot line, side).
2.90.
Zoning ordinance. An officially adopted ordinance that regulates the manner, type, size and use to which a piece
of property may be put.
(Mo. of 10-4-1977; Mo. of 6-9-1983; Mo. of 9-6-1983; Mo. of 6-30-1986)
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.1. - Abandoned real property.
3.1.1.
[Public street or alley.] For any public street or alley which is hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the
regulations applicable to each parcel of abutting property shall apply to the centerline property which is
abandoned. In the event abandoned property is not divided at the centerline for abutting properties, the zoning
districts applicable shall apply to such ownership line as determined by virtue of such abandonment.
3.1.2.
[Public property other than streets or alleys.] For any public property other than streets or alleys the regulations
applicable to the zoning classifications which abuts the abandoned property for the greatest number of lineal feet
shall apply to the entire property.
Sec. 3.2. - Abandoned vehicles.
Within all zoning districts except where specifically authorized, all vehicles which are inoperative and/or
unlicensed shall not be abandoned in the public right-of-way or on private property in excess of thirty (30) days
except within a completely enclosed garage, unless permission is granted upon application to the governing
authority.
(Mo. of 3-2-1982)
Sec. 3.3. - Access control.
In order to promote the safety of motorists and the pedestrian and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict by
reducing the magnitude of and the number of points of contact, the following regulations shall apply:
3.3.1.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
290/393
Appoint of access, that is, a driveway or other opening for vehicles onto a public street, shall not exceed twentyfive (25) feet in width, except as otherwise provided in this section.
3.3.2.
The maximum number of points of access permitted onto any one street shall be as follows:
Lot Width Abutting Street Number of Points of Access
Less than 65 feet 1
65 feet to 200 feet 2
Greater than 200 feet 2, plus 1 for each additional 200
feet or fraction thereof.
3.3.3.
In lieu of any two (2) openings permitted on any one street, there may be permitted a single point of access up to
thirty-five (35) feet in width. However, service stations shall be permitted two (2) openings, not to exceed thirtyfive (35) feet each in width along any abutting public street providing that such property abuts such street for a
distance of not less than one hundred twenty (120) feet.
3.3.4.
There shall be a minimum distance of twelve (12) feet between any two (2) openings onto the same street.
3.3.5.
No point of access shall be allowed within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of any
public street.
3.3.6.
No curbs shall be cut or altered and no point of access or opening for vehicles onto a public street shall be
established without a permit issued by the local governing authority under the supervision of the appropriate
engineer.
Sec. 3.4. - Accessory buildings in residential districts.
No accessory building in Residential districts shall be erected in any required court or any yard other than a rear
yard, except as provided hereafter. An accessory building may be erected as part of a principal building or if at
least six (6) feet therefrom, may be connected thereto by a breezeway or similar structure, provided all yard
requirements of this ordinance for a principal building are complied with.
3.4.1.
Corner lots in agricultural and residential district. Any Agricultural or Residential district, where a corner lot
adjoins in the rear a lot fronting on the side street, no part of any accessory building on such corner lot within
twenty-five (25) feet of the common lot line shall be nearer a side road lot line than the least depth of the front
yard required along such side street for a dwelling on such lot, and in no case shall any part of such accessory
building be nearer to the side road lot line than the least width of the side yard required for the principal building
to which it is accessory.
3.4.2.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
291/393
Setbacks for accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be a distance at least ten (10) feet from alley lines,
and at least ten (10) feet from lot lines of adjoining lots in a residential district.
Sec. 3.5. - Buildings on through lots.
Where a lot extends through from one street to another, the setback requirement for each such street shall be
complied with and any building shall have dual facing. No accessory building or other structure shall be placed
on through lots if said structures would conflict with other building values or uses on the same street. On lots
having frontage on more than two (2) streets, the minimum front yard shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance on at least two (2) of the street frontages.
Sec. 3.6. - Churches and schools.
Public schools shall be subject to the regulations in this ordinance set forth in section 5.3.
3.6.1.
Private schools, churches and religious institutions shall be permitted in agricultural, single-family residential
districts, agricultural residential districts, multi-family residential districts, general commercial, and
neighborhood commercial districts provided that the following requirements are complied with:
3.6.1.1.
Off-street parking shall be provided as set forth in article III, section 29.
3.6.1.2.
The principal building and accessory buildings shall comply with the yard and setback requirements of the
district in which it is located; and in no case less than the minimum requirements set forth in the district.
3.6.2.
Private schools, churches and religious institutions may be permitted in other districts only after
recommendations of the planning commission, which shall hold a public hearing on such request, see article VII,
section 2
Sec. 3.7. - Cemeteries, mausoleums, crematories.
No premises shall be used or occupied for the purpose of a cemetery, mausoleum, or crematory in any district
excepting in multi-family residential, single-family residential, agricultural residential, and agricultural districts,
and then only upon approval after public hearing. No land for which a plat has not been recorded shall be used
for any burials. The dead shall not be buried or placed closer than ten (10) feet to any highway right-of-way, nor
closer than ten (10) feet to any other property line. The minimum size for a cemetery shall be one acre.
(Mo. of 3-2-1982)
Sec. 3.8. - Conversion of dwellings.
The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any dwelling so as to accommodate an
increased number of dwelling units or families, shall be permitted only within a district in which a new building
for similar occupancy would be permitted under this ordinance, and only when the resulting occupancy will
comply with the requirements governing new construction in such district with respect to minimum lot size, lot
area per dwelling unit, percentage of lot coverage, dimensions of yards and other open spaces, and off-street
parking. Each conversion shall be subject also to such further requirements as may be specified hereinafter
within the article applying to such district.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
292/393
Sec. 3.9. - Deed restrictions.
These regulations shall not affect any deed restrictions or restrictive covenants recorded with any deed, plat, or
other legal document relating to the use or lot and building requirements.
Sec. 3.10. - Excavation of sand, gravel, or other material (for industrial or commercial use).
Excavation shall be considered a temporary use, and shall be permitted only in Agricultural districts and when
required, excavations shall conform to criteria as outlined in the county soil erosion and sedimentation control
ordinance. The extent of excavation shall not be nearer than one hundred (100) feet to any school, church,
dwelling, or highway.
(Mo. of 10-4-1977)
Sec. 3.11. - Existing uses.
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be deemed or construed to prohibit a continuation of the particular
lawful use or uses of any land, building, structure, improvement or premises legally existing in the respective
districts at the time this ordinance became effective; provided, however, that if any such existing lawful uses
change to a different use after the date of the adoption of this ordinance, such different use shall conform to the
provisions of this ordinance regulating the particular district in which said premises is situated. If any legally
existing use or occupancy of a building or premises conflicts with any requirement of this ordinance or any of its
amendments, such building shall not be moved, structurally altered or added to except after a public hearing.
All future buildings, structures, repairs, alterations or other improvements shall comply with all district
requirements contained herein, and such structural provisions of the building code and other regulations as have
been incorporated herein and made a part hereof, including any building on which construction had been
suspended at the time this ordinance was adopted and any building for which foundations were not completed at
said time.
No nonconforming building or structure shall be extended or enlarged except when authorized by the Liberty
County Joint Planning Commission which may permit one enlargement or extension up to twenty-five (25)
percent of the floor area of the structure as it existed at the time of passage of this ordinance.
(Mo. of 10-4-1977)
Sec. 3.12. - Dilapidated buildings.
Dilapidated and/or burned out buildings or mobile homes shall be removed from the property on which they are
located within ninety (90) days after notice by the joint planning commission.
Sec. 3.13. - Garbage disposal.
Garbage or other refuse shall be deposited only in approved garbage cans or in approved garbage disposal areas.
Sec. 3.14. - Group housing.
Group housing developments, two (2) single or multiple family dwellings to be constructed in a plot of ground
under single ownership of one acre or more, not subdivided into the customary streets and lots and which shall
not be so subdivided, may be developed in any multi-family district provided that:
3.14.1.
Maximum percent of lot coverage shall not exceed that which is required for the districts in which the project is
located.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
293/393
3.14.2.
Height limits, front, side, or rear yard requirements shall be met in accordance with the district in which such
group housing is permitted.
Sec. 3.15. - Home occupations.
A.
Intent and purpose. Certain occupational uses termed "home occupations" are allowed in dwelling units on the
basis that such uses are incidental to the use of the premises as a residence. In this regard, such home occupations
shall be subject to special regulations to ensure that the same will not be a detriment to the character and
livability of the surrounding neighborhood. The regulations ensure that the accessory home occupation remains
subordinate to the residential use and the residential viability of the dwelling is maintained. The regulations
recognize that many types of jobs can be done in a home with little or no effect on the surrounding neighborhood
and, as such, may be permitted provided such uses:
1.
Are incidental to the use of the premises as a residence;
2.
Are conducted within the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner;
3.
Are compatible with residential uses;
4.
Are limited in extent and do not detract from the residential character of the neighborhood.
B.
Definition of accessory home occupations. There are two (2) types of home occupations, type A and type B.
Permit requirements and uses allowed in each type vary and are allowed only if they comply with all of the
requirements of this ordinance. Deviation from any standard requires a variance approval from the board of
commissioners.
1.
In type A home occupations residents use their home as a place of work, home office or business telephone or
mailing address. Employees or customers are prohibited from coming to the site, and there is no visible
indication of commercial activity. By way of illustration only, examples include artists, crafts people, writers and
consultants. Type A home occupations may be approved administratively by the zoning administrator or his
designee.
2.
In type B home occupations the resident uses their home for work which requires or results in either employees
or customers coming to the site on an infrequent basis. Examples are counseling, tutoring, family daycare, and
single-chair hair cutting and styling. Type B home occupations must obtain a conditional use permit from the
board of commissioners due to their greater possible impact on the surrounding neighborhood as a result of
individuals and visitors from outside the neighborhood coming to the property.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
294/393
C.
General provisions and prohibited uses. All home occupations shall meet the following:
1.
A home occupation shall be incidental and accessory to the use of a dwelling as a residence. No more than
twenty (20) percent of the floor space of the dwelling unit (including attached garages) may be used for the home
occupation.
2.
There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation or alteration of the residence and/or accessory
buildings to accommodate the home occupation. Internal or external changes which will make the dwelling
appear less residential in nature or function are prohibited. Examples of such prohibited alterations include
construction of parking lots, paving of required setbacks, or adding commercial-like exterior lighting.
3.
There shall be no outside operations or exterior storage of inventory, equipment, or materials to be used in
conjunction with a home occupation.
4.
Off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the home
occupation nor park their personal vehicles at the location.
5.
No more than one (1) vehicle associated with the home occupation (no larger than a standard van or pick-up
truck and with minimal commercial markings as approved by the zoning administrator) may be parked at the
site. Such vehicle is limited to one-ton carrying capacity and must be used exclusively by the resident and parked
on a valid improved surface constructed of materials common in conventional residential development (e.g.,
concrete, pavers, etc.) and which is otherwise compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
6.
No use or activity may create an offensive noise, dust, glare, vibration, smoke, smell, electrical interference or
any fire hazard, unsightly or unhealthful condition, or other nuisance or disturbance.
7.
All home occupations shall be subject to periodic inspections by the department of planning and zoning.
8.
Any type of repair or assembly of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engines (such as, autos,
motorcycles, marine engines, lawn mowers, chain saws, and other small engines) or of large appliances (such as,
washing machines, dryers, and refrigerators) or any other work related to automobiles and their parts is
prohibited.
9.
Accessory home occupations may not serve as headquarters or dispatch centers where employees come to the
site and are dispatched to other locations.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
295/393
D.
Specific criteria for Type A home occupations. In addition to the general criteria established in subsection C, type
A home occupations are subject to the following restrictions:
1.
No clients, nonresident employees or customers are allowed on the premises.
2.
Pickups from and deliveries to the site in regard to the business shall be restricted to vehicles which have no
more than two (2) axles and shall be restricted to no more than two (2) pickups or deliveries per day between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
3.
No signage regarding the home occupation is permitted on the property.
4.
No advertisement shall be placed in any media (including flyers soliciting business) containing the address of the
property.
5.
Retail sales are prohibited.
E.
Specific criteria for Type B home occupations. In addition to the general criteria established in subsection C, type
B home occupations are subject to the following restrictions:
1.
A conditional use permit must be obtained from the board of commissioners following a public hearing. The
board of commissioners shall consider the desires of the immediate neighborhood, the nature of the proposed
business, the availability of parking, traffic generation and any other issue that may detract from the residential
character of the area and property values. The public hearing shall follow the same procedures as set forth in
section 7.3 and article IX of the zoning ordinance of Liberty County, Georgia.
2.
No type B home occupation may be established in districts zoned for multifamily residential purposes or zoned
R-4.
3.
Two (2) nonresident employees are allowed with a type B home occupation provided no customers come to the
site and adequate parking is provided on-site. Home occupations which have customers coming to the site are not
allowed to have nonresident employees (defined as an employee, business partner, co-owner, or other person
affiliated with the home occupation, who does not live at the site, but who visits the site as part of the home
occupation.
4.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
296/393
Retail sales of goods must be entirely accessory to any permitted services provided on the site (such as hair care
products sold as an accessory to hair cutting); except that the sale of garden produce grown on the premises
within A-1 or AR-1 zoning districts shall be permitted in accordance with this ordinance, provided that this
exception shall not extend to allow the operation of a commercial greenhouse or nursery or the existence of
stands or booths for display of such produce.
5.
No more than one (1) type B home occupation per dwelling is permitted.
6.
Customers may visit the site only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Unless otherwise specifically
approved by the board of commissioners, no more than two (2) customers or other business visitors shall be
permitted at any one (1) time at the residence.
7.
Unless otherwise specifically approved by the board of commissioners, no signage shall be permitted. if
specifically approved by the board of commissioners, the home occupation is permitted one (1) sign only
according to the following criteria:
a)
Signs shall be mounted against the wall of the principal building, and unless otherwise indicated by the board of
commissioners shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area;
b)
Signs may not be illuminated in any fashion;
c)
No detached sign may exceed four (4) feet in height; and
d)
All signs, including shape, color and materials must be such as not to detract from the residential character of the
neighborhood, and shall be approved by the zoning administrator or his designee prior to installation.
F.
[Additional requirements.] The foregoing requirements for home occupation shall be in addition to those
requirements for business licenses generally, and any violation of these requirements shall be grounds for denial,
suspension or revocation of the subject business license, and vice versa. Upon any violation of this ordinance,
the home occupation may be suspended, denied or terminated as with business licenses generally.
G.
[Renewal application.] All persons wishing to renew their home occupation from the previous year shall make
application for such renewal at the same time as provided for renewals of business licenses generally on such
forms as may be prepared by the zoning administrator. Notwithstanding any terminology used in this section or
any other provision herein to the contrary, the granting of a home occupation for one (1) year shall in no way
vest any rights or privileges whatsoever to any renewal or subsequent permit, and such person must satisfy in full
the requirements for such business license established by ordinance at the time of such renewal; provided,
however, that if there is no change in the home occupation and the operations connected thereto, the zoning
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
297/393
administrator shall be empowered to grant any such application for renewal without further consideration,
whether type A or type B.
(Ord. of 9-2-2003)
Sec. 3.16. - Junkyards.
3.16.1.
All junkyards shall be completely screened from roads or developed areas with a solid fence or wall a minimum
of six (6) feet, maintained in good condition as determined by the local governing authority, and painted except
for masonry construction, or with suitable plantings.
3.16.2.
No operations shall be conducted which shall cause a general nuisance or endanger the public health.
3.16.3.
All existing junkyards shall have complied with these requirements within one year of the date of this ordinance,
or shall then have terminated their operation.
Sec. 3.17. - Land and water fills, dredging, excavations and mining.
No person shall engage in the filling of land or water areas, dredging, the excavation of land or removal of earth
and no mining operation shall be undertaken without application to the planning commission which shall refer
and recommend approval or rejection to the governing authority. All applications for permits for any activities
covered by this section shall be referred to the planning commission for its recommendation.
Sec. 3.18. - Land subject to flooding.
No new construction or substantial improvement of residential structures or location of a mobile home shall be
permitted in a flood hazard area, unless the lowest floor (including basement) is elevated to or above the level of
the one hundred-year flood.
Sec. 3.19. - Living units in zones other than residential.
Dwellings shall not be permitted in any business or industrial zone as a principal use. However, living units may
be established within the principal building in a business or industrial use; provided that such living units within
any general commercial or neighborhood commercial district shall have direct access to an abutting street. In the
general commercial or neighborhood commercial districts, living units shall be permitted as accessory to the
permitted use, and single-family dwellings as accessory uses shall be permitted on existing lots of record
including other uses permitted on the same lot.
Sec. 3.20. - Minimum living area.
No single or multiple-family living unit shall be constructed with a total living area of less than five hundred
twenty-five (525) square feet. Provided, however, that a special exception to the minimum living area
requirements may be granted, if it is established that the granting of such exception will not adversely affect the
interest of the general public or the character of the surrounding neighborhood. Application for any such special
exception shall be made to the planning commission.
The planning commission shall forward its recommendations to the governing authority for its action. The
planning commission may require the submission of plans in connection with such applications, showing the
location and type of construction proposed, and may impose such additional requirements as a condition of the
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
298/393
granting of the request as it deems reasonable and appropriate. (This section shall not apply to mobile homes
meeting all other requirements of this ordinance.)
(Mo. of 10-4-1977)
Sec. 3.21. - Mobile homes, trailers, mobile home parks and trailer parks.
No trailer or mobile home shall be parked outside of a trailer or mobile home park, unless specifically permitted
to provide living quarters or space for the conduct of business, except that it may be used temporarily for office
purposes during the construction of a principal building or a road, on the issuance of a temporary permit by the
zoning officer, except as permitted below.
Except for trailers offered for sale on trailer sales lots, the parking of a trailer, trailer coach or mobile home
outside of a permitted area in any district for forty-nine (49) hours or more, shall be prohibited. Some utility
trailers are excluded from this provision.
No new mobile home park, addition or substantial improvement to an existing mobile home park, or location of
a mobile home not in a mobile home park in a flood hazard area will be permitted until all criteria of Federal
Flood Control Regulations 1910.3(c)9 are met. In location of new mobile homes in now existing mobile home
parks in flood hazard areas, Regulation 1910.3(c)10 of Federal Flood Control Regulations* must be complied
with.
Camping and recreational equipment. Any owner of camping and recreational equipment, including but not
limited to travel trailers, pick-up coaches, motorized homes and boat trailers may park or store such equipment
on private residential property subject to the following conditions:
3.21.1.
Such parked or stored camping and recreational equipment shall never be occupied or used for living, sleeping or
house-keeping purposes.
3.21.2.
If the camping or recreational equipment is parked or stored outside of a building, it shall be parked or stored, if
possible to the rear of the front building line of the lot.
3.21.3.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 3.21.2 above, camping and recreation equipment may be parked
anywhere on the premises while actually being loaded or unloaded.
(Mo. of 10-4-1977)
Sec. 3.22. - Moving of buildings.
Whenever a building is moved from any location to a site within the county, the building shall immediately be
made to conform to all provisions of the building, plumbing and electrical codes, if any, and zoning regulations.
The owner causing the building to be moved shall secure a building permit from the joint planning commission.
(Mo. of 10-4-1977)
Sec. 3.23. - Non-conforming buildings or structures.
Any lawful use of any dwelling, building, or structure existing at the effective date of this ordinance may be
continued, even though such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are made,
a non-conforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of a more restricted
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
299/393
classification. Whenever a non-conforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use,
such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use. No non-conforming building or structure shall be
extended, or enlarged except when authorized by the planning commission which may permit one enlargement
or extension up to twenty-five (25) per cent of the floor area of the structure as it existed at the time of passage of
this ordinance.
Whenever the use of a building shall become nonconforming through a change in the zoning ordinance or in the
district boundaries, such use may be continued, and if no structural alterations are made, may be changed to
another non-conforming use of the same or of a more restricted classification.
A non-conforming use of a building or portion thereof which is hereafter discontinued for a continuous period of
six (6) months shall not again be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such
building is located.
A non-conforming building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or the public enemy to the
extent of more than sixty (60) per cent of its reproduction value at the time of damage, shall not be restored
except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. When damage is less than sixty
(60) per cent of its reproduction value, a non-conforming building may be repaired or reconstructed, and used as
before the time of damage, provided such repairs or reconstruction are completed within one year of such
damage.
Non-conforming trailers or mobile homes located on a lot in any district when once removed shall not be
relocated on such lot and shall not be replaced with another trailer or mobile home.
(Mo. of 10-4-1977)
Sec. 3.24. - Non-conforming lot.
3.24.1.
Remedies. Where two (2) or more nonconforming lots with continuous frontage are under the same ownership or
where a non-conforming lot has a continuous frontage with a larger tract under the same ownership, such lot or
lots shall be combined to form one or more building sites meeting the lot requirements of the district in which
they are located.
3.24.2.
Dwellings on non-conforming lots. A building permit may be issued for a single-family dwelling on any nonconforming lot excluding sub-standard lots, provided that the remedies set forth in this section cannot be
complied with and provided that the regulations of the district in which the lot is located are met.
3.24.3.
Non-conforming uses of land. The nonconforming use of land not involving any principal building or structure
existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be continued for a period of not more than three (3) years;
provided, however, that no such non-conforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended either on
the same or adjoining property. If such non-conforming use of land or any portion thereof is discontinued or
changed, any future use of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
3.24.4.
Dwellings on sub-standard lots. The governing authority may authorize the issuance of a building permit for a
single-family dwelling for a sub-standard lot only after it has been determined that remedies as set forth in this
section cannot be complied with. The governing authority may also grant such variances on lot and building
requirements in cases of hardship, if conditions detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare are not
caused.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
300/393
Sec. 3.25. - Non-conforming use of buildings and structures.
Use of any building or structure not in conformance with these regulations pertaining to uses permitted on the
effective date of this ordinance; may not be:
3.25.1.
Changed to another non-conforming use except where it is determined by the governing authority that the
design, construction, and character of the building is unsuitable for uses permitted in the district in which such
non-conforming use is situated. The governing authority shall hold a public hearing, as set forth in article VII,
section 2 of this ordinance in order to determine the question of suitability for uses permitted in the district in
which such building is located.
3.25.2.
Re-established after discontinuance for six (6) months except where it is determined by the governing authority
that the design, construction, and character of the building is unsuitable for uses permitted in the district in which
such non-conforming use is situated. The governing authority shall hold a public hearing, as set forth in article
VII, section 2 of this ordinance, in order to determine the question of suitability for uses permitted in the district
in which such building is located.
3.25.3.
Extended, enlarged, or expanded except when authorized by the governing authority which may permit one
enlargement or extension up to twenty-five (25) per cent of the floor area of the structure as it existed at the time
of passage of this ordinance.
Sec. 3.26. - Nursing homes.
Nursing homes shall include convalescent homes, homes for the aged, and such other activities designed to take
care of the aged or persons unable to care for themselves without supervision or assistance. Nursing homes shall
be permitted only with governing authority approval in any multi-family residential district. Such uses shall
comply with all regulations applicable to the district. Such uses shall comply with the off-street parking
requirements set forth in this article. In addition, such uses shall meet the minimum requirements as set forth by
state or federal agencies regulating such activities and shall, upon application, for either building permit or
occupancy certificate, provide certificates indicating approval by such state and federal agencies.
Sec. 3.27. - Obstruction to vision at road intersections.
In order to minimize accidents caused by obstruction to vision at road intersections, the following regulations
shall apply in all districts:
3.27.1.
Within the area formed by the rights-of-way lines of intersecting roads and a straight line connecting points on
such rights-of-way lines, at a distance of twenty (20) feet form their points of intersection there shall be a clear
space with no obstruction to vision between the height of thirty (30) inches and a height of ten (10) feet above
the average grade of each road as measured at the centerline thereof.
3.27.2.
Requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall.
3.27.3
Trees shall be permitted in the clear space provided that foliage is cut away within the prescribed height.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
301/393
Sec. 3.28. - Offensive color, designs, smoke, noise, etc.
Nothing shall be allowed on the premises in any district which would in any way be offensive or obnoxious by
reason of the emission of odors, liquids, gas, dust, smoke, vibration, or noise; nor shall anything be placed,
constructed, or maintained that will in any way constitute an eye-sore or nuisance to adjacent property owners,
residents, or to the community. All uses must satisfactorily comply with the requirements of the state department
of natural resources as required by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Sec. 3.29. - Off-street parking and loading.
In all districts off-street parking facilities shall be provided and properly maintained, as set forth in this section
for any building which is hereafter erected, enlarged or increased in capacity. Such facilities shall be made
available for public use:
3.29.1.
Size and access. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square
feet exclusive of access drives or aisles and be in unusable shape and condition, except in the case of dwellings
and shall have no parking area containing less than three (3) spaces. There shall be adequate ingress and egress
to all parking spaces. Where a lot does not abut on public or private alley or easement of access, there shall be
provided an access drive leading to the parking or storage areas or loading spaces. Such access drive shall be not
less than ten (10) feet in width in the case of a dwelling, and not less than twenty (20) feet in width in all other
cases.
Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to several well-defined locations, and in no case shall there be
unrestricted access along the length of a street or alley.
3.29.2.
Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking spaces required is set forth in the following
table. Where the use of the premises is not specifically mentioned, requirements for similar uses shall apply.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Automatic laundry 1 for each laundry machine
Automobile sales and service garage 1 for each 400 sq. ft. floor area
Banks/professional offices 1 for each 300 sq. ft. floor area
Bowling alleys 4 for each alley
Churches, temples, or places of worship, funeral
homes, schools, public buildings, theaters, auditoriums,
areas and places of assembly, private clubs, community
buildings, social halls, and lodges
1 for each 4 seats of maximum seating capacity in
principal assembly area or 1 for each 17 classroom
seats, whichever is greater.
Country clubs, golf clubs, gun clubs, tennis clubs and
organizations designed to provide outdoor sporting or
recreational activities
1 for each 5 members
Dental offices 2 for each dentist
Driving ranges and golf courses 2 for each tee
Dwellings, single-family 2 for each unit
Food store, supermarket 1 for each 200 sq. ft. floor area
Funeral homes, mortuaries 20 for each parlor
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
302/393
Furniture, appliance stores 1 for each 200 sq. ft. floor area
Hospitals, sanitariums, and nursing homes 1 for each 2 patient beds
Hotels and motels 1 for each guest room plus 1 for each 3 employees
Manufacturing, industrial plant, research laboratory,
bottling plants
1 for each 2 employees on largest shift plus 1 for each
company vehicle
Manufacturing and industrial concerns with retail
business on premises
1 for each 2 employees on largest shift plus 1 for each
150 sq. ft. devoted to sales or service
Medical offices 10 for each doctor
Restaurants, beer parlors, nightclubs 1 for each 2.5 seats plus
1 for each 3 employees
Retail stores and shops 1 for each 300 sq. ft. floor area
Rooming houses, boarding houses, dormitories,
fraternities and sororities
1 for each 2 beds
Service station 2 for each pump
Sports arenas, auditoriums, theaters, assembly halls 1 for each 3.5 seats
Trailer or monument sales or auctions 1 for each 2,500 sq. ft. of lot area
Wholesale and warehouse concerns 1 for each 2 employees, plus 1 for each company
vehicle, plus 1 for each 50 sq. ft. of retail sales or
service
3.29.3.
Location of off-street parking spaces.
3.29.3.1.
Such parking space as required in this section shall in no part exist upon and no portion of any vehicle shall overhang the right-of-way of any public road, street, alley, or walkway. There shall be no off-street parking in the
front yards of residential districts except as normally exists in driveways.
3.29.3.2.
The parking spaces for all dwellings shall be located on the same plot as the main building.
3.29.3.3.
Parking spaces for all other uses shall be provided on the same plot with the main building or not more than three
hundred (300) feet distance, as measured along the nearest pedestrian walkway provided that such area is under
the same ownership as the principal use. The applicant for a building permit who proposes to use an area for offstreet parking in order to meet the requirements of this ordinance and in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection shall submit evidence of a restrictive covenant running with the land to be used for off-street parking
purposes stating that such land shall not be encroached upon, used, sold, leased, or conveyed for any other
purpose until such time as the principal building ceases to be required to provide such off-street parking
facilities.
3.29.3.4.
Parking requirements for two (2) of more uses of the same or of different types may be provided by the
establishment of the required number of spaces for each use in a common parking area provided that all such
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
303/393
uses being served by a common parking area are under the same ownership. Accessory uses shall not be required
to have additional parking spaces other than those required by the principal use.
3.29.3.5.
Off-street parking areas may be situated in any Residential district abutting any Commercial district or Industrial
district to a depth not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) feet and provided that all off-street parking lot
improvements as provided in subsection 3.29.4. of this article are complied with.
3.29.4.
Parking lot improvement requirements. Any off-street parking lots serving any use other than dwellings of four
(4) units per building or less shall meet the following off-street parking lot improvement requirements:
3.29.4.1.
Screening and landscaping. Off-street parking and areas for more than five (5) vehicles, and off-street loading
areas shall be effectively screened on each side which joins or faces residential or industrial premises situated in
any Residential district.
3.29.4.2.
Surfacing for all retail sales and services, business services and professional services serving the general public
and having access to and abutting a paved street, the off-street parking area shall be provided with a hard surface,
all-weather pavement of asphalt or cement and shall be so graded and drained to provide for the adequate run-off
and disposal of surface water.
3.29.4.3.
Lighting. Where lighting facilities are provided for the parking area, they shall be designed and installed so as to
reflect the light away from any contiguous residentially zoned property.
3.29.5.
Off-street loading requirements.
3.29.5.1.
Every hospital, institution, commercial or industrial building or similar use having a floor area of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet or more and requiring receipt or distribution by vehicle of materials or
merchandise shall have at least one permanent off-street loading space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof immediately adjacent to the principal building.
3.29.5.2.
Every building which requires the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, shall provide
off-street loading berths in accordance with the following tables:
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
Uses Sq. Ft. of Floor Area Required Off-Street Loading Berths
Schools 15,000 or more 1
Hospitals (in addition to space for
ambulance)
10,000—300,000 1
For each additional 300,000 or
major fraction thereof
1 additional
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
304/393
Undertakers and funeral parlors Regardless of size 1
Hotels, offices and multi-dwellings 10,000 or more 1
Commercial, wholesale
manufacturing and storage
10,000—25,000 1
25,000—40,000 2
40,000—60,000 3
60,000—100,000 4
For each additional 50,000 or major
fraction thereof
1 additional
3.29.5.3.
Every off-street loading and unloading space shall have direct access to the public street or alley and shall have
the following minimum dimensions: length, thirty (30) feet; width, twelve (12) feet; height, fourteen (14) feet.
Sec. 3.30. - Overhang or extruding projections.
In single-family residential districts, multi-family residential districts and mobile home park districts, every part
of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed except for the customary
projection of sills, belts, courses, cornices, ornamental features, and eaves; provided, however, that none of the
above projections shall extend into a required yard more than thirty-six (36) inches. Open or enclosed fire
escapes, outside stairways, balconies, chimneys, flues or other projections shall not extend into any required yard
except that uncovered steps may project not more than three (3) feet into the required yard.
Sec. 3.31. - Parking of trucks and trailers.
Within any Residential district, no trucks, trailers or wagons in excess of one ton capacity shall be parked for
storage purposes, including overnight, on any public right-of-way or on private property except within a
completely enclosed garage. Trailers of less than one ton capacity, including pleasure boat trailers, collapsible
camping trailers, and cargo trailers, may be parked on private property in any district provided that such trailers
are parked only within areas in which the principal building, accessory building, or the parking of vehicles is
permitted.
Sec. 3.32. - Performance standards.
These performance standards shall apply to all non-residential uses:
3.32.1.
Smoke, dust and dirt. All emissions of visible smoke, dust, dirt, fly-ash or any particulate matter from any pipes,
vents or other openings from any other source shall conform to state and federal standards.
3.32.2.
Fumes, vapors, and gases. All emissions of any fumes, vapors or gases of a noxious, toxic, or corrosive nature
which can cause any damage or irritation to health, animals, vegetation, or to any form of property shall conform
to state and federal regulations.
3.32.3.
Sewage. There shall be no discharge at any point of liquid or solid waste into any public sewage disposal system
which will overload such system or create detrimental effects in the flow and treatment of public sewage. There
shall be no discharge of any industrial wastes into any private sewage disposal system, stream, or into the ground
of any kind or nature which would contaminate any water supply or otherwise cause emission of dangerous or
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
305/393
objectionable elements or conditions. There shall be no accumulation of solid waste conducive to the breeding of
rodents or insects.
3.32.4.
Odors. There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive,
obnoxious or unpleasant beyond the property line on which the principal use is located. Any process including
the preparation of food which may involve the creation and emission of any such odor shall be provided with a
primary and secondary safeguard system so that odor control may be maintained in the event of failure of the
primary safeguard system. Any odorous matter shall be kept a minimum of fifteen hundred (1,500) feet from any
residence, school, hospital, or church, and any "B" district.
3.32.5.
Noise. The permitted level of noise or sound emission at the property line of the lot on which the principal use is
located shall not at any time exceed the average noise level prevailing for the same hour as generated by the
American Standards Association.
3.32.6.
Glare. There shall be no direct glare visible from any residential district caused by unshielded floodlights or
other sources of high intensity lighting.
Sec. 3.33. - Pending applications for building permits.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layouts, plans, construction, size, or designated
use of any development, building, structure, or part thereof, for which official approval and required permits
have been granted, or where no approvals or permits are necessary, where construction has been legally started,
before the enactment of this ordinance and completed within a one year period.
Sec. 3.34. - Permitted building area.
The principal building on any lot or parcel of land shall be erected within the area bound by the building lines
established by setback or yard requirements. Accessory buildings may be erected within any building line
established for the principal building and in required rear yards as may be otherwise provided in these
regulations.
Sec. 3.35. - Principal building on a lot.
Except in mobile home parks and the group housing projects as provided in these regulations, only one principal
building and its customary accessory building may hereafter be erected on any lot of record. Any dwelling shall
be deemed to be the principal building on the lot on which the same is located. An addition to any building shall
not be construed as a principal building.
Sec. 3.36. - Retaining walls.
Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to prohibit or to prevent the erection of a retaining wall on any
property provided that such retaining wall does not adversely affect the natural flow of surface water or create
any other adverse effect upon adjacent or adjoining properties. However, any application for a retaining wall
shall be subject to approval of the board of commissioners before the issuance of a permit.
Sec. 3.37. - Shopping centers.
Shopping centers are hereby defined as a group of retail stores or shops under single ownership or management
with an area of five (5) acres or more and with a minimum depth of three hundred (300) feet established as a
shopping entity with common parking facilities, ingress and egress, loading and unloading facilities. Shopping
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
306/393
centers shall be permitted in any General or Neighborhood Commercial district and may be developed in
accordance with approval by the planning commission. The shopping center shall not be divided into separate
lots for each store or use. No permit shall be issued for the construction of shopping centers until the plans and
specifications, including the design of ingress and egress roads, parking facilities and other such items as may be
found of importance, have been approved by the planning commission. No buildings shall be erected closer than
fifty (50) feet to any road right-of-way line. There shall be provided a minimum of one parking space for each
two hundred (200) square feet of floor area designed to be used for business or shopping purposes. Such parking
area, including maneuvering areas, ingress and egress roads, and driving lanes shall be paved and kept in good
repair at all times with a hard, all-weather surface. All points of access shall be to the public road; however, there
shall be no public roads or alleys within the shopping center property. All loading and unloading shall be done
entirely within the shopping center property. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all uses within the
shopping center shall conform with other regulations as set forth in this resolution.
Sec. 3.38. - Purpose of sign regulations.
Liberty County finds that signs are proper and necessary uses of private property, are a means of personal free
expression, are a necessary component of a commercial environment, and constitute a legitimate business
enterprise. As such, signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the
number of signs tends to proliferate leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted roadways. The manner of the
erection, location, and maintenance of signs affects the public health, safety, morals, and welfare of the citizens
of Liberty County. The following regulations shall apply to all surfaces utilized to advertise a service, product, or
business establishment. Separate use signs advertise a service, product, or business establishment not directly
related to its location.
3.38.1.
General.
3.38.1.1.
Signable area. The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representations, emblems
or any figures or similar characters, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of
the display or used to differentiate this sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the
necessary supports or uprights on which this sign is placed; provided, that any open space contained within the
outer limits of the display face of a sign, or between any component, panel, strip or fixture of any kind
composing the display face shall be included in the computation of the area of the sign whether this open space
be enclosed or not by a frame or border. For projecting or double-faced signs only one (1) display face shall be
measured in computing the sign area when the sign faces are parallel, or where the interior angle formed by the
faces is sixty (60) degrees or less provided that it is a common attached structure. If the two (2) faces of a
double-faced sign are of unequal area, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the larger face.
3.38.1.2.
Miscellaneous. No signs shall be erected within ten (10) feet of an established road right-of-way line except as
otherwise provided herein. All signs fifteen (15) feet in height or more require sign installation drawings to be
certified by a structural engineer as being designed to meet/exceed one hundred-mph winds. If the sign is
illuminated, it shall be of an enclosed lamp design and require electrical load calculations and a wiring plan in
accordance with NFPA 70 and other documents. All signs must conform with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75(9) (the
Georgia Outdoor Advertising Law). A building permit shall be required for all signs larger than thirty-two (32)
square feet located within the county. All signs which have external illumination shall have appropriate methods
of de-activating illumination during daylight hours. On-premises signs which are capable of multiple messages,
changeable messages or displays shall be illuminated by LEDs or similar technology and integrate an automatic
dimmer and shall remain fixed for not less than fifteen (15) seconds, and the message transition shall occur in a
period not to exceed two (2) seconds. Off-premises billboards and signs (as referred to in sections 3.38.2 and
3.38.3) which are capable of multiple messages, changeable messages or displays shall be illuminated by LEDs
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
307/393
or similar technology and integrate an automatic dimmer and shall remain fixed for not less than ten (10)
seconds, and the message transition shall occur in a period not to exceed two (2) seconds. Additionally, any
multiple or changeable message sign or display shall contain a default design that will freeze the sign or display
in one (1) position if a malfunction occurs.
3.38.2.
Billboards (signs) adjacent to the interstate highway system. Signs adjacent to the interstate system of roads shall
meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Law.
3.38.2.1.
Uniform in size. All signs erected adjacent to an interstate highway shall be uniform in size. The outside
measurements shall equal twelve (12) feet in height and fifty (50) feet in length, with or without trim.
3.38.2.2.
Illumination. All signs which are illuminated shall use base-mounted fluorescent, mercury vapor lights, or metal
halide and shall have appropriate methods of deactivating illumination during daylight hours. No other lighting
including, but not limited to, neon, running lights, or animation, shall be permitted.
3.38.2.3.
Apron measurement. All signs shall have an apron directly beneath the face of the signs which shall not be used
for advertising purposes, and shall only be permitted to display the agency holding the permit and the permit
number. The aprons shall be uniform in size, measuring three (3) feet in height and forty-five (45) feet in length.
3.38.2.4.
Height above Interstate. All signs shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in height above the highest point of
pavement of the Interstate. According to regulations, signs shall not exceed seventy (70) feet in height above the
center of the road. Two (2) signs in the same location, whether back-to-back or in a "V" formation, shall be the
same height above the surface of the Interstate.
3.38.2.5.
Extrusions. No extrusion outside the face of the sign, except for the apron, shall be allowed.
3.38.2.6.
Limitation per location. No more than one (1) sign shall face in any one (1) direction per location. This means
that there shall be a maximum of two (2) signs per location, which allows for back-to-back signs or signs in a
"V" formation, but does not allow two (2) signs facing the same direction.
3.38.24.7.
Spacing. Sign locations shall be no less than five hundred (500) feet apart, measuring from the two (2) closest
points. In addition, no billboard shall be located within five hundred (500) feet in any direction from a public
park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however, sign
may be placed closer to a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or
cemetery if visibility is blocked by other buildings or obstructions. No multiple message or changeable message
signs may be located within five thousand (5,000) feet of another multiple message sign on the same side of the
highway.
3.38.2.8.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
308/393
Location limitation. A maximum of three (3) sign locations shall be allowed per quadrant at any interchange
where spacing requirements can be met.
3.38.2.9.
Marshland limitations. No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of a marshland area or an area of
designated historic interest.
3.38.2.10.
Structural condition. All signs must be kept in good structural condition and well-painted at all times.
3.38.2.11.
Out of business. Any sign which advertises an activity, business, or product or service no longer produced or
conducted shall be removed within six (6) months of the date of the discontinuance of said activity.
3.38.2.12.
Local permits. No person shall construct or maintain any outdoor advertising on an interstate without first
obtaining a permit from the Liberty County Building and Licensing Department. This does not eliminate the
need for a state permit.
3.38.3.
Billboards adjacent to county designated roads and other routes on the state highway system. Signs adjacent to
the county designated road system of arterials and major collectors shall only be allowed on undeveloped parcels
that are zoned as B-2 (General Commercial), or I-1 (Industrial) and shall meet the requirements contained in
subsections 3.38.3.1 through 3.38.3.9. All signs adjacent to all state maintained routes not on the interstate
highway system shall also meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under the Georgia
Outdoor Advertising Law, in addition to meeting all requirements for signs on the designated county system of
arterials and major collectors. The county shall adopt a map under this ordinance that designates the county and
state routes where signs or billboards may be placed.
3.38.3.1.
Size. All signs erected adjacent to a designated route shall not exceed three hundred seventy-eight (378) square
feet per sign face, and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height above the center of the road.
3.38.3.2.
Illumination. All signs which are illuminated shall use base-mounted fluorescent, mercury vapor lights, or metal
halide and shall have appropriate methods of deactivating illumination during daylight hours. No other lighting
including, but not limited to, neon, running lights, or animation, shall be permitted.
3.38.3.3.
Apron measurement. All signs shall have an apron directly beneath the face of the signs which shall not be used
for advertising purposes, and shall only be permitted to display the agency holding the permit and the permit
number.
3.38.3.4.
Limitation per location. No more than one (1) sign shall face in any one (1) direction per location. This means
that there shall be a maximum of two (2) signs per location, which allows for back-to-back signs or signs in a
"V" formation, but does not allow two (2) signs facing the same direction.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
309/393
3.38.3.5.
Spacing. Sign locations shall be no less than one thousand (1,000) feet apart, measuring from the two (2) closest
points. Furthermore, no billboard shall be located within five hundred (500) feet in any direction from a public
park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided however sign
may be placed closer to a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or
cemetery if visibility is blocked by other buildings or obstructions. No multiple message or changeable message
signs may be located within five thousand (5,000) feet of another multiple message sign on the same side of the
highway.
3.38.3.6.
Marshland limitations. No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of a marshland area or an area of
designated historic interest.
3.38.3.7.
Structural condition. All signs must be kept in good structural condition and well-painted at all times.
3.38.3.8.
Out of business. Any sign which advertises an activity, business, or product or service no longer produced or
conducted shall be removed within six (6) months of the date of the discontinuance of said activity.
3.38.3.9.
Local permits. No person shall construct or maintain any outdoor advertising on any designated route without
first obtaining a permit from the Liberty County Building and Licensing Department. This does not eliminate the
need for a state permit. All county permits shall be renewed annually.
3.38.4.
No obstruction. No business signs shall be erected so as to obstruct driver visibility along any established road
right-of-way.
3.38.5.
Signs in residential districts. No signs shall be erected in or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any residential
district, except as otherwise provided in these regulations. Residential development identification structures
located on one (1) or both sides of the major entrances designed to identify residential development. Such signs
may be placed outside the right-of-way on common development property or privately owned lots and shall be in
the form of a wall or fence with an attached signable area. Said structure shall be made of durable materials
including but not limited to: brick, stone, wrought iron, or composite materials, but in no case will a wood sign
be permitted. The wall portion of said sign shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. Columns may be incorporated
into the signage with a maximum allowable height of eight (8) feet. The maximum signable area permitted shall
be sixty-four (64) square feet. Such residential development entrance signs shall be incorporated in the
preliminary plat. Subsequently, the final plat shall indicate a sign easement in favor of the development over the
lot(s) where the signs are located. Said easement shall also appear within the deed records of the burdened
properties and shall exist solely for sign purposes.
3.38.6.
Temporary signs.
3.38.6.1.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
310/393
A temporary sign such as a real estate sign to be removed within thirty (30) days of the intended use, not
exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area and not exceeding five (5) feet in height is allowed on properties with
road frontage of less than two hundred (200) feet. A sign or signs totaling not more than sixteen (16) square feet
in area for each two hundred (200) feet of frontage may be posted to be removed within thirty (30) days of the
intended use.
3.38.6.2.
One (1) temporary sign not exceeding sixty-four (64) square feet in area for subdivisions or planned
developments.
3.38.6.3.
Construction advertisements. Building contractors' and professional persons' temporary advertisements on or
adjacent to buildings under construction, limited to a total area for all such signs of one hundred fifty (150)
square feet.
3.38.7.
Business or industrial signs. Business or industrial signs are permitted in business or industrial zones under the
following conditions:
3.38.7.1.
Number of signs. Permitted signs may include parallel, projecting and freestanding signs. Not more than two (2)
parallel or projecting signs may be allowed for each business or industrial establishment. A freestanding sign
may be either a stanchion or a monument sign.
3.38.7.2.
Size. The maximum size of signs, per sign face, shall be as follows, not including billboards as defined in
subsections 3.38.2 and 3.38.3:
B-1 Zoning District and O-I District -
parallel and projecting signs
Any parallel or projecting sign or any combination or these signs on
a building surface cannot exceed five (5) percent of the building's
front surface and five (5) percent of any other building surface that
faces another street with a secondary street frontage of at least one
hundred (100) feet.
B-1 Zoning District and O-I District -
freestanding signs
One (1) freestanding sign is allowed per parcel, and a freestanding
stanchion or pylon sign cannot exceed twenty (20) feet in height with
a total signable area of thirty-two (32) square feet per business
establishment, but in no case shall the total signable area exceed one
hundred (100) square feet. A monument sign cannot exceed five (5)
feet in height with a total signable area of forty (40) square feet.
B-2 Zoning District - parallel and
projecting signs
Any parallel or projecting sign or any combination of these signs on
a building surface cannot exceed ten (10) percent of the building's
front surface and ten (10) percent of any other building surface that
faces another street with a secondary street frontage of at least one
hundred (100) feet.
B-2 Zoning District - freestanding signs One (1) freestanding sign is allowed for each street on which the
properties front. The parcel or properties must have a frontage of at
least one hundred (100) feet on any secondary street or streets to
qualify for an additional freestanding sign. A freestanding stanchion
or pylon sign cannot exceed twenty (20) feet in height. The
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
311/393
maximum total signable area on any stanchion sign or combination
of stanchion signs cannot exceed one hundred (100) square feet per
business establishment, but in no case shall the total signable area of
all stanchion signs exceed two hundred (200) square feet. A
monument sign cannot exceed eight (8) feet in height with a total
signable area of sixty-four (64) square feet.
Industrial Zoning District Sixty-four (64) square feet for any freestanding signs, other than
industrial parks under a master plan of development. In any master
planned industrial development, the types and sizes of all signs shall
be approved by the planning commission and the governing
authority.
3.38.7.3.
Height.
3.38.7.3.1.
Maximum height. No sign shall extend more than twenty (20) feet above the center of the road. However, not
including interstate-oriented signs.
3.38.7.3.2.
Clearance. No hanging, suspended or projecting sign shall have a vertical clearance of less than fourteen (14)
feet over any vehicular public way, nor less than nine (9) feet over any pedestrian public way. Public ways used
in this subsection include privately owned sidewalks or drives, customarily used by the public.
3.38.7.3.3.
Projections. No sign shall project from the wall of a building more than six (6) feet.
3.38.7.4.
Lighting. If externally illuminated, the light shall be confined to the surface of the sign, which shall be so located
and arranged as to avoid glare or reflection onto any portion of any adjacent highway or onto the path of
oncoming vehicles or into any adjacent premises. No flashing or moving signs, shall be permitted. If internally
illuminated, the illumination in which the light source is concealed or contained with the structure itself and
which becomes visible in darkness by shining through a translucent surface shall not exceed sixteen (16)
footcandles of incident light measured at a distance of ten (10) feet from such structure.
3.38.8.
Churches and conditional uses. Churches located on a single parcel in any zoning district shall be allowed
parallel or projecting signs or any combination of these signs on a building surface that cannot exceed five (5)
percent of the building's front surface. They are also allowed a monument sign that cannot exceed five (15) feet
in height with a total signable area of sixty-four (64) square feet. Signs for conditional uses shall be considered
with the request for the conditional use.
3.38.9.
Existing signs. A nonconforming sign is any sign existing on the effective date of this ordinance which does not
conform to the standards of this ordinance, but which was legal at the time it was erected. Nonconforming signs
shall be permitted until one (1) of the following conditions occurs: (1) the sign is abandoned; or (2) the permittee
or property owner fails to adequately maintain the sign. If the nonconforming sign is modified in size, height or
location, the sign must conform to all of the requirements of this ordinance. Minor repairs and maintenance are
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
312/393
exempted. Signs damaged by fire, act of God, or by other cause demonstrated by the owner of the sign by clear
and convincing evidence to be outside the owner's control may be restored to their original nonconforming
condition.
3.38.10.
Appeal procedure. An individual whose permit application has been denied or whose permit has been revoked
may file an appeal with the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission within fourteen (14) calendar days. The
Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission will make a recommendation to the governing authority. Appeal
request shall state the reason(s) and/or circumstance(s) in writing on which it is based.
(Mo. of 11-2-1993; Ord. No. 2008-004, § I, 12-2-2008)
Sec. 3.39. - Rear dwelling and easements required therewith.
In all districts except the Industrial districts, no building in the rear of a principal building on the same lot shall
be used for residential purposes unless it conforms to the open space requirements of this ordinance. For the
purpose of determining the front yard in such case, the rear line of the required rear yard for the principal
building in front shall be considered the front lot line for the building in the rear. In addition, there must be
provided for any such rear dwelling, an unoccupied and unobstructed access way not less than ten (10) feet wide
to a road, and there shall not be more than one dwelling, housing not more than two (2) families for each such
easement, except that a common easement of access at least forty (40) feet wide may be provided for two (2) or
more dwellings, housing any number of families.
Sec. 3.40. - Road frontage required.
No lot shall contain any dwelling unless it abuts at least twenty (20) feet on a public street, or unless it conforms
to the easement of access required in this article.
Sec. 3.41. - Traffic visibility across corner lots.
On any corner lot in any district, no fence, structure or planting, more than thirty (30) inches high measured from
the center of the road, shall be erected or maintained within twenty (20) feet of the "corner" so as not to interfere
with traffic visibility across the corner.
Sec. 3.42. - Certain building and land use excepted.
3.42.1.
Agricultural uses. Except for compliance with minimum yard requirements, visibility across corner lots, and for
the commercial raising of fur-bearing animals, or hog farms, nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the use of
any land for agricultural purposes as defined herein, or the construction or use of buildings or structures incident
to the use for agricultural purposes of the land on which such buildings or structures are located, in any
Agricultural district.
3.42.2.
Public or semi-public uses. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance of essential services, by public utilities or county, city, or other governmental agencies and no
zoning certificate shall be required for any such structure; provided, however, that the provisions of this
paragraph shall not apply to buildings, towers, or storage yards of such public utilities or governmental agencies
except when conforming to the procedures specified by state law.
State law reference— Zoning proposal review procedures law, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-1 et seq.
Sec. 3.43. - Swimming pools, private, community or club.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
313/393
3.43.1.
Private swimming pools. A private swimming pool in the ground or permanent installations above the ground,
but not including farm ponds, as regulated herein, shall be any pool, lake or open tank not located within a
completely enclosed building and containing or normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point
greater than one and one-half (1½) feet. No such swimming pool shall be allowed in a "B-1," "A-1," "AR-1," or
any "R" district, except as an accessory use and unless it complies with the following conditions and
requirements.
3.43.2.
The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of the principal use of the
property on which it is located, and their guests, and no fee shall be charged.
3.43.3.
It may not be located, including any walks or paved areas or accessory structures adjacent thereto, closer than ten
(10) feet to any property line of the property on which it is located.
3.43.4.
The swimming pool, or the entire property on which it is located, shall be so walled or substantially fenced as to
prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or from adjacent properties, and said fence or wall to be
not less than four (4) feet above ground level and maintained in good condition and grounded for electricity.
Pools shall conform to the department of health standards.
Existing pools shall conform in ninety (90) days to these requirements. Inspection by the zoning officer to
ascertain conformance with the law shall be made before use of the pool by the owner or any friend or relative of
the owner or paid member will be allowed. The inspection shall be made within one week of completion of all
construction.
3.43.5.
Community or club swimming pools. A community or club swimming pool shall be any pool constructed by an
association of property owners, or by a private club solely for use and enjoyment by members of the association
or club and their families and guests of members. Community and club swimming pools shall comply with the
following conditions and requirements:
3.43.5.1.
The pool and accessory structures thereto, including the areas used by the bathers, shall not be closer than ten
(10) feet to any property line of the property on which it is located.
3.43.5.2.
The swimming pool and all of the area used by the bathers shall be so walled or fenced as to prevent
uncontrolled access by children from the street or adjacent properties. The said fence or wall shall not be less
than four (4) feet in height and maintained in good condition and grounded for electricity. The area surrounding
the enclosure except of the parking spaces, shall be suitably landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs and trees and
maintained in good condition.
(Mo. of 11-2-1982)
Sec. 3.44. - Time limitation.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
314/393
No zoning permit for construction, erection, or alteration of any building or structure or part thereof, or for signs
or outdoor advertisements, or part thereof, shall be valid for more than one year unless work at the site has
commenced within such period.
Sec. 3.45. - Notice of starting work.
The building and zoning inspector shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours notice by owner or applicant
prior to commencement of work at the site under zoning permits.
Sec. 3.46. - Adult entertainment or services.
No premises shall be occupied for the purpose of providing adult entertainment or services, including but not
limited to adult book stores, adult motion picture theaters, massage parlors, palm readers, tattoo parlors, health
clubs, and health spas, in any district except B-2, General Commercial, and then only upon approval of the
governing authority after a public hearing. No such activity shall be located within one thousand five hundred
(1,500) feet (measured in direct line) of any area zoned residential and no such activity shall be located within
one thousand (1,000) feet of any other activity which provides the same type entertainment.
(Mo. of 6-30-1986)
Sec. 3.47. - Bed and breakfast inn.
Bed and breakfast inns are authorized as a conditional use and shall include but are not limited to the following:
(1)
Host or hostess shall live in the inn.
(2)
Each bedroom for rent shall have a private bath.
(3)
A minimum of one (1) parking space for each bedroom for rent plus two (2) shall be provided in parking area,
and entrance thereto shall be paved.
(Mo. of 4-7-1995)
Sec. 3.48. - Placement of manufactured homes.
3.48.1.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings as set forth below unless
otherwise required by context.
(a)
Manufactured home, Class A, shall mean a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or
assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Home and Standards Act 42 USC 5401-5445 (the HUD Code, which became effective on June 15,
1976), and meeting the following development standards:
(i)
The manufactured home shall have a minimum width in excess of twenty (20) feet.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
315/393
(ii)
The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof and be finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used
in conventional residential construction, including, but not limited to, wood shakes, asphalt composition
shingles, fiberglass, slate or such other similar material comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to
shingles commonly used in conventional residential construction, as determined by the zoning administrator.
(iii)
The exterior siding shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, stucco, aluminum (vinyl-covered or
painted, but in no case exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint) or such other similar material comparable
in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in conventional residential
construction, as determined by the zoning administrator.
(iv)
The manufactured home shall be placed on a durable foundation and be anchored in a manner that complies with
the latest published edition of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code (or its successor). Furthermore, a
curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access and constructed of masonry, shall be installed
so that it encloses the area located under the home to the ground level. Such a wall shall be finished with brick,
stucco, or such other similar material as may be approved by the zoning administrator.
(v)
The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and all other towing apparatus shall be removed from the manufactured
home after placement on the lot and before occupancy.
(vi)
Landings at each outside doorway of the requisite composition and size as per section 312.1 of the CABO Oneand Two-Family Dwelling Code (or its successor), with said provisions being expressly incorporated by
reference herein as part of this requirement.
(vii)
All manufactured homes must be otherwise installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq.
(b)
Manufactured home, Class B, shall mean a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or
assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with Federal
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act 42 USC 5401-5445 (the HUD Code, which became
effective on June 15, 1976), and meeting the following development standards:
(i)
The manufactured home shall be finished with a type of roofing that is commonly used in conventional
residential construction, including, but not limited to, wood shakes, asphalt composition shingles, fiberglass,
slate or such other similar material comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to roofing commonly
used in conventional residential construction (to include any original roofing made a part of the manufactured
home, but in no case exceeding the reflectively of gloss white paint), as determined by the zoning administrator.
(ii)
The exterior siding shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, stucco, aluminum (vinyl covered or
painted, but in no case exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint) or such other similar material comparable
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
316/393
in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in conventional residential
construction, as determined by the zoning administrator.
(iii)
The manufactured home shall be placed on a durable foundation and be anchored in a manner that complies with
the latest published edition of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code (or its successor). Furthermore,
skirting shall be installed, and maintained in good repair, with appropriate ventilation, so as to enclose the area
located under the home to the ground level. Such skirting shall be of a material commonly used in conventional
residential construction as approved by the zoning administrator.
(iv)
The tongue, transporting lights, and all other towing apparatus shall be removed from the manufactured home
after placement on the lot and before occupancy to the extent practicable. In the event it is not practicable to
remove such transportation and towing apparatus, the same shall be skirted in their entirety as provided in
subparagraph 1(b)(iii) hereinabove; provided, however, that the tongue only may remain exposed.
(v)
Landings at each outside doorway of the requisite composition and size as per section 312.1 of the CABO Oneand Two-Family Dwelling Code (or its successor), with said provisions being expressly incorporated by
reference herein as part of this requirement.
(vi)
All manufactured homes must be otherwise installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq.
(c)
Manufactured home, Class C, shall mean a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or
assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with Federal
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act 42 USC 5401-5445 (the HUD Code, which became
effective on June 15, 1976), but which does not satisfy the criteria necessary to qualify the unit as a Class A or
Class B manufactured home. All Class C manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. §
8-2-160 et seq.
(d)
Manufactured home, Class D, shall mean a manufactured home (to include mobile homes) that does not meet the
definitional criteria of a Class A, Class B or Class C manufactured home (i.e., not constructed to the HUD code).
All Class D manufactured homes permitted by this section must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-
160 et seq.
(e)
Permitted residential districts shall mean the following zoning districts as defined by section 4.1 of the zoning
ordinance of Liberty County, Georgia: A-1, AR-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-4 districts.
3.48.2.
Permitted location of manufactured homes, Class A. Manufactured homes qualifying as Class A Manufactured
Homes as defined herein shall be allowed only in the permitted residential districts within the unincorporated
areas of the county and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to the
restrictions and limitations imposed herein. Approval to place the Class A Manufactured Home within such
permitted residential districts shall be granted by the zoning administrator upon application and determination
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
317/393
that the manufactured home meets the requirements of this section and all other applicable state and local laws.
Manufactured homes qualifying as Class B, Class C or Class D Manufactured Homes shall be located only in
those areas as expressly authorized by this section and are not permitted in R-2 zoning districts.
3.48.3.
Permitted location of manufactured homes, Class B. Manufactured homes qualifying as Class B Manufactured
Homes as defined herein shall be allowed only within R-2A, A-1, and AR-1 zoning districts, as well duly
licensed and approved parks for manufactured and mobile homes located within R-4 Mobile Home Park
Residential Districts. Approval to place the Class B Manufactured Home within such R-2A, A-1 and AR-1
zoning districts shall be granted by the zoning administrator upon application and determination that the
manufactured home meets the requirements of this section and all other applicable state and local laws.
3.48.4.
Permitted location of manufactured homes, Class C. Manufactured homes qualifying as Class C Manufactured
Homes shall not be permitted within the unincorporated areas of the county, except in duly licensed and
approved parks for manufactured and mobile homes located within R-4 Mobile Home Park Residential Districts.
3.48.5.
Permitted location of manufactured homes, Class D. Manufactured homes qualifying as Class D Manufactured
Homes shall not be introduced or otherwise permitted within the unincorporated areas of the County; provided,
however, that Class D Manufactured Homes qualifying as a legal nonconforming use pursuant to this section
may be relocated in duly licensed and approved parks for manufactured and mobile homes located within R-4
Mobile Home Park Residential Districts. Furthermore, Class D Manufactured Homes qualifying as a legal
nonconforming use pursuant to this section and which otherwise satisfy the requirements of a Class B
Manufactured Home set forth in subparagraphs 1(b)(i) through (vi) may also be relocated in R-2A, A-1, and AR1 zoning districts, provided approval to place said Class D Manufactured Home within such R-2A, A-1, and AR1 zoning districts shall be granted by the zoning administrator upon application and determination that the
manufactured home meets the requirements of this section and all other applicable state and local laws.
3.48.6.
Emergency placement. Any person desiring to place a manufactured home not complying with the standards
herein provided within the unincorporated areas of the county may make application for same to the zoning
administrator, who shall refer said application to the governing authority of the county for determination on the
following basis: if in the opinion of the governing authority, it should become necessary as a temporary
emergency or hardship or for security or protection, such permit may be granted on a limited basis for a period
not exceeding twelve (12) months from the date of permit. If before the expiration date of the permit, the
emergency or other reasons for the home shall no longer exist, then said permit shall be automatically cancelled
and said structure removed by the owner. If said home is not removed on or before the expiration date of the
permit, it may be removed by the county at the owner's expense. such permit, if granted, shall be a privilege and
not a right and shall be issued strictly at the determination of the governing body of the county who shall
prescribe the terms, location, conditions and duration of the permit, and their decision shall be final.
3.48.7.
Application and approval for placement of manufactured home. Person(s) proposing to locate a manufactured
home within the unincorporated areas of the county for the first time or which are proposing to relocate a
manufactured home within said county must make application to the zoning administrator of Liberty County as
follows:
(a)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
318/393
Application. Applications for placement of manufactured homes shall be made on a form or forms developed for
that purpose and shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and approval in accordance with this
section. Such application shall include all information necessary to make a determination as to conformity with
the provisions of this section as applicable to each such manufactured home, including photographs or
renderings of the front and side of the manufactured home, exterior finish, and other information necessary to
make a determination required by this section.
(b)
Review of application. Approval or denial of the application shall be within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt
of the completed application and all required supporting materials. The applicant shall be notified in writing of
the approval, conditional approval or denial of the application within five (5) business days after such decision is
made. Conditional approval shall require that the conditions and reasons therefore be stated in writing and be
agreed to by the applicant; such conditions shall be binding upon the applicant. In the case of disapproval, the
reasons therefore shall be stated in writing.
(c)
Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator regarding the approval, conditional
approval or denial of the placement of a manufactured home may appeal from such decision to the governing
authority of the county by filing with the county administrator a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully and
distinctly wherein the decision appealed from is contrary to the provisions of this section or the laws of this state.
Such appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which notification of the decision is
received. The governing authority of the county shall fix the date and time certain for the hearing of the appeal
and shall give notice thereof to the appealing party. The governing authority of the county shall decide the appeal
within ten (10) working days after the date and time of the hearing. In exercising its powers, the governing
authority may reverse or affirm the decision appealed, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or
determination appealed from and to that end shall have all the powers of the official from whom the appeal was
taken. Any decision from the governing authority of the county may be appealed by filing a writ of certiorari
with the superior court of this county within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the decision on appeal has
been rendered in writing. The decision made by the governing body shall be placed in writing and the factual
basis for the decision shall be set forth in the written decision.
3.48.8.
Penalty. Any person who locates a manufactured home within the unincorporated areas of the county without
first having obtained approval to do so as set forth herein or who otherwise violates the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of no more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every such offense, or imprisonment of not more than sixty (60) days, or
both.
3.48.9.
Enforcement. The magistrate's court of Liberty County shall have jurisdiction over violations of this section and
all procedures for enforcement hereof shall be as provided in article 4, chapter 10, title 15, Official Code of
Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.]. Complaints of violations of any provision contained herein
shall be brought before the magistrate's court on a citation issued by the zoning administrator of Liberty County
or the chief magistrate of Liberty County and shall be prosecuted through that court. Violations of this section
will be tried upon citations either with or without a prosecuting attorney as determined by the zoning
administrator of Liberty County. Service of citation shall be performed by the constable of the magistrate's court
of Liberty County, Georgia. Citations shall meet all the official requirements as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-
63, as amended. It is provided, however, that the county retains any and all civil remedies, including the right of
civil injunction for the prevention of said violations and for the recovery of money damages therefor.
3.48.10.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
319/393
Nonconforming individual manufactured homes. Manufactured homes in place on December 2, 1997, and
otherwise authorized by the governing authority of Liberty County, are declared to be legal nonconforming uses
at their current location; provided, however, that such homes may not be altered, relocated, or expanded in any
way unless the alteration, relocation or expansion results in conformance with this section. When a
nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned, for whatever reason, for six (6) consecutive months or
eighteen (18) months during any two-year period, the use shall be considered abandoned, shall not be
reestablished, and the structure and/or land used in accordance with this section.
3.48.11.
Nonconforming R-2 lots preserved. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, any lot within an R2 zoning district whereupon a legal nonconforming manufactured home is located as of September 1, 1998, is
declared to be a legal nonconforming lot, and any placement of a manufactured home thereon after such date
shall be permitted, provided, however, that such qualifying manufactured home satisfies the requirements of a
Class B Manufactured Home as defined herein and otherwise meets all other applicable state and local laws.
Should ownership of any such legal nonconforming lot change at any time, the nonconforming lot shall
thereafter be subject to the provisions of this section; provided that the legal nonconforming manufactured home
located thereon at such time shall continue to qualify as a legal nonconforming manufactured home pursuant to
subsection 3.47.10. Notwithstanding the foregoing, once a conforming manufactured home is located or
otherwise established on any legal nonconforming lot, such lot shall thereafter be subject to the provisions of this
section.
3.48.12.
Restrictive covenants. No provisions of this section shall preempt or preclude any protective or restrictive
covenants which may be attached to any property within the unincorporated areas of the county.
(Ord. No. 1998-005, § 1 , 9-1-1998)
Editor's note—
Section II of Ord. No. 1998-005, adopted Sept. 1, 1998, repealed the ordinance adopted Dec. 2, 1997, from
which this section derived, and section I enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. This section had
been redesignated from § 3.47 to § 3.48, with the permission of the county, to avoid duplicate section numbers.
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Sec. 4.1. - Type of districts.
For the purpose of this ordinance the area of Liberty County, Georgia, is hereby divided into the following
zoning districts:
A-1 Agricultural
districts
AR-1 Agricultural
residential
districts
R-1 Single-family
residential
districts
R-2 Two-family
residential
districts
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
320/393
R-2A One- and twofamily
residential
districts
R-3 Multi-family
residential
districts
R-4 Mobile home
park
residential
districts
B-1 Neighborhood
commercial
districts
B-2 General
commercial
districts
I-1 Industrial
districts
PUD Planned unit
development
districts
DM-1 Dunes and
marshland
districts
Sec. 4.2. - Zoning maps.
The boundaries of these zoning districts are hereby established on a map to be designated "Zoning Map" for
Liberty County, Georgia, which is hereby made a part of this ordinance, together with all existing and future
notations, references and amendments. The originals of said zoning map properly attested, shall be and remain
on file in the office of the planning commission, and a copy in the office of the clerk of Superior Court of Liberty
County.
(Ord. No. 1998-006, 9-1-1998)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 1998-006, adopted Sept. 1, 1998, enacted the republished Zoning Map of Liberty County; dated Sept.
1, 1998, being entirely clerical in nature.
Sec. 4.3. - District boundary lines.
The district boundary lines on the zoning maps are intended to follow property lines on the centers of streets,
alleys, railroads or watercourses. In the case of unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines shall be
determined using the appropriate scale.
ARTICLE V. - USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
Sec. 5.1. - A-1 Agricultural Districts.
5.1.1.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
321/393
Permitted uses.
5.1.1.1.
Single- and two-family dwellings including mobile homes with their customary uses, on the basis of one
dwelling for each one acre of land or more under the same ownership.
5.1.1.2.
All commercial agricultural pursuits, and structures incidental thereto, including dairy products, livestock,
poultry and poultry products, field crops, truck crops, horticultural specialties and forestry.
5.1.1.3.
Churches, charitable, semi-private or philanthropic institutions or camps and state parks.
5.1.1.4.
Airfield, together with subordinate uses.
5.1.2.
Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in any agricultural district on a conditional basis upon
approval by the governing authority after review by the planning commission:
5.1.2.1.
Commercial riding stables provided that no building or enclosure for animals is located closer than one hundred
(100) feet from any property line.
5.1.2.2.
Cemetery. The minimum size for a cemetery shall be one acre.
5.1.2.3.
Planned unit development (PUD) upon approval of the planning commission.
5.1.2.4.
Home occupation upon approval of local governing authority.
5.1.3.
Prohibited uses. Any business, commercial, or industrial use, except in connection with the agricultural pursuits
otherwise permitted in this section.
5.1.4.
Lot and building requirements. The principal building, accessory buildings, and other land uses shall be located
so as to comply with the following requirements:
Principal Building One
Acre or
More
Minimum lot 1 acre
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
322/393
Minimum lot width at building line 125 feet
Minimum front yard 50 feet
Minimum side yard, interior 25 feet
Minimum side yard, street 25 feet
Minimum rear yard 25 feet
Maximum percent of lot coverage 20
percent
Accessory buildings.
Minimum setback from lot line:
Front 50 feet
Rear 25 feet
Side Same as
principal
building
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes
may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used.
(Mo. of 10-4-1977; Mo. of 1-3-1978; Mo. of 3-2-1982; Mo. of 12-3-1985)
Sec. 5.2. - AR-1 Agricultural Residential Districts.
5.2.1.
Permitted uses.
5.2.1.1.
Single family dwellings, including mobile homes, and their customary uses, on the basis of one dwelling for
each thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of land or more under the same ownership.
5.2.1.2.
All uses permitted in the Agricultural district as shown in section 5.1
5.2.2.
Conditional uses.
5.2.2.1.
Small retail commercial establishments upon the approval of the governing authority.
5.2.2.2.
Cemeteries under same conditions as for 5.1.2.2.
5.2.2.3.
Bed and breakfast inns.
5.2.3.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
323/393
Lot and building requirements.
Minimum lot area 30,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot width at building line 125 feet
Minimum front yard 35 feet
Minimum rear yard 25 feet
Minimum side yard, interior 25 feet
Minimum side yard, street 25 feet
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes
may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used.
(Mo. of 10-4-1977; Mo. of 3-2-1982; Mo. of 12-3-1985; Mo. of 4-7-1995)
Sec. 5.3. - R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts.
5.3.1.
Permitted uses.
5.3.1.1.
One-family detached dwelling (other than a mobile home).
5.3.1.2.
Unlighted, regulation-size or par three (3) golf courses, including normal club house and pro shop activities, and
other business activity associated with country clubs.
5.3.1.3.
Noncommercial horticulture or agriculture, but not including the keeping of poultry or animals.
5.3.2.
Conditional uses.
5.3.2.1.
Home occupations upon approval by the local governing authority.
5.3.2.2.
Planned unit development (PUD) upon approval by the local governing authority.
5.3.2.3.
Churches, synagogues, temples or other place of worship provided that: (1) such use is housed in a permanent
structure, and (2) no structure on the lot is closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any abutting residential property
line.
5.3.2.4.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
324/393
Public and private school engaged in teaching general curriculum for educational advancement, provided the
structures are placed not less than fifty (50) feet from any residential property line.
5.3.2.5.
Public utilities substation or sub-installation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a
painted or chain-link fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is neither office
nor commercial operation nor storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not
less than five (5) feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around facility.
5.3.2.6.
Cemetery, provided that such use: (1) consists of a site of at least one acre; (2) includes no crematorium or
dwelling unit other than for a caretaker; (3) has a front yard setback of at least seventy (70) feet from the
centerline of the street or ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line; whichever is further.
5.3.2.7.
Bed and breakfast inns.
5.3.3.
Lot and building requirements. The principal building and accessory buildings shall be located and constructed
in accordance with the following requirements:
Minimum lot area 12,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot width at building line 100 feet
Minimum front yard 35 feet
Minimum rear yard 25 feet
Minimum side yard, interior 15 feet
Minimum side yard, street 20 feet
Maximum percent of lot coverage 30 percent
Maximum building height 35 feet
Accessory buildings
Minimum setback from lot line:
Rear 7½ feet
Side Same as principal building
Required utilities. The minimum lot area is only permitted for property served by a central water system and a
central sanitary sewer service system. If no central sanitary sewer service is available, an applicant for a building
permit must have a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. If neither central sanitary sewer nor
central water system is available in the area at the time of building the applicant must have a minimum of thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet and the permit will be issued with the requirement that upon such time that either
service is extended to the property, hook-up will be required within ninety (90) days. Health department approval
must be obtained prior to the issuance of a building permit.
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes
may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used.
(Mo. of 3-2-1982; Mo. of 9-6-1983; Mo. of 12-3-1985; Mo. of 4-7-1995)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
325/393
Sec. 5.4. - R-2 Two-Family Residential Districts.
5.4.1.
Permitted uses.
5.4.1.1.
All permitted uses in single-family residential districts.
5.4.1.2.
Duplexes and two-family structures.
5.4.1.3.
Customary accessory buildings incidental to the above permitted uses.
5.4.2.
Conditional uses.
5.4.2.1.
Mobile homes upon approval by the local governing authority.
5.4.2.2.
Home occupations upon approval by the local governing authority.
5.4.2.3.
Planned unit development (PUD) upon approval by the local governing authority.
5.4.2.4.
Public utilities substation or sub-installation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a
painted or chain-link fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is neither office
nor commercial operation nor storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not
less than five (5) feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility.
5.4.2.5.
Cemetery, provided that such use: (1) Consists of a site of at least one acre; (2) includes no crematorium or
dwelling unit other than for a caretaker; (3) has a front yard setback of at least seventy (70) feet from the
centerline of the street or ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line, whichever is further.
5.4.2.6.
Churches, synagogues, temples, or other places of worship provided that: (1) such use is housed in a permanent
structure, and (2) no structure on the lot is closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any abutting residential property
line.
5.4.2.7.
Public and private school engaged in teaching general curriculum for educational advancement, provided the
structures are placed not less than fifty (50) feet from any residential property line.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
326/393
5.4.2.8.
Bed and breakfast inns.
5.4.3.
Lot and building requirements.
Principal buildings
Living units Maximum 6 per acre
Minimum lot area per unit 7,200 sq. ft.
Minimum lot width at building line 80 feet
Minimum front yard 25 feet
Minimum rear yard 20 feet
Minimum side yard, interior 15 feet
Minimum side yard, street 20 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum percent of lot coverage 30 percent
Required utilities. The minimum lot area is only permitted for property served by a central water system and a
central sanitary sewer service system. If no central sanitary sewer service is available, an applicant for a building
permit must have a minimum of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. If neither central sanitary sewer nor
central water system is available in the area at the time of building the applicant must have a minimum of thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet and the permit will be issued with the requirement that upon such time that either
service is extended to the property, hook-up will be required within ninety (90) days.
Accessory Buildings
Minimum setback from lot line:
Rear 10 feet
Side Same as principal building
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes
may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used.
(Mo. of 3-2-1982; Mo. of 12-3-1985; Mo. of 4-7-1995)
Sec. 5.4.A. - R-2A Single-Family, Two-Family, and Mobile Home Residential District.
5.4.A.1.
Permitted uses.
5.4.A.1.1.
All permitted uses in a single-family residential district.
5.4.A.1.2.
Duplexes and two-family structures.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
327/393
5.4.A.1.3.
Mobile homes as defined in this ordinance.
5.4.A.1.4.
Customary accessory buildings incidental to the above permitted uses.
5.4.A.2.
Conditional uses.
5.4.A.2.1.
Home occupations upon approval by the local governing authority.
5.4.A.2.2.
Planned unit development (PUD) upon approval by the local governing authority.
5.4.A.2.3.
Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a
painted or chain-link fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is neither office
nor commercial operation nor storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not
less than five (5) feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility.
5.4.A.2.4.
Cemetery, provided that such use: (1) consists of a site of at least one acre; (2) includes no crematorium or
dwelling unit other than for a caretaker; (3) has a front yard setback of at least seventy (70) feet from the
centerline of the street or ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way line, whichever is further.
5.4.A.2.5.
Churches, synagogues, temples, or other places of worship provided that: (1) such use is housed in a permanent
structure, and (2) no structure on the lot is closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any abutting residential property
line.
5.4.A.2.6.
Public and private school engaged in teaching general curriculum for educational advancement, provided the
structures are placed not less than fifty (50) feet from any residential property line.
5.4.A.2.7.
Bed and breakfast inns.
5.4.A.3.
Lot and building requirements.
Principal Buildings
Living units Maximum 6 per acre
Minimum lot area per unit 7,200 sq. ft.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
328/393
Minimum lot area width at building line 80 feet
Minimum front yard 25 feet
Minimum rear yard 20 feet
Minimum side yard, interior 15 feet
Minimum side yard, street 20 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum percent of lot coverage 30 percent
Required utilities. The minimum lot area is only permitted for property served by a central water system and a
central sanitary sewer service system. If no central sanitary sewer service is available, an applicant for a building
permit must have a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet per unit. If neither central sanitary sewer nor
central water system is available in the area at the time of building the applicant must have a minimum of fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet per unit and the permit will be issued with the requirement that upon such time
that either service extended to the property, hook-up will be required within ninety (90) days.
Accessory Buildings
Minimum setback from lot line:
Rear 10 feet
Side Same as principal building
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes
may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used.
(Mo. of 3-2-1982; Mo. of 12-3-1985; Mo. of 4-7-1995))
Sec. 5.5. - R-3 Multi-Family Residential Districts.
5.5.1.
Permitted uses.
5.5.1.1.
All permitted uses in Single-Family Residential districts and Two-Family Residential districts.
5.5.1.2.
Multiple family dwellings, rooming houses, fraternities, sororities, and dormitories.
5.5.1.3.
Customary accessory buildings incidental to the above permitted uses.
5.5.2.
Lot and building requirements.
Principal Buildings
Garden apartments
Living units Maximum
12 per
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
329/393
acre
Minimum lot width at building line 16 feet
Minimum front yard 10 feet
Minimum rear yard 15 feet
Minimum side yard, interior 0 feet
Minimum side yard, street 20 feet
Maximum building height 60 feet
Maximum percent of lot coverage 40
percent
Accessory building
Minimum setback from lot line:
Rear 10 feet
Side Same as
principal
building
Townhouse
Living units Maximum
10 per
acre
Minimum lot area 4,300 sq.
ft.
Minimum lot width at building line 16 feet
Minimum front yard 10 feet
Minimum rear yard 4 feet
Minimum side yard None if
buildings
are
attached
—40 feet
between
groups of
buildings.
Maximum number of units having same building line 8 units
Maximum building height 35 feet
Condominium
Living units Maximum
24 per
acre
Minimum width lot at building line 200 feet
Minimum size lot for project 1 acre
Minimum front yard 20 feet
Minimum rear yard 15 feet
Minimum side yard, street 8 feet
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
330/393
Maximum building height 40 feet
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes
may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used.
5.5.3.
Conditional uses.
5.5.3.1.
Bed and breakfast inns.
(Mo. of 11-2-1982; Mo. of 12-3-1985; Mo. of 4-7-1995)
Sec. 5.6. - R-4 Mobile Home Park Residential Districts.
5.6.1.
Permitted uses.
5.6.1.1.
Mobile home parks, and accessory structures incidental thereto.
5.6.1.2.
Recreational facilities.
5.6.1.3.
Laundry facilities solely for the mobile home park occupants.
5.6.1.4.
Office and mail facilities for the mobile home park.
5.6.1.5.
The sale of new and used mobile homes shall be permitted within the boundaries of an approved mobile home
park subject to the following conditions:
5.6.1.5.1.
Allowable number. The number of mobile homes for sale shall not exceed five (5) percent of the total number of
approved mobile home spaces in the mobile home parks.
5.6.1.5.2.
Location. Mobile homes for sale shall be located only on approved mobile home spaces in the mobile home
parks, and subject to the same setbacks and yard requirements as occupied mobile homes.
5.6.1.5.3.
Maintenance. There shall be no renovating, overhaul, or repair to mobile homes offered for sale within mobile
home parks. However, customary maintenance shall be permitted, such as would be allowed for an occupant
while living in a mobile home.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
331/393
5.6.1.5.4.
Advertising. There shall be no advertising signs, banners, pennants, or any type of display advertising mobile
homes for sale except that one sign, not over eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches shall be permitted
to be posted on each mobile home offered for sale.
5.6.2.
Approval of mobile home parks. No mobile home park may hereafter be developed or expanded until all
requirements and regulations set forth in the mobile home park ordinance for the county and this zoning
ordinance, have been met and the site plan thereof has the approval of the local governing authority.
Sec. 5.7. - B-1 Neighborhood Commercial Districts.
5.7.1.
Permitted uses.
Retail stores
Personal services
Professional services and offices
Banks
Commercial offices
Soda fountains, cafes or restaurants, (with-out entertainment)
Parking areas
Mortuaries
Public and semi-public uses
Utilities (except storage yards)
Accessory uses to the above
Outdoor signs
5.7.2.
Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in a Neighborhood Commercial district upon approval
of the governing authority:
Multiple dwellings
Theaters (indoor)
Entertainment facilities
Drive-in commercial uses (not including drive-in theaters)
Automotive sales with service and repair related to the sales. (Six-foot (6) fence required on sides and rear of
facility)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
332/393
Accessory uses to the above
Minimum side setback, street 15 feet
Maximum building height 35 feet
Maximum percent of lot coverage 25 percent
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes
may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used.
5.7.3.
Lot and building requirements.
Principal and accessory buildings:
Minimum lot area 6,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot width at building line 50 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
Minimum rear setback 30 feet
Minimum side setback, interior 10 feet
Minimum side setbacks for interior lots may be zero feet when two (2) adjacent lot owners wish to abut their
property and so request in writing. (Request should be made on application for building permit). Governing
authority may approve smaller lot sizes when buildings are to abut.
(Mo. of 5-7-1985; Mo. of 12-3-1985)
Sec. 5.8. - B-2 General Commercial Districts.
5.8.1.
Permitted uses:
Service stations
Restaurants
Motel and tourist courts
Tourist homes
Entertainment facilities
Retail businesses
Personal services
Offices and banks
Professional activities
Garages for service (excluding storing junked vehicles outdoors)
Drive-in commercial uses (including theaters)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
333/393
Mortuaries
Animal hospitals, clinics or kennels
Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries
Golf-driving ranges and miniature golf
Public and semi-public uses
Utilities
Lumber yards
Tire retreading and recapping
Business services
Food processing
Research and testing facilities
Billiard or pool rooms
Commercial recreation
Hotels
Printing, lithographing or publishing plants
Taverns
Accessory uses to the above
Outdoor advertising signs
Clubs and lodges
Mobile home sales
Automotive sales, with service and repair related to sales, (six (6) foot fence required on sides and rear).
5.8.2.
Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in a general commercial district upon approval of the
governing authority:
Amusement parks
Feed and grain, sales and storage
Wholesale business
Equipment sales and repair
Truck terminals
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
334/393
Stone or monument works
Bulk fuel storage
Cleaning, laundry and drying plants
Drive-in theaters
Cemeteries
Apartments
Machine shops
Accessory uses to the above
5.8.3.
Lot and building requirements .
Minimum lot area 6,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot width at building line 50 feet
Minimum front setback 30 feet
Minimum rear setback 30 feet
Minimum side setback, street 15 feet
Minimum side setback, interior 10 feet
Maximum building height 3 stories
Maximum percent of lot coverage 30 per cent
Minimum setbacks for interior lots may be zero feet when two (2) adjacent lot owners wish to abut their property
and so request in writing. (Request should be made on application for building permit.) Governing authority may
approve smaller lot sizes when buildings are to abut.
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes
may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used.
(Mo. of 10-4-1977; Mo. of 5-7-1985; Mo. of 12-3-1985)
Sec. 5.9. - I-1 Industrial Districts.
All uses in an industrial district shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission.
5.9.1.
Submission of plans. The owner of a tract of land zoned for industrial uses shall submit to the planning
commission for its review a plan for the use and development of each tract of land. It shall then be the duty of the
planning commission to investigate and ascertain whether the proposed activity complies with all of the
provisions of this ordinance which pertain to I-1 districts. The commission may employ experts in specific fields
as needed, and as funds are available, to determine whether a proposed use meets the required performance
standards.
5.9.2.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
335/393
Referral and authorization. A report of its findings shall be furnished by the commission to the governing
authority. The commission may suggest disapproval, recommend the plan as submitted, or may modify, alter,
adjust or amend the plan before recommendation, and in recommending it, may propose the prescribing of other
conditions. The report of the planning commission to the governing authority shall be in writing, and shall
include a finding as to whether the proposed use is consistent with the applicable provisions and requirements of
the zoning ordinance. If the governing authority finds that the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of the
zoning ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, it may direct the proper official to
authorize a permit.
5.9.3.
Performance standards. All industrial uses must conform to the following performance standards:
5.9.3.1.
Smoke. The emission of grey smoke at a density greater than no. 1 on the Ringlemann Chart published by the
U.S. Bureau of Mines (Power's Micro-Ringlemann development to the particular site and the particular demand
for housing and commercial activity existing at the time of development in a manner consistent with the
preservation of the property values within existing areas, and to ensure that the increased flexibility of
regulations over land development authorized herein is carried out under such administrative standards and
procedures as shall encourage the disposition of proposals for land development without undue delay; this
section is enacted.
[Sec. 5.10. - Planned Unit Development District.]
5.10.1.
Applicability of the planned unit development district.
5.10.1.1.
The provisions of section 5.10 of this ordinance shall apply only to a tract of land: (1) which either has a
minimum of five (5) acres, or (2) a minimum of twenty (20) units.
5.10.1.2.
The planning commission in its review of the proposed development plan shall consider:
5.10.1.2.1.
The adequacy of existing and proposed streets, utilities, and other public services to serve the development.
5.10.1.2.2.
The character, design, and appropriateness of the proposed land uses and their adequacy to encourage desirable
living conditions, to provide separation and screening between uses where desirable to preserve the natural
amenities of streams, wooded areas and similar natural features.
5.10.1.2.3.
The adequacy of open and play area and that recreation facilities are provided for the needs of the development.
5.10.1.3.
Approval and recommendation of the planning commission shall be accompanied by a report stating the reasons
for approval of the application and specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed planned unit
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
336/393
development will not adversely affect the property adjacent to the area included in the plan.
5.10.1.4.
Final approval of a planned unit development shall not be granted until the owner or owners of the property give
written notice of their consent to the proposed development.
5.10.2.
Review and administrative procedures.
5.10.2.1.
Pre-application conference. Before submitting an application for a planned unit development an applicant, at
applicant's option, may confer with the planning commission to obtain information and guidance before entering
into binding commitments or incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys, and other data.
5.10.2.2.
Development plan. The following information shall appear on the preliminary development plan:
5.10.2.2.1.
Detailed plan and general location map, showing the projected area prepared at a scale not less than one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall show such designations as proposed streets (public and private), all
buildings and their use, common open space, recreation facilities, parking areas, service areas, and other facilities
to indicate the character of the proposed development. The submission may be composed of one or more sheets
and drawings and shall include:
(a)
Boundary lines. Bearings and distance.
(b)
Easement. Location, width, and purpose.
(c)
Streets on, and adjacent to the tract. Street name, right-of-way width, existing or proposed centerline elevations,
pavement, walks, curbs, gutters, and culverts (and their respective types).
(d)
Utilities on and adjacent to the tract. Location, size, and invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; location
and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, manholes, electrical and telephone lines and street
lights; direction and distance to, and size of, nearest water mains and sewers adjacent to the tract showing invert
elevation of sewers.
(e)
Ground elevations on the tract. For land that slopes less than two (2) per cent, show one foot contours; show spot
elevations at all breaks in grades, along all drainage channels or swales, and at selected points not more than one
hundred (100) feet apart in all directions; for land that slopes more than two (2) per cent, show contours at five
(5) foot intervals.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
337/393
(f)
Subsurface conditions on the tract if required by the appropriate engineer. Location and results of tests made to
ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and groundwater conditions; depth to groundwater, unless test pits are dry at a
depth of five (5) feet.
(g)
Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
(h)
Internal uses of each building or structure, as well as the specific overall land use of the premises.
(i)
Title and certificates. Present tract designation according to official records of the office of deeds; title under
which the proposed development is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners, and notation stating
acreage.
(j)
Names. The names and addresses of the persons to whom notice of hearings are to be sent including the
subdivider or developer, the designer of the subdivision or development, and the owners of the land immediately
adjoining the land to be platted.
(k)
Open space. All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property
owners with the purpose indicated and their sizes.
(l)
General location, purpose, and height of each building, other than single-family residences on individually
platted lots.
(m)
Map data. Name of development, north point, scale and date of preparation.
5.10.2.3.
Character. Explanation of the character of the planned unit development and the reasons it has been planned to
take advantage of the flexibility of these regulations.
5.10.2.4.
Ownership. Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within the project.
5.10.2.5.
Schedule. Development schedule indicating:
5.10.2.5.1.
Stages in which project will be built with emphasis on area, density, use, and public facilities such as open space
to be developed with each stage. Overall design of each stage shall be shown on the plan and through supporting
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
338/393
graphic material.
5.10.2.5.2.
Approximate dates for beginning and completion of each stage.
5.10.2.6.
Covenants. Proposed agreements, provisions which will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection
of the planned unit development and any of its usable open space.
5.10.2.7.
Density. Provide information on the density of uses, including structures per acre, and the number of buildings
by type.
5.10.2.8.
Nonresidential use. Provide information on the type and amount of ancillary and nonresidential uses in a
residential planned unit development, including the amount and location of usable open space.
5.10.2.9.
Service facilities. Provide information on all service facilities and off-street parking facilities.
5.10.2.10.
Architectural plans. Preliminary architectural plans for all primary buildings shall be submitted in sufficient
detail to permit an understanding of the style of the development, the design of the building, and the number,
size, and type of dwelling units.
5.10.2.11.
Facilities plans. Preliminary plans for:
5.10.2.11.1.
Roads, including classification, width of right-of-way, width of pavement, and construction details.
5.10.2.11.2.
Sidewalks.
5.10.2.11.3.
Sanitary sewers.
5.10.2.11.4.
Storm drainage.
5.10.2.11.5.
Water supply system.
5.10.2.11.6.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
339/393
Underground supply system.
5.10.2.11.7.
A general landscape planting plan.
5.10.2.12.
Review of preliminary residential plan.
5.10.2.12.1.
Public hearings.
(a)
Within sixty (60) days after the filing of an application for tentative approval of a planned unit development, a
public hearing pursuant to public notice on said application shall be held by the planning commission. The
chairman, or, in the chairman's absence, the acting chairman, of the planning commission or its designated
agency may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing
shall be given under oath and every party of record at a hearing shall have the right to cross-examine adverse
witnesses.
(b)
A verbatim record of the hearing shall be made by the planning commission whenever such records are
requested by any party to the proceedings; but the cost of making and transcribing such a record shall be borne
by the party requesting it and the expense of copies of such record shall be borne by those who wish to obtain
such copies. All exhibits accepted in evidence shall be identified and duly preserved or, if not accepted in
evidence, shall be properly identified and the reason for the exclusion clearly noted in the record.
(c)
The planning commission may continue the hearing from time to time, and may refer the matter back to the
planning agency for a report, provided, however, that in any event, the public hearing or hearings shall be
concluded within sixty (60) days after the date of the first public hearing.
(d)
The planning commission, within thirty (30) days following the conclusion of the public hearing provided for in
this article, shall, by official written communication, to the landowners, either:
(1)
Grant tentative approval of the development plan as submitted;
(2)
Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not included in the development plan as submitted; or
(3)
Deny tentative approval to the development plan.
Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of tentative approval of the development plan as
submitted. In the event, however, that tentative approval is granted subject to conditions, the landowner may,
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
340/393
within thirty (30) days after receiving a copy of the official written communication of the planning commission,
notify such governing body of such land-owner's refusal to accept all said conditions, in which case, the planning
commission shall be deemed to have denied tentative approval of the development plan.
designation of the specific internal uses to which each building shall be put.
(e)
Tabulations on each separate unsubdivided use area, number of dwelling units per square acre.
(f)
Public facilities. All public facilities and improvements made necessary as a result of the planned residential
development shall be either constructed in advance of the approval of the final plan, or, at the election of the city.
Escrow deposits, irrevocable letters of credit in a form approved by the county, or performance bonds shall be
delivered to guarantee construction of the required improvements.
(g)
Covenants. Final agreements, provisions, or covenants shall govern the use, maintenance and continued
protection of the planned residential development.
(h)
A landscape plan showing the location, type and size at installation of all proposed landscape materials, existing
landscaping and trees to be retained on the site, as well as an identification of the existing trees to be removed
that are two (2) inches in diameter or greater, all proposed fences, walls, berms and any pertinent architectural
elements associated with the landscaped plan.
[5.10.2.13. Reserved.]
5.10.2.14.
[Requirements of Mylar submission.] Within a maximum of three (3) weeks following the date of final approval
by the planning commission of the final development plan, the applicant shall submit an eighteen inch by
twenty-four inch (18" ;times; 24") reproducible Mylar of the approved final development plan to the joint
planning commission which, at the expense of the developer, shall record final plan in the office of the register of
deeds. The Mylar shall contain the following information:
5.10.2.14.1.
Graphic representation of the exact location of all buildings and accessory structures.
5.10.2.14.2.
Land use characteristics in table form containing the following information:
(a)
Gross project area in terms of acres.
(b)
Net project area in terms of acres.
(c)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
341/393
Approved density for the project in terms of area per structure.
(d)
Approved usable open space for the project in terms of square feet of open space per structure.
(e)
Total number of parking spaces.
(f)
Total number of dwelling units in the project.
(g)
Number and type of nonresidential units in the project.
5.10.2.14.3.
Types and square footage of floor spaces of all non-residential uses provided:
(a)
Graphic representation of all public easements and legal descriptions thereof, to whom the easement is conveyed,
the purpose of such easement, and any conditions relating to the use of the easement.
5.10.2.14.4.
Legal description of the gross project area.
5.10.2.14.5.
All public and private streets, roads, and alleys included in the project shall be shown by their bearings, widths
and names. All streets, roads or alleys, not dedicated to public use, shall be marked "private" and named. All
curves, portions of streets, roads or alleys shall be defined by curve data including points of curvature, points of
tangency, points of compound curvature, radii of curves, central angles and length and bearing of its long chord.
5.10.2.14.6.
In the event streets in the planned residential development are to be dedicated, a statement shall appear on the
Mylar that the streets shown on it are dedicated to the use of the public.
5.10.2.14.7.
The planning commission shall issue a certificate certifying the final approval of the planned unit development,
and the chairman of the planning commission shall place such chairman's signature on such certificate which
shall appear on the Mylar. In the event said Mylar is not submitted three (3) weeks following the date of final
approval, the building official shall not issue any building permits for the development or phase of a particular
development until said Mylar is received.
5.10.2.14.8.
In the event the planned unit development is to be submitted for final approval in stages, the applicant shall
submit reproducible Mylars for each stage of the development containing the information required above.
5.10.2.15.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
342/393
[Control after final approval.] Control of the planned residential development after final approval.
5.10.2.15.1.
After the certificate of approval has been stamped on the reproductive Mylar and other prints of plans and signed
by appropriate officials, the use of land and the construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or
structures within the planned residential development will be governed by the approved and recorded final
development plan rather than by other provisions of this zoning ordinance except the minor land use and
engineering changes permitted by this section.
5.10.2.15.2.
After the certificate of final approval has been issued and the final plan recorded, no changes may be made in the
approved final development plan, except upon application to the appropriate agency under the procedures
provided below:
(a)
Major land use changes. Changes which alter the concept or intent of the planned residential development,
including changes in the approved public street or private drive construction standards, increases in density,
decreases in proposed open space, changes in sizes of public and/or private sewer or water lines, other than
service connections, resulting in less capacity, changes in the location of and types of nonresidential uses
approved by the planning commission, change in the alignment of any street, drive, parking area or water or
sewer line in excess of twenty-five (25) feet, change in the location of any public easement, change in the
proportion of housing types by not more than fifteen (15) per cent of the approved dwelling unit court, a
violation of any specific condition set forth by the planning commission and any changes in the final governing
agreements, provisions, or covenants. All such changes may be approved only by submission of a new
preliminary plan and supporting data, following the preliminary approval steps and subsequent amendment of
the final planned unit development plan.
(b)
Minor land use changes. The following minor changes to the approved final plan may be authorized by the
chairman of the planning commission upon written request by the developer and upon submission of detailed
plans demonstrating the requested change:
(1)
Decrease in density.
(2)
Increases in open space.
(3)
Changes in the proportion of housing unit types by less than fifteen (15) per cent of the approved dwelling unit
count.
(4)
Increases in acreage of the planned residential development providing that the acreage under consideration is ten
(10) per cent or less of the gross site area, in which the increase can only be used for open space, accessory
buildings or parking.
(5)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
343/393
A density increase of not more than (10) per cent of the approved dwelling unit total, providing that the overall
lot area requirement per dwelling unit of the district is not exceeded.
(c)
Minor engineering changes. The following minor engineering changes to the approved engineering plans may be
authorized by the director of public works in consultation with the appropriate engineer and others as required
only upon written request by the developer and submission of detailed engineering plans demonstrating the
requested change:
(1)
Changes in road alignment and parking lot location by twenty-five (25) feet or less.
(2)
Changes in the alignment of storm and sanitary sewers and water lines by twenty-five (25) feet or less.
(3)
Increases in the approved capacity of storm and sanitary sewers and water lines.
In the event a situation occurs where it is not clear whether a modification constitutes a major or minor change,
the responsibility to make such determination shall be jointly vested with the chairman of the planning
commission, and the appropriate engineer.
(d)
A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final approval shall be so certified without delay
by the planning commission and shall be filed on record forthwith in the office of the recorder of deeds before
the development shall take place in accordance therewith. Upon filing record of the development plan, the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in such plan shall cease to apply thereto.
Pending completion within a reasonable time of said planned residential development or of that part thereof, as
the case may be, that has been finally approved, no modification of the provisions of said development plan, or
part thereof, as finally approved, shall be made except with the consent of the landowner.
(e)
In the event that a development plan, or a section thereof, is given final approval and thereafter the landowner
shall abandon such plan or the section thereof that has been finally approved, and shall so notify the governing
body in writing; or in the event the landowner shall fail to commence and carry out the planned residential
development within such reasonable period of time as may be fixed by ordinance after final approval has been
granted, no development or further development shall take place on the property included in the development
plan until after the said property is resubdivided and is reclassified by enactment of an amendment to the zoning
ordinance.
(Mo. of 10-4-1977)
Sec. 5.11. - DM-1 Dunes and Marshlands District.
It is the intent of this district to protect those areas of the county that are considered to be environmentally
sensitive to development, due to soil types, drainage, vegetation, wildlife habitats or other factors that are subject
to being seriously endangered, damaged, or destroyed if allowed to develop in a manner inconsistent with their
conservation and preservation. Since the welfare and well-being of the citizens of the county are directly linked
and related to the natural environment of the area, it is recognized that in order to maintain sensitive areas in
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
344/393
their natural condition for the benefit of mankind, it is necessary to protect such areas from degradation. All
regulations of the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act* shall be applicable in this district.
[Sec. 5.12. - ]
5.12.1.5.
Community centers and similar places of public assembly.
5.12.1.6.
Hospitals.
5.12.2.
Conditional uses. When approved by the governing authority.
5.12.2.1.
Pharmacy, when O-I district includes medical clinics, doctor's offices and/or a hospital.
5.12.2.2.
Private or public care homes, provided such facility conforms with the requirements of the Georgia State Board
of Health and provided plans for such facilities receive the written approval of the Liberty County Board of
Health prior to the issuance of any permits for construction and operation; copies of such approval to be attached
to the building permit and to be retained in the files of the county building official.
5.12.3.
Lot and building requirements.
Minimum lot area: six thousand (6,000) square feet.
Minimum front setback: thirty (30) feet.
Minimum side setback: fifteen (15) feet.
Minimum rear setback: twenty (20) feet.
Maximum building height: three (3) stories.
Minimum side setbacks may be zero (0) feet when two (2) adjacent lot owners wish to abut their buildings. Lot
sizes may be decreased when buildings are to abut.
Parking shall be in accordance with subsection 3.29.2.
(Ord. of 4-4-1989)
State law reference— Coastal Marshlands Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280 et seq.
Sec. 5.13. - Liberty Gateway Overlay District.
(a)
General. There shall be established within (regulating jurisdiction) Georgia, a zoning district which is placed
over the base zoning system to modify the development guidelines and to achieve a specific purpose for those
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
345/393
areas which fall within the boundaries of the district. The Liberty Gateway Overlay District is hereby
established, with accompanying design guidelines. All land, buildings and structures within the overlay district
shall be regulated by the following separate and distinct regulations:
(1)
The regulations of the underlying, or base, zoning system, meaning the use regulations, special permit uses,
height regulations, area regulations, road and transportation requirements, subdivision regulations, and other
zoning-related requirements that apply to a parcel by virtue of the zoning classification assigned to that parcel by
the city (county); and
(2)
The additional regulations and design standards set forth in the Liberty Gateway Overlay District, which shall
apply to all roads, parcels, buildings, structures, and signs by virtue of their lying within the boundaries of the
overlay district.
In the event of a conflict between these two (2) regulations, this document shall apply.
(b)
Legislative purpose and intent. U.S. Highway 84 and the surrounding areas serve as a significant gateway into
Liberty County and each of her communities. The overall appearance of this area and the efficiency of the
transportation network are of the utmost importance to the county as a whole. Therefore, these design guidelines
have been developed to provide a resource to address development within this area. The purpose and intent of
these guidelines are as follows:
(1)
Preserve and enhance natural, cultural, and historic resources of Liberty County and encourage designs
compatible with these goals;
(2)
Develop a gateway to the county to encourage tourism and economic development consistent with Liberty
County's vision;
(3)
Promote an attractive view from I-95 which will reflect a positive image of Liberty County to the travelling
public;
(4)
Develop an efficient transportation network of interconnected streets and multimodal facilities;
(5)
Preserve and enhance the capacity and safety of regional highways, especially U.S. Highway 84; and
(6)
To distinguish Liberty County from other exits along Interstate 95.
(c)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
346/393
Establishment of the Liberty Gateway Overlay District. The district is generally described in the Liberty
Gateway District Design Guidelines attached to Ord. No. 2008-003 with an exhibit map being part of the
ordinance showing the overlay district boundaries and are specifically delineated on the official zoning map of
(regulating jurisdiction), Liberty County, Georgia. Properties including Tier I and II areas shall include:
(1)
Parcels or any portion of a parcel within seven hundred fifty (750) feet from the right-of-way of the subject
corridor.
(2)
For existing lots of record, if more than thirty (30) percent of the entire parcel is within seven hundred fifty (750)
feet from the right-of-way of the subject corridor, then the entire parcel is included within Tier I or Tier II as
appropriate.
The boundaries of the Tier I and Tier II areas may be adjusted based upon a natural or manmade feature upon a
recommendation by the LCPC and the approval of the governing jurisdiction.
(d)
Effect upon existing land uses.
(1)
All existing parcels shall be considered to be in compliance with this section until the parcel is developed,
redeveloped, modified, or rehabilitated, at which time all such development, redevelopment or land disturbance
shall adhere to the new regulations set forth in the Gateway Sector Overlay District.
(2)
Properties located within the overlay district will retain all of the rights conferred by their existing zoning
classifications.
(3)
Nothing in this section shall preclude a property owner from petitioning the (regulating jurisdiction) for an
amendment, modification or variance to any zoning classification as otherwise allowed by the jurisdiction's
zoning ordinance.
(4)
Existing properties which are redeveloped or renovated within this district shall comply if the value of said
improvements made to the property within a five-year period is fifty (50) percent or more of the assessed tax
value of the property.
(e)
Effect upon existing applications for development. All applications for development within the Liberty Gateway
District prior to December 2, 2008, shall be exempt from the regulations herein. Any application submitted to the
LCPC for development or redevelopment on or after December 2, 2008, is subject to the requirements of the
Liberty Gateway District.
Single-family residential uses on existing lots of record as of the effective date of this ordinance may be
exempted from the requirements of this ordinance upon approval by the governing body.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
347/393
(f)
Liberty Gateway District Design Review Board.
(1)
Creation and composition. There is hereby created a design board of review (hereinafter referred to as the
"board") which shall consist of five (5) voting members interested in the quality of growth and development in
the Liberty Gateway District. Such board shall include the following members who shall be appointed as such:
a.
LCPC executive director (chair): Ex officio member.
b.
Two (2) qualified design professionals from the fields of planning, architecture, landscape architecture: One (1)
each appointed by the City of Midway City Council and the Liberty County Board of Commissioners.
c.
Representative of the City of Midway: Appointed by the City of Midway City Council.
d.
Representative of the Liberty County: Appointed by Liberty County Board of Commissioners.
e.
Building official—City of Midway: Ex officio, nonvoting member.
f.
Building official—Liberty County: Ex officio, nonvoting member.
(2)
Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the board shall include the area contained with the Liberty Gateway District and
those elements of development, redevelopment and other construction or land alteration within the overlay
district, as indicated on the official zoning map.
(3)
Decision-making authority. The board shall provide recommendations on all submittals as required by this
ordinance to the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC). The LCPC will communicate all
recommendations, along with accompanying plans, to the appropriate governing authority (e.g., board of
commissioners or Midway City Council). Final actions of approval or disapproval shall be made by the
governing authority with jurisdiction over the subject property.
(4)
Independent counsel. The board shall have the right to seek independent counsel and review.
(5)
Terms of office. In initial establishment of the board, the City of Midway and Liberty County shall each appoint
one (1) member for a one-year term and one (1) member for a two-year term. All subsequent terms shall be for
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
348/393
two (2) years. Members shall be eligible for reappointment for an additional term of two (2) years. A member
who has served for two (2) successive terms shall not be eligible for reappointment for a period of two (2) years
after the termination of his or her second term. The term of a board member may be terminated and a new
member appointed in the event the board member fails to attend any three (3) consecutive board meetings. Term
limits shall not be in effect for those serving in their official capacity as an employee of the City of Midway,
Liberty County, or the LCPC.
(6)
Serve without pay. Members of the board shall serve without pay.
(7)
Organization. The board shall elect from its membership a vice-chairman. The office of chair shall be provided
by the executive director of the LCPC. No member shall serve for more than two (2) successive terms in the
same office.
a.
Chair. The chair shall preside over the board and shall sign all certificates of appropriateness approved by the
board.
b.
Vice-chair. In the absence or disability of the chair, the vice-chair shall perform the duties of the chair and in so
serving shall have the same duties and authorities as the chair.
c.
Secretary. An LCPC staff member shall serve as secretary to the board and shall maintain the records and
minutes of the board.
(8)
Quorum. Three (3) members of the board shall constitute a quorum.
(9)
Majority required for approval. All approvals require a majority vote, defined as the majority of the full board,
regardless of the number of board members present.
(10)
Rules of procedure. The board shall adopt rules, not inconsistent with the provisions set forth in this section, for
the transaction of its business and consideration of applications. Such rules shall provide for the time and place
of regular meetings and for the calling of special meetings. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public
and a public record shall be kept of the board's resolutions, proceedings and actions.
(11)
Design review board staff. The LCPC staff shall function as staff for the design review board. Applications for
development within the Gateway Overlay District will be reviewed for completion before submitting to the
board for review.
(12)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
349/393
Meetings. The board shall meet as called to review submittals.
(13)
Calendar. Applications shall be docketed and placed upon the calendar of the board in the order in which they
are received. Materials to be reviewed by the Board shall be submitted to the offices of the Liberty Consolidated
Planning Commission not less than ten (10) working days before the scheduled appearance date.
(14)
Action required by the design review board. The design review board shall take action within forty-five (45) days
upon the receipt of a complete application. If no action is taken within this time frame, the application shall be
forwarded to the LCPC for action.
(g)
Procedural requirements. Presentations to the design review board must include sufficient technical and
illustrative information about the proposed design for the board to reach an informed conclusion about the
project's ability to be completed within the guidelines. Presentations for specific developments should include
plan, elevation and section information relating to adjacent and/or opposing properties and block faces in
sufficient detail to clearly demonstrate the appropriateness of the proposed designs. Three (3) dimensional
representations may be requested illustrating a project from ground level and/or as part of a larger contextual
framework.
(1)
Zoning approval. Master plans as required for submittal at the time of a rezoning application are not required to
undergo review and approval under this overlay district to move through the zoning process. However, this
provision does not remove the applicability of this ordinance to any property in the Gateway Overlay District
prior to the issuance of any development permits.
(2)
Master plan approval. For developments which also include a subdivision of property, the master plan and plat
may proceed through the review process, independent of architectural review. The LCPC may allow final plat
approval subject to future action of the board regarding architecture and design plan submittals.
(3)
Site plan approval. For developments which require review and approval of a building(s), the site plan and
building(s) shall be reviewed concurrently.
(4)
Building permits. No building permits shall be issued until the final plat is approved and all other requirements of
this ordinance are met.
(Ord. No. 2008-003, 12-2-2008)
ARTICLE VI. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
Sec. 6.1. - Existing lots of record.
Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this ordinance in any "A-1," "AR-1," or "R" district, may be
used for the erection of a single-family dwelling, even though its area and width is less than the minimum
requirements set forth herein, except as set forth hereinafter. Front, side and rear yards shall conform with the
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
350/393
requirements of this ordinance as closely as possible. Where two (2) adjacent lots of record with less than the
required area and width are held by one owner, the request for a permit shall be referred to the board of
commissioners, which may require that the two (2) lots be combined and used for one main building.
Sec. 6.2. - Yards.
6.2.1.
Front yards of through lots. In any "R" district, where a lot runs through a block from street to street, a front yard
as required by this ordinance shall be provided along each street lot line.
6.2.2.
Projections into yards and courts. A wall or fence six (6) feet in height or under, or higher if a retaining wall,
may be erected within the limits of any yard not extending beyond the front setback line. Any wall or fence in
the front yard, not including a retaining wall, shall be limited to forty-eight (48) inches in height.
[Patio restrictions.] Patios may not be located closer than ten (10) feet to any adjacent property line.
Architectural projects. Chimneys, leaders, cornices, eaves, gutters and bay windows, and the like, may extend
not more than twenty-four (24) inches into any required yard.
6.2.3.
Accessory structures. Accessory structures which are attached to the principal building shall comply with all the
yard requirements for a principal structure.
Unattached accessory structures in "A-1," "AR-1," and "R" districts may be erected within a rear yard, provided
they conform with the following:
Maximum height. One and one-half (1½) stories or fifteen (15) feet, except in "A-1" and "AR-1" districts.
An accessory structure shall not be less than ten (10) feet from any lot line.
An accessory structure shall be located not less than ten (10) feet from a principal structure.
Not more than two (2) accessory structures, including a private garage, shall be located in any "R" district, on
one lot.
Unattached non-residential accessory structures shall comply with the front and side yard requirements for the
principal structure. They shall have a rear yard of ten (10) feet, except as otherwise specified in this ordinance.
(Mo. of 10-4-1977)
ARTICLE VII. - APPEALS
Sec. 7.1. - Organization and procedure.
7.1.1.
Authority. All appeals shall be decided by the governing authority, the same being the board of commissioners of
the county.
7.1.2.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
351/393
Procedure. Appeals may be made by any person or official aggrieved or affected by any provision of the zoning
ordinance or by the decision of the planning commission or by the decision of the building and zoning inspector
or other officer charged with enforcement of the provisions of the zoning ordinance. Such appeal must be made
within twenty (20) days after said decision, by filing with the building and zoning inspector, a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds therefore. The building and zoning inspector shall arrange for the proper notices and shall
bring the appeal before the governing authority at its next meeting.
7.1.3.
Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the
building and zoning inspector shall certify to the governing authority after the notice of appeal has been filed
with it, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in such inspector's opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the governing authority or by a court of equity, after notice to the officer from whom
the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
7.1.4.
Filing. The governing authority may require the applicant to furnish such information as it deems necessary,
when filing an application or appeal, and may require specific forms to be used.
7.1.5.
Reserved.
7.1.6.
Refiling of disapproved or withdrawn cases. If a case is disapproved by the governing authority, thereafter the
governing authority shall take no further action for substantially the same proposal or the same property, until
one year after the date of such disapproval. If a case before the governing authority is advertised, and thereafter
withdrawn by the applicant before or at the meeting of the governing authority, applicant shall be precluded from
filing another application for substantially the same proposal on the same premises for six (6) months.
(Mo. of 9-6-1983)
Sec. 7.2. - Hearings.
Upon filing of an appeal or application, the governing authority shall fix a time and place for a hearing, and give
notice as follows:
7.2.1.
Public notice. Notice given not more than thirty (30) days and not less than fifteen (15) days in advance of any
public hearing required by this ordinance. Such notice shall be published once each week for two (2) successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. Such notice shall state the time and place of the
hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
7.2.2.
Decisions of the governing authority. The governing authority shall decide all applications and appeals within
sixty (60) days after the final hearing thereon. Notice of decision shall be given to all parties so requesting. The
governing authority's decision shall be binding on the building and zoning inspector, and such inspector shall
incorporate the terms and conditions of the same in any permit issued.
(Mo. of 9-6-1983)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
352/393
Sec. 7.3. - Conditional uses.
Initial application for a conditional use shall be made to the building and zoning inspector who shall determine
whether the use is allowed as a conditional use in the particular zone. If such use is allowed, the building and
zoning inspector shall submit the application to the planning commission for its comments. Upon review by the
planning commission, recommendations shall be presented to the governing authority as to additional restraints,
restrictions, qualifications, or limiting factors that are felt to be desirable. The governing authority shall review
all recommendations and approve or disapprove the conditional use.
7.3.1.
Considerations for determining additional requirements for conditional use.
7.3.1.1.
Approval of a conditional use shall not adversely affect the economic values or the physical appearance of the
neighborhood or areas surrounding the site or lot in question.
7.3.1.2.
The physical and environmental effects of allowing the conditional use shall be considered.
7.3.1.3.
Buffer zones, where necessary to shield any adverse factors, shall be considered.
7.3.1.4.
Additional space for parking, landscaping, building, loading zones and setback shall be considered if necessary
to protect adjacent structures or lots from any adverse impact.
7.3.2.
Action of governing authority. The governing authority may add, delete, modify, or change any recommendation
made by the planning commission.
(Mo. of 9-6-1983)
Sec. 7.4. - Powers and Limitations of the Board.
7.4.1.
Administrative review. The governing authority shall have the following powers:
7.4.1.1.
To hear and decide appeals where an error is alleged in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by the building and zoning inspector in the enforcement of any section or article adopted pursuant to this
ordinance.
7.4.1.2.
To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon which such board is required to pass.
7.4.1.3.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
353/393
To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary
to the public interest where, owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance
will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual
case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the governing authority that:
(a)
There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question
because of its size, shape, or topography;
(b)
The application of the ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship;
(c)
Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and
(d)
Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of
the ordinance; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that
is prohibited by the ordinance. In exercising the above powers, the governing authority may, in conformity with
the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements,
decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken
and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.
7.4.2.
Variances. On an appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination of the building and zoning
inspector, or any other administrative officer or agency, the governing authority may grant a variance in the
application of the provisions of the zoning ordinance, only if all of the following findings are made:
7.4.2.1.
That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of
lot size or shape or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and
that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not to circumstances or conditions generally created
by the provisions of the zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
7.4.2.2.
That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be
developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the zoning ordinance, and that the authorization of a
variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
(Mo. of 9-6-1983)
ARTICLE VIII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 8.1. - Administration.
8.1.1.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
354/393
Building and zoning inspector. The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by a building and zoning
inspector, the office of which is hereby established.
8.1.1.1.
Duties. The duties of the building and zoning inspector shall be:
8.1.1.1.1.
To receive and check all applications for zoning permits and certificates of occupancy.
8.1.1.1.2.
To issue zoning permits and certificates of occupancy only for construction and uses which are in accordance
with the regulations of this ordinance and subsequent amendments; or through board or court approval.
8.1.1.1.3.
To record and file all application for zoning permits and certificates of occupancy together with accompanying
plans and documents and keep them for public record.
8.1.1.1.4.
To immediately prepare and publish a complete list of all nonconforming uses and occupations existing at the
time of adoption of this ordinance or any amendment thereto. Such list shall contain the names and addresses of
the owner or owners of such nonconforming uses and of any occupant other than the owner, the legal description
or descriptions of the land, to the degree reasonably attainable, and the nature and extent of land use. Notification
of this list shall be given by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the jurisdiction
of this ordinance indicating where and when such list may be examined. Property owners and occupants shall be
given one month to inspect the list and suggest necessary changes. They shall be given opportunity to appeal to
the board for such changes in the list, as they request, but which are not made by the building and zoning
inspector. After any necessary changes have been made by the building and zoning inspector, copies of the list
shall be delivered to the board of commissioners for approval and recording.
The building and zoning inspector shall issue certificates of occupancy for legal nonconforming uses. He shall
examine them periodically to determine that they do not expand beyond the limitation prescribed in the
ordinance.
8.1.1.1.5.
Upon specific request of the commission or board, to furnish such facts, records and similar information, which
will assist such body in reaching its decision.
8.1.1.1.6.
To be responsible for keeping this ordinance, including the zoning map, up to date, and to include any
amendments thereto. To approve plats which qualify as exceptions to the definitions of a "subdivision" contained
in the subdivision regulations.
8.1.1.1.7.
If the building and zoning inspector shall find that any provisions of this ordinance are being violated, such
inspector shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation
and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Such inspector shall order discontinuance of illegal uses of land,
buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations of structural changes
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
355/393
thereto; order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or shall by this ordinance prevent violation of its
provisions.
(Mo. of 3-2-1982)
Sec. 8.2. - Zoning permits and certificates of occupancy.
8.2.1.
Zoning permits. A zoning permit shall be required prior to the erection, construction, moving or alteration of any
building, structure or portion thereof.
Applications for zoning permits shall be made in writing to the building and zoning inspector, and shall contain
all information necessary to ascertain whether the proposed erection, construction, alteration or use complies
with the provisions of this ordinance including the following:
8.2.1.1.
Plan in duplicate drawn to scale indicating:
8.2.1.1.1.
Actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon.
8.2.1.1.2.
Exact size and location on the lot of all buildings and other structures, if any, and the location and dimensions of
proposed buildings and other structures or alterations.
8.2.1.1.3.
Existing and proposed uses, showing the number of families the building is designed to accommodate.
8.2.2.
Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be required prior to the occupation for use or change of
use of land, building or structure.
Application for certificate of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building and zoning inspector.
When use of premises involves a new building or structure, or alterations to an existing building or structure,
such application shall be made at the same time application for a zoning permit is made.
When no construction or alteration is involved, application to occupy and use land may be made at any time.
Such application shall contain all information necessary for the building and zoning inspector to determine
whether the proposed occupation and use of land conforms to the provisions of this ordinance.
An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be granted or refused within fifteen (15) days after the
building and zoning inspector has been officially notified of: (a) completion of construction, or (b) application to
occupy and use land where no construction is involved.
Sec. 8.3. - Enforcement.
This ordinance shall be enforced by the building and zoning inspector. No permit or certificate of occupancy
provided for in this ordinance shall be granted by such inspector for any purpose except in compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance, or with a decision of the governing authority or the courts.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
356/393
Sec. 8.4. - Complaints regarding violations.
Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, which shall be filed with the building and zoning inspector.
Such inspector shall acknowledge such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided
in this ordinance.
Sec. 8.5. - Schedule of fees.
Fees shall be paid in connection with applications under this ordinance as follows:
Application for appeal to the governing authority: $100.00
Application for zone changes: $100.00
Building permits as established by the board of commissioners
(Mo. of 9-2-1975; Mo. of 4-5-1983; Mo. of 9-6-1983)
Sec. 8.6. - Remedies.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any
building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, or of any ordinance or other regulation made
under authority conferred hereby, the board of commissioners, or with the approval of the board of
commissioners, the building and zoning inspector or other proper official, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the
occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, business, or use in or about such
premises.
ARTICLE IX. - AMENDMENTS TO MAP OR TEXT
FOOTNOTE(S):
(12) State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; zoning proposal review
procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-1 et seq.
Sec. 9.1. - General.
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice require, the governing
authority by ordinance, may, after receipt of recommendation thereon from the planning commission, and subject
to the procedures provided by law, amend, supplement, or change the regulations, district boundaries or
classifications of property, now or hereafter established by this ordinance or amendments thereof.
(Mo. of 12-3-1985)
Sec. 9.2. - Applications for change.
Applications for any change in the text or classifications of property shown on the zoning map, shall be
submitted to the building and zoning inspector upon such forms and accompanied by such data and information
as may be prescribed for that purpose by such inspector, so as to assure the fullest practicable presentation of
facts for the record. Each application for a change of district boundaries or classification of property shall be
verified by at least one of the owners or lessees of property or such person's representative, attesting to the truth
and correctness of all facts and information presented with the application. It shall contain a map of the area
proposed to be rezoned, and the area within two hundred (200) feet, giving the names and addresses of property
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
357/393
owners, and all district boundary lines, and streets and alleys located therein. The inspector shall check the
application to determine whether it conforms with the requirements listed above. Amendments to the zoning
ordinance may also be initiated by the Liberty County Joint Planning Commission and after a public hearing,
may be recommended to the local governing authority.
(Mo. of 12-3-1985)
Sec. 9.3. - Public hearing.
All amendments to this zoning ordinance shall require a public hearing. Additional public hearings may be held
if deemed appropriate by the governing authority.
9.3.1.
Responsibility for hearing. The Liberty County Joint Planning Commission is delegated authority to hold all
hearings required by this ordinance in lieu of a hearing by the governing authority.
9.3.2.
Public notice of hearing. Notice of hearing shall be given at least fifteen (15), but not more that forty-five (45)
days in advance by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county by the commission and shall
state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. If the purpose of the hearing is to consider rezoning property
(amend zoning map), the notice shall include the location of the property, Liberty County tax map number and
parcel number, its present zoning classification and proposed zoning classification and owner or representative
who is making the request.
9.3.3.
Posting sign on property. A sign shall be placed on the property (in a conspicuous location) by the commission,
not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, containing information that rezoning is being considered, the
date, time and place of the hearing, present zoning classification and proposed zoning classification.
9.3.4.
Notice to applicant. The commission shall notify the applicant in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of
the date, time and place of the hearing.
9.3.5.
Notice to other property owners. The commission shall give notice of the time, place and purpose of public
hearings to be held by it on proposed amendments or supplements, by mailing a postal card or letter notice to the
owners of all properties lying within two hundred (200) feet of any part of the property proposed to be changed.
The failure to notify any specific property owner as provided in this section, shall not invalidate any
recommendations adopted hereunder, provided that other adjacent property owners are notified; it being the
intention of the section to provide, so far as may be possible, due notice to the persons substantially interested in
the proposed change, that an application is pending before the commission, proposing to make a change in the
zoning map or the regulations set forth in this ordinance.
9.3.6.
Conduct of hearing. The following procedures shall be followed:
9.3.6.1.
The hearing shall be conducted by the chairman of the Liberty County Joint Planning Commission or in the
chairman's absence by the vice-chairman.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
358/393
9.3.6.2.
A secretary shall record the proceedings of the public hearing. The record with all evidence submitted at the
hearing shall be recorded as such and become a permanent part of the particular zoning amendment's file. Any
party desiring a verbatim transcript of the hearing may bring a stenographer or tape recorder.
9.3.6.3.
The chairman shall open the hearing by stating the specific zoning amendment being considered and indicated on
county tax map the specific area involved.
9.3.6.4.
The chairman shall determine if the applicant is present.
9.3.6.5.
The chairman shall determine the number and names of persons attending who desire to testify or present
evidence at the hearing.
9.3.6.6.
The chairman shall permit the applicant to present the proposal, then.
9.3.6.7.
The chairman shall permit each person attending who has indicated a desire, to present such person's evidence,
and/or speak. When there are a large number of individuals, time limits may be invoked which shall apply
equally to all individuals.
9.3.6.8.
All speakers shall address the chair and may not ask questions of each other. Members of the commission may
ask questions of any speaker.
9.3.6.9.
When all have been heard the chairman shall declare that the receiving of testimony is closed.
9.3.6.10.
After the receipt of all testimony and the consideration of all facts developed, the commission shall take into
account the following factors:
a.
Will the zoning proposal adversely affect the existing use value or usability of adjacent or nearby property? This
especially applies to adjacent or nearby residential property.
b.
Will the proposed zoning amendment permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent
and nearby property?
c.
Does the property proposed to be rezoned have a reasonable economic use as currently zoned?
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
359/393
d.
Will the proposed zoning change result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of
existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools?
e.
Will the proposed zoning change be in conformity with the policy and intent of the Liberty County land use
plan?
f.
Are there other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property proposed to be
rezoned which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval?
g.
Is this request a logical extension of a zoning boundary which would improve the pattern of uses in the general
area and conform to the comprehensive plan?
h.
Is this spot zoning and generally unrelated to either existing zoning or the pattern of development of the area, and
contrary to the intent of the comprehensive plan?
i.
Would granting this request extend to the applicant development rights denied to others similarly situated in the
same area?
j.
Does this request have the potential of achieving short-term, to the disadvantage of long-term, development
goals?
k.
Could this request have a domino effect, in that it becomes the opening wedge for further rapid growth,
urbanization, or other land-use change beyond what is indicated in the existing land use plan?
l.
Could a change in classification adversely affect market values and/or tax rates of nearby properties?
9.3.7.
Action by planning commission. When all considerations of the matter have been completed the chairman shall
entertain a motion from any member of the planning commission as to what recommendation shall be made to
the governing authority. If no motion is made, the chairman shall ask for a vote of those who recommend
approval and then those who recommend disapproval. The planning commission may recommend approval,
disapproval or approval to a more restrictive zoning than that requested.
(Mo. of 12-3-1985)
Sec. 9.4. - Reconsideration of zoning decision.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
360/393
All adverse determination of rezoning requests made by the governing authority may not be again submitted for
rezoning for a period of six (6) months from the date of the adverse determination by the governing authority.
(Mo. of 12-3-1985)
ARTICLE X. - INTERPRETATION AND VALIDITY
Sec. 10.1. - Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not
intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits
previously adopted or issued and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or which shall be
adopted or issued, pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with
this ordinance; nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements,
covenants, or other agreements between parties not in conflict with this ordinance.
Sec. 10.2. - Validity.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
of this ordinance.
Sec. 10.3. - Repeal.
All ordinances or parts thereof which are in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
Sec. 10.4. - Effective date.
This ordinance shall become effective from and after the date of its approval and adoption provided by law.
ARTICLE XI. - CRIMINAL PENALTIES
Sec. 11.1. - Penalties.
Violation of the provisions of the zoning ordinance (Appendix A Zoning in said Code of Ordinances of Liberty
County, Georgia) as amended hereby or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute
a misdemeanor. Any person who violates said zoning ordinance (as amended) or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned
for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the zoning administrator of Liberty County from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
(Ord. of 11-1-1988)
Sec. 11.2. - Jurisdiction.
The magistrate's court of Liberty County shall have jurisdiction over violations of said zoning ordinance (as
amended) and all procedures for enforcement of said zoning ordinance (as amended) shall be as provided in
article 4, chapter 10, title 15, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Complaints of violations of any provision of
said zoning ordinance (as amended) shall be brought before the magistrate's court on a citation issued by said
zoning administrator or the chief magistrate of Liberty County and shall be prosecuted through that court.
Violations of said zoning ordinance (as amended) will be tried upon citations either with or without a prosecuting
attorney as determined by said zoning administrator. Service of citation shall be performed by the constable of
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
361/393
the magistrate's court of Liberty County, Georgia. Citations shall meet all of the requirements as specified in the
Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 15-10-63 [O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63], as amended.
(Ord. of 11-1-1988)
Sec. 11.3. - Other penalties.
In addition to criminal penalties listed above, violation of the provisions of the zoning ordinance, as amended,
shall be cause for denial of a business license, and where a business license has already been granted shall be
cause for suspension, revocation or denial of renewal of such business license.
(Ord. of 11-1-1988)
Sec. 11.4. - Effective date.
The effective date of this amending ordinance shall be November 1, 1988.
(Ord. of 11-1-1988)
Sec. 11.5. - Repeal.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this amending ordinance are repealed.
(Ord. of 11-1-1988)
ARTICLE XII. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
Sec. 12.1. - Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to impose certain permitting requirements for the siting of all wireless, cellular,
television and radio telecommunications towers and antennas; to encourage the location of towers in
nonresidential areas; to minimize the total number of towers within the community necessary to provide
adequate personal wireless services to residents of Liberty County and surrounding areas; to encourage the joint
use of new and existing tower sites among service providers; to locate telecommunications towers and antennas
in areas where adverse impacts on the community are minimized; to encourage the design and construction of
towers and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts; and to enhance the ability of the providers of
telecommunications services to deliver such services to the community effectively and efficiently.
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § I, 10-3-2000)
Sec. 12.2. - Definitions.
Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall
be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. Words used in the singular
include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the
future tense. The word "erected" includes the words "constructed," "located," or "relocated." The word "map" or
"zoning map" means the Zoning Maps of Liberty County, Georgia. The word "parcel" includes the word "plot"
or "lot." The word "person" includes the words "individuals," "firms," "partnerships," "corporations,"
"associations," "governmental bodies," and all other legal entities. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
never discretionary. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed to
be used or occupied."
For the purpose of this article, certain terms used herein shall be defined as follows:
Administrator means the zoning administrator of Liberty County or the administrator's designee.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
362/393
Alternative tower structure means clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles, electric
transmission towers, on-premises signs, outdoor advertising signs, water storage tanks, and similar natural or
manmade alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, radio, or television
communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
Co-location means the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower or
alternative tower structure.
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
Geographic antenna placement area means the general vicinity within which the placement of an antenna is
necessary to meet the engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting need (as
informed by industry standards).
Governing authority means the Board of Commissioners of Liberty County, Georgia.
Height, when referring to a tower or other structure, means the distance measured from ground level to the
highest point on the tower structure or appurtenance.
Pre-existing towers and antennas means structures as set forth in subsection 12.3.4 of this article.
Scenic views means those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as
identified by the governing authority from time to time.
Telecommunications facility means any tower, alternative tower structure, antenna, or other similar structure,
facility or appurtenance governed by this article.
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more
antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and
television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telecommunication towers,
man-made trees (with accessory buildings/structures) and other similar structures.
Visual quality means the appropriate design, arrangement and location of tower structures in relation to the built
or natural environment to avoid abrupt or severe differences.
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § I, 10-3-2000)
Sec. 12.3. - Applicability.
12.3.1
General applicability. Except as set forth in subsection 12.3.3 herein, the provisions, requirements and
limitations of this article shall govern the location of all wireless telecommunication, cellular telecommunication,
television, microwave, radio, or similar transmission towers or antennas installed within the jurisdiction of the
governing authority. The provisions, requirements and limitations of this article shall only apply to wireless
telecommunication, cellular telecommunication, television, microwave, radio, or similar transmission towers or
antennas installed within the jurisdiction of the governing authority. In addition, any provisions, requirements or
limitations contained elsewhere within the zoning ordinance of Liberty County, Georgia, which directly conflict
with the administration of this article or the provisions, requirements or limitations hereof shall be inapplicable
to this article.
12.3.2
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
363/393
Governmental exemption. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article, the provisions of this
article shall not apply to the governing authority's properties, facilities or structures. Private facilities and
structures placed upon the governing authority's property shall be governed by a lease agreement or similar
instrument between the governing authority and the provider.
12.3.3
Amateur radio; receive-only antennas. This article shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna,
that is seventy-five (75) feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio
station operator from the operator's residence, or is used exclusively as a receive only antenna; provided,
however, only one such tower or antenna per residence shall be excluded from this article.
12.3.4
Pre-existing towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date of this article shall not be required to meet the provisions of this article 10-3-00, other than
subsections 12.4.9, 12.4.10, 12.4.11, and section 12.9, and the requirements of subsections 12.4.4 (except
subsection 12.4.4(f)), 12.4.6 and 12.4.7 within six (6) months from the date of adoption of this article 10-3-00.
Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this article as "pre-existing towers" or "pre-existing
antennas;" provided, however, that the placement of antennas on any nonconforming structure shall not create a
vested right for the continued use of the structures should the nonconforming use cease.
If an additional antenna is co-located upon a pre-existing tower after adoption of this article, then the
requirements of subsections 12.4.4 (except subsection 12.4.4(f)), 12.4.6 and 12.4.7 shall be met as part of the
permitting process.
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § I, 10-3-2000)
Sec. 12.4. - General provisions.
12.4.1
Principal or accessory use. A tower and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any lot or parcel of
land as the sole or primary structure, and is considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel shared with a
different existing primary use or existing structure. An existing use or structure on the same lot or parcel shall
not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zoning district requirements, including but not limited to setback, buffer and
other requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or tower may
be located on a leased area within such lot or parcel. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed,
in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a
nonconforming use of structure.
12.4.2
Co-location; design requirements. In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all towers, except
amateur radio towers, shall be designed to accommodate the co-location of cellular telecommunication antennas
according to the following:
(a)
For towers up to one hundred fifty (150) feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to
accommodate at least three (3) providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current
technology, whichever is greater;
(b)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
364/393
For towers greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be
designed to accommodate at least four (4) providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most
current technology, whichever is greater.
12.4.3
Co-location; availability of suitable existing structures. No new tower except amateur radio towers, shall be
permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the administrator and/or governing authority (as
the case may be) that no existing tower or existing alternative tower structure can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or
qualified industry experts. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can
accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of the following:
(a)
That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within the geographic antenna
placement area which will allow for the effective operation of the proposed antenna (as informed by industry
standards);
(b)
That existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to allow for the effective operation of the proposed
antenna (as informed by industry standards);
(c)
That existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and
related equipment (as informed by industry standards);
(d)
That the applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna(s) on the
existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with
the applicant's proposed antenna, and such interference cannot be effectively remedied;
(e)
That the cost or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing substantially exceed the cost and requirements of new tower
development and are otherwise entirely unreasonable;
(f)
That the applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and
structures unsuitable, other than economic reasons.
12.4.4
Aesthetics. The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the design and construction of all towers, and the
installation of all antennas, governed by this article.
(a)
Towers and/or antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable
standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
365/393
(b)
At all tower sites, the design of all buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening,
and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and building environment. Any
equipment or cabinet that supports telecommunication facilities must be concealed from public view and made
compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or
cabinets shall be concealed from public view by using landscaping and materials and colors consistent with the
surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained.
(c)
For antennas installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
ground equipment shall be of a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually
unobtrusive.
(d)
Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is
required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that
would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. The lighting shall be dimmed or changed to red
lights from the sunset to sunrise.
(e)
No signage or other identifying markings of a commercial nature shall be permitted upon any tower or
alternative tower structure within Liberty County.
(f)
To the extent practical, telecommunication facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or
scenic view corridors as designated by the governing authority or by any state or federal law or agency.
(g)
Access to the tower site shall be restricted so as to minimize visibility of the access. Where possible, existing
roads shall be used. Where no roads exist, access shall follow the existing contours of the land so as to minimize
the visual impact of the site on the surrounding area.
(h)
Such other additional requirements as the administrator and/or governing authority (as the case may be) shall
reasonably require to minimize the visual impact of the site on the surrounding area.
12.4.5
Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers:
(a)
Towers shall be setback a minimum distance equal to the height of the tower from its base to any public right-ofway or occupied structure, or property line of the lot or parcel containing the tower unless the owner of the
adjoining property whose property is within said fall zone otherwise consents in writing.
(b)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
366/393
Guy-wires and accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum accessory use location and setback
requirements.
(c)
Towers shall not be located closer than five thousand two hundred eighty (5,280) feet from any existing tower;
provided, however, that the administrator or governing authority may waive this requirement when it is
determined that the placement of another tower within said five thousand two hundred eighty (5,280) feet is
technologically required or visually preferable. This requirement shall not apply to amateur radio towers.
12.4.6
Security fencing/anti-climbing devices. All towers and supporting equipment shall be enclosed by fencing not
less than six (6) feet in height and shall also be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Fencing shall
be of chain link, wood or other approved alternative.
12.4.7
Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern landscaping surrounding all towers:
(a)
Where adequate vegetation is not present, tower facilities shall be landscaped with a landscaped strip of plant
materials which effectively screens the view of the tower compound. Landscaped strips shall be a minimum of
ten (10) feet in width and eight (8) feet in height at planting and located outside the fenced perimeter of the
compound.
(b)
Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
Where natural vegetation around the perimeter of the site would provide an adequate visual screen, an
undisturbed buffer may be utilized. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant
vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost.
(c)
Landscaping shall be maintained by the provider and shall be subject to periodic review by the administrator to
assure proper maintenance. Failure to maintain landscaping shall be deemed a violation of this article.
Amateur radio towers and antennas, or receive-only antennas shall not be subject to this section unless
specifically required by the governing authority by virtue of other provisions of the zoning ordinance of Liberty
County, Georgia.
12.4.8
Maintenance impact. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to
reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for
maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street, utilizing existing access to the
property on which such facility is to be located, where possible.
12.4.9
Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC,
and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such
standards and regulations are changed, the permittee, owner or the lessee of the tower and/or antenna governed
by this article shall bring such tower and/or antenna into compliance with such revised standards and regulations
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
367/393
within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more or less stringent
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring such tower and/or antenna
into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall be deemed to be a declaration of abandonment
of the tower and/or antenna and constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's,
permittee's, or lessee's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided by
section 5-84 et seq. of the Code of Ordinances of Liberty County, Georgia, governing unsafe or abandoned
structures.
12.4.10
Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner, permittee or subsequent
lessee of a tower or alternative tower structure shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards
contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the
Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the administrator concludes
that a tower fails to comply with all applicable codes and standards, or constitutes a danger to persons or
property, then upon receipt of written notice by the owner, permittee or lessee of the tower, said party shall have
fifteen (15) days to bring the tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within fifteen (15) days shall be deemed a declaration of abandonment of the tower and constitute
grounds for removal of the tower as provided in section 5-84 et seq. of the Code of Ordinances of Liberty
County, Georgia, governing unsafe or abandoned structures. Prior to the removal of any tower, the administrator
may consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee for repair of substandard
towers, and may grant a reasonable extension of the above referenced compliance period.
12.4.11
Change of ownership notification. Upon the transfer of an ownership interest in any tower, alternative tower
structure, or lot upon which such a structure has been erected, the tower permittee shall notify the administrator
of the transaction in writing within thirty (30) days.
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § I, 10-3-2000)
Sec. 12.5. - Application procedures.
12.5.1 General application requirements. Application for a permit for any telecommunications facility shall be
made to the administrator by the person, company, organization, or duly authorized agent thereof, that will own
and operate the telecommunications facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The
administrator is authorized to develop application forms to assist in providing the required information and
facilitate the application process. Except for a co-location information submittal under subsection 12.5.2 of this
article, the following information shall be submitted when applying for any permit required by this article and
must be submitted for an application to be considered complete:
(a)
Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facility, transmission building and/or
other accessory use, access, parking, fence, landscaped area, and adjacent land uses. Applicants shall submit both
a paper location map and, if requested by the administrator, a digitized location map in a format compatible with
the GIS software utilized by Liberty County, Georgia.
(b)
Landscaped plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in subsection 12.4.7.
(c)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
368/393
A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any
adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic
view corridors.
(d)
A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of
service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance.
(e)
Report from a professional qualified engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, or other appropriate qualified
industry expert, documenting the following:
(i)
Tower or antenna type, height, and design;
(ii)
Engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design;
(iii)
Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including numbers and types of antennas which can
be accommodated;
(iv)
Evidence of structural integrity of the tower or alternative tower structure;
(v)
Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are
of adequate size to contain debris; and
(vi)
Certification that the antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of
the FCC.
(f)
Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the
nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the
telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service
network (i.e., whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity).
(g)
If the proposed site is zoned R-1 through R-4, B-1, B-2, or PUD, applicants must describe why an alternate site
zoned A-1, AR-1 or I-1 was not proposed by identifying:
(i)
What good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure such an alternate site;
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
369/393
(ii)
Why such an alternate site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible and why such efforts were
unsuccessful; and
(iii)
How and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area.
The administrator will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue
difficulties in entering into a lease or similar agreement. The administrator shall carefully weigh such claims, and
the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site.
(h)
The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power
line easements impacting the proposed tower site.
(i)
The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the administrator to fully evaluate
and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility.
12.5.2
Tower co-location information submittals. Any person or entity co-locating an antenna or antennas which will
add no more than ten (10) feet to the height of the tower and related equipment or appurtenances on or around a
tower for which a permit has already been issued shall submit the following information only:
(a)
The name of the person or entity co-locating the antenna.
(b)
The name of the owner of the tower.
(c)
The tower's permit number.
(d)
The location of the tower.
(e)
The remaining structural capacity of the tower.
(f)
Certification that the antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of
the FCC.
(g)
Such other information identified in subsection 12.5.1 as may reasonably be required by the administrator.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
370/393
12.5.3
Inventory of existing sites. To facilitate the co-location of antennas, each applicant seeking to locate a new tower,
alternative tower structure or antenna, or modify any such existing structure, shall provide to the administrator an
inventory of it's existing towers or alternative tower structures. The inventory shall include all such structures
that are within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; within a municipality located, in whole or in part,
within Liberty County; or, within one mile of the border of Liberty County, and shall include specific
information about the location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, tower type and general
suitability for antenna co-location of each tower, and other pertinent information as may be required by the
administrator. The administrator may make such information available to members of the public, to include,
without limitation, other organizations seeking to locate towers or antennas within Liberty County, and in such
form and manner as the administrator deems appropriate; provided, however that the administrator is not, by
sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or otherwise
suitable.
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § I, 10-3-2000)
Sec. 12.6. - Administrative approvals.
12.6.1
General.
(a)
The administrator may administratively approve the uses set forth in section 12.5 of this article as provided by
this section 12.6. All such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in this article and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
(b)
The administrator shall respond to each application within forty-five (45) days of its receipt by either approving,
approving with conditions, or denying the application. One 45-day extension of this review period may be
exercised by the administrator if such additional time is deemed necessary to adequately assess the request. If the
administrator fails to respond to the applicant within a maximum of ninety (90) days, the application shall be
deemed to be approved.
(c)
As part of any administrative approval, the administrator may administratively reduce setback requirements by
up to ten (10) percent to compensate for irregularly shaped lots or parcels.
(d)
Any decision by the administrator that results in the denial of a request to place, construct, or modify a
telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence. In addition to the
requirements set forth in subsection 12.6.4 for uses allowed by administrative approval, the administrator shall
consider the applicable factors set forth in this article, to include subsection 12.7.5, in acting upon an application
for administrative approval.
12.6.2
Application; contents; fee. All applications for administrative approval of a permit shall be submitted to the
administrator. Each application shall contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in
section 12.5. An application for administrative approval of a permit shall not be accepted for processing without
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
371/393
the information required in section 12.5 of this article. An application fee shall be charged by the administrator in
an amount stated in section 12.10 of this article.
12.6.3
Co-location of antennas required. Applicants for the erection of a tower or placement of an antenna shall be
required to co-locate upon an existing tower or alternative tower structure. An exception to co-location shall only
be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for co-location does not exist in
the geographic antenna placement area, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in
subsection 12.4.3.
12.6.4
Uses allowed by administrative approval. The following uses may be approved by the administrator after
conducting an administrative review:
(a)
If it is adequately demonstrated that antenna co-location, as required in subsection 12.6.3 above, is not possible
for a given geographic antenna placement area, construction of a new tower up to a height of three hundred (300)
feet, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said
tower or antenna, may be permitted in the following zoning districts:
(i)
Agricultural (A-1);
(ii)
Agricultural-Residential (AR-1); and
(iii)
Industrial (I-1);
Provided, however, that all structures shall meet the setback, screening and buffer requirements contained herein,
together with such additional conditions which may be reasonably imposed by the administrator to minimize the
adverse effects of such placement on surrounding properties.
(b)
So long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than ten (10) feet to the height of the existing alternative
tower structure:
(i)
Installation of an antenna on an existing alternative tower structure in any zoning district, and further including
the placement of additional structures or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna,
provided that if such installation is proposed on an existing alternative tower structure located in zoning districts
R-1 through R-4, the applicant shall be required to (1) place all additional structures or other supporting
equipment within the existing tower compound, and (2) meet such additional conditions which may be
reasonably imposed by the administrator to minimize the adverse effects of such placement on surrounding
properties; or
(ii)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
372/393
Installation of an antenna on an existing county owned alternative tower structure in any zoning district,
provided a lease or similar agreement authorizing the antenna has been approved by the governing authority.
(c)
So long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than ten (10) feet to the height of the existing tower:
(i)
Installation of an antenna on an existing tower of any height in any zoning district, and further including the
placement of additional structures or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, provided
that if such installation is proposed on an existing tower located in zoning districts R-1 through R-4, the
applicant shall be required to (1) place all additional structures or other supporting equipment within the existing
tower compound, and (2) meet such additional conditions which may be reasonably imposed by the
administrator to minimize the adverse effects of such placement on surrounding properties, or
(ii)
Installation of an antenna on an existing tower located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the
county in any zoning district, and further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting
equipment used in connection with said antenna, provided a lease or similar agreement authorizing the tower has
been approved by the governing authority.
(d)
Construction of a new tower up to a height of three hundred (300) feet, including the placement of additional
buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, if placed upon property
owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the county in any zoning district except R-1 through R-4, providing a
lease or similar agreement authorizing the tower has been approved by the governing authority.
12.6.5
Public notice/appeal. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the construction of a tower or
antenna as an administratively approved use, except for co-location permits, the administrator shall cause a sign
to be conspicuously posted on the property and the publication of a public notice in the newspaper in which
sheriff's advertisements appear. Said public notice shall state the nature of the application, height of the proposed
structure, street address of the proposed location, or other identifying information necessary to inform the public
of the proposed location. The expense of the public notice shall be borne by the applicant.
If during the public notice period, a written objection to the permit application is filed, the validity of the
application and all pertinent documentation shall be determined by the governing authority. Said objection must
make reference to the specific section of the article which the objector contends is not met and provide
supporting documentation therefor. The objection shall be placed on the first available agenda of a regularly
scheduled meeting of the governing authority following the expiration of the 15-day appeal period. The
governing authority shall dispense with the objection by either:
(a)
A determination that the application is valid and meets all applicable criteria of this article, which shall result in
the issuance of a permit as set forth herein.
(b)
A determination that the application does not satisfy all applicable criteria of this article. Applications so found
must, as a result, be processed through the conditional use permit process set forth in section 12.7 contained
herein.
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
373/393
(c)
Review of the decision of the governing authority shall be made within thirty (30) days by writ of certiorari to
the Superior Court of Liberty County, Georgia.
12.6.6
Appeal of administrative determination. If a permit application for a tower as an administratively permitted use
is determined by the administrator to not meet all applicable criteria of this article, the applicant may appeal the
determination of the administrator to the governing authority in accordance with sections 7.1 and 7.2 of the
zoning ordinance of Liberty County, Georgia. The governing authority shall dispense with the appeal by either:
(a)
A determination that the application is valid and meets all applicable criteria of this article, which shall result in
the issuance of a permit as set forth herein.
(b)
A determination that the application does not satisfy all applicable criteria of this article. Applications which do
not satisfy all applicable criteria must, as a result, be processed through the conditional use permit process set
forth in section 12.7 contained herein.
(c)
Review of the decision of the governing authority shall be made within thirty (30) days by writ of certiorari to
the Superior Court of Liberty County.
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § I, 10-3-2000)
Sec. 12.7. - Conditional use permit required.
12.7.1
General.
(a)
If the proposed location, height, setback or other aspect of a proposed telecommunications facility cannot
comply with the minimum requirements established in this article or are otherwise ineligible for administrative
approval pursuant to section 12.6, then a conditional use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower
or the placement of an antenna in any zoning district. All such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in
this article and all other applicable codes and ordinances, unless the applicant can show that the denial of a
permit in such a location will cause a significantly harmful and permanent degradation of service which cannot
be overcome by any other means including planned or potential locations which would provide the same or
similar coverage or capacity.
(b)
In granting a conditional use permit, the governing authority may impose additional conditions to the extent that
it concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize adverse effects from the proposed tower on adjoining or
nearby properties as set out in subsection 12.7.5.
12.7.2
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
374/393
Application; contents; fee. All applications for conditional use permits shall be submitted to the administrator
who shall forward the same to the governing authority for its consideration. Each application shall contain as a
part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in section 12.5. An application for a conditional use
permit shall not be accepted for processing without the information required in section 12.5. An application fee
shall be charged by the administrator in the amount stated in section 12.10
12.7.3
Co-location of antennas required. Applicants for the erection of a tower or antenna, except amateur radio
operators, shall be required to co-locate upon an existing tower structure. An exception to co-location shall only
be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for co-location does not exist in
the geographic antenna placement area, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in
subsection 12.4.3 contained herein.
12.7.4
Public hearing. Before taking action upon the proposed conditional use permit, the governing authority shall
hold a public hearing on the matter. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing, the
governing authority shall cause the following notice requirements to be instituted by the administrator:
(a)
A sign shall be erected, in a conspicuous location, on or adjacent to the property under consideration. The sign
shall state the time, place, location, and purpose of the public hearing.
(b)
A letter shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all property owners of record of abutting
parcels, and to all property owners of residentially-used parcels lying in whole or in part within a distance of two
(2) times the height of the proposed tower as measured from its base (as such property owners may be
reasonably ascertained by the administrator), giving notice of the public hearing. The letter shall state the same
information as required for the sign.
(c)
A public notice shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear once a week for
two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the date of the hearing.
(d)
Subsections (b) and (c) above shall be the responsibility of, and at the expense of, the applicant.
12.7.5
Considerations in approval or denial of conditional use permits. Any denial of a request to place, construct or
modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a
written record. The following factors may be taken into consideration in acting upon a conditional use permit
application under the provisions of this article:
(a)
The height and setbacks of the proposed tower, antenna, and equipment and structures in support thereof;
(b)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
375/393
The proximity of the tower, antenna, and equipment and structures in support thereof to residential structures and
residential district boundaries;
(c)
The nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(d)
The surrounding topography;
(e)
The surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(f)
The design of the tower, antenna, and equipment and structures in support thereof, with particular reference to
design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
(g)
The proposed ingress and egress;
(h)
The availability of suitable existing towers or other structures for antenna co-location;
(i)
The impact of the proposed tower, antenna, and equipment and structures in support thereof upon scenic views
and visual quality of the surrounding area;
(j)
The needs of the applicant as balanced against the detrimental effects on surrounding properties;
(k)
The impact of the proposed tower or antenna(s) on adjacent and nearby properties; and
(l)
Such other considerations as may be implicated by the provisions of this article.
12.7.6
Requirements for issuance of conditional use permit. The conditional use permit may be issued by the governing
authority only upon satisfaction of the following requirements:
(a)
A proper application filed in accordance with the requirements of section 12.5
(b)
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
376/393
The application is otherwise in compliance with the conditions for the proposed conditional use required by this
section;
(c)
The applicant complies with the conditions imposed by the governing authority for the purpose of reducing the
harmful effects of the use on surrounding uses and ensuring compatibility with surrounding uses;
(d)
The governing authority determines that the benefits and need for the proposed conditional use are greater than
any possible depreciating effects or damages to neighboring or nearby properties; and
(e)
All fees and other expenses required have been paid in full.
12.7.7
Independent expert review. The administrator or governing authority may engage a licensed professional
engineer or other qualified industry professional as an independent expert to review any of the materials
submitted by an applicant for a conditional use permit and render an opinion regarding any concerns about the
proposal, including but not limited to, structural integrity and the feasibility of alternative sites or co-location;
provided, however, that prior to seeking the review of an independent expert, the zoning administrator or
governing authority shall convey its concerns to the applicant in writing and shall allow the applicant a
reasonable opportunity to address those concerns. if the applicant is unable to address those concerns to the
satisfaction of the administrator or governing authority, the applicant shall be allowed a reasonable amount of
time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, following the receipt of the letter to such effect, in which to modify the
application to alleviate the administrator's or governing authority's concerns or withdraw the application
altogether. If the applicant fails to so modify or withdraw the application within the required time, the
administrator or governing authority may proceed to engage a licensed professional engineer to conduct the
independent expert review and the expert's reasonable fees, costs and expenses shall be paid by the applicant;
provided that the administrator or governing authority shall give the applicant written notice of its intent to do so.
The expert's opinion shall not necessarily be determinative, but shall be a significant factor to be considered in
granting or denying the application. No permit shall issue until the applicant has paid all such fees, costs and
expenses incurred under this section.
12.7.8
Resubmittal of conditional use application. An application for a conditional use permit which has been denied
shall not be resubmitted for a period of six (6) months and then only if the applicant can document a substantial
change in need for a tower or antenna at the same location.
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § I, 10-3-2000)
Sec, 12.8. - Towers and antennas in residential and environmentally fragile areas.
12.8.1
Placement of towers and antenna in residential areas. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no
tower (to also include the use of an alternative tower structure) shall be permitted in zoning districts R-1 through
R-4 or within two thousand (2,000) feet of (1) the boundary line of any property zoned R-1 through R-4, or (2)
any single-family residential dwelling located upon property not zoned R-1 through R-4, unless the applicant can
show that the denial of a permit in such a location will cause a significantly harmful and permanent degradation
of service which cannot be overcome by any other means including, without limitation, planned or potential
locations which would provide the same or similar coverage or capacity; provided, however, that a tower (or use
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
377/393
of an alternative tower structure) may, absent such showing, be permitted within two thousand (2,000) feet of
any residential dwelling located on property not zoned R-1 through R-4 upon the written consent of the owner(s)
of such residentially used property. Applications for placement of a tower (or use of an alternative tower
structure) within two thousand (2,000) feet of the external boundary line of any property zoned R-1 through R-4
shall be available only through the conditional use permit process.
12.8.2
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tower or antenna shall be permitted in a zoning district
classified Dunes and Marshland (DM-1).
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § I, 10-3-2000)
Sec. 12.9. - Removal of abandoned towers and antennas.
12.9.1
Notice of abandoned antenna and structures. The owner or lessee of a tower or antenna shall promptly notify the
administrator of its intent to abandon, or the abandonment of, any tower or antenna.
12.9.2
Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any tower, antenna, or other equipment and structure in support
thereof that is not operated for a continuous period exceeding twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned,
and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the structure within ninety (90) days of such abandonment.
If said tower or antenna is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the governing authority may, in the manner
provided in section 5-84 et seq. of the Code of Ordinances of Liberty County, Georgia, governing unsafe and
abandoned structures, take such action as may be deemed necessary to remove, or cause to be removed, such
tower, antenna, or other equipment and structure in support thereof at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or
more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease utilizing the
tower.
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § I, 10-3-2000)
Sec. 12.10. - Application and permit fees.
The following fees will be required of any applicant submitting an application under this article:
12.10.1
Administrative approval of new tower construction. An application for construction of a new tower up to a height
of three hundred (300) feet in A-1, AR-1 or I-1 zoning districts, otherwise eligible for administrative approval,
shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
12.10.2
Administrative approval of antenna location on tower or alternative tower structure. An application for location
of an antenna on an existing tower or alternative tower structure (so long as the addition of said antenna adds no
more than ten (10) feet to the height of the existing tower or structure), otherwise eligible for administrative
approval, shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
12.10.3
Conditional use permit for construction of new tower. An application for construction of a new tower (including
the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or
antenna) not eligible for administrative approval shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
378/393
12.10.4
Conditional use permit for location of antenna on tower or alternative tower structure. An application for
location of an antenna on an existing tower or alternative tower structure, not eligible for administrative
approval, shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
12.10.5
Building permit fees. In addition to the application fees set forth herein, the applicable construction and utility
inspection permit fees in effect at the time of the application for the permit shall apply. The foregoing permit fees
shall also be in addition to any and all other costs and expenses required by this article to be borne by the
applicant.
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § I, 10-3-2000)
Sec. 12.11. - Severability.
If any provision of this article is declared to be invalid, such declaration shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the
remaining provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § II, 10-3-2000)
Sec. 12.12. - Repeal.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance article are hereby repealed.
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § III, 10-3-2000)
Sec. 12.13. - Effective date.
This ordinance shall become effective on the 3rd day of October, 2000.
(Ord. No. 2000-002, § IV, 10-3-2000)
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the
time of the publication and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table.
Ordinance
Number
Date Section Section
this
Code
74-05-01 5-14-1974 4-1
74-07-01 7- 9-1974 103-1
75-3-1 3-11-1975 2-1
9- 2-1975(Mo.) App. A,
§ 8.5
10- 4-1977(Mo.) App. A,
§ 2.0
App. A,
§ 3.10,
App. A,
§ 3.11
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
379
/393
App. A,
§ 3.20
—App.
A, §
3.23
App. A,
§ 5.1
,
App. A,
§ 5.2
App. A,
§ 5.8
,
App. A,
§ 5.9
App. A,
§ 6.2
1- 3-1978(Mo.) App. A,
§ 5.1
3- 2-1982(Mo.) App. A,
§ 3.2
App. A,
§ 3.7
App. A,
§ 5.1
—
App. A,
§ 5.4
App. A,
§ 5.4.A
App. A,
§ 8.1
11- 2-1982(Mo.) App. A,
§ 3.43
App. A,
§ 5.5
83-01-01 1-11-1983
1
11-1
4- 5-1983(Mo.) App. A,
§ 8.5
6- 9-1983(Mo.) App. A,
§ 2.0
9- 6-1983(Mo.) App. A,
§ 2.0
App. A,
§ 5.3
App. A,
§ 7.1
—
App. A,
§ 7.4
App. A,
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
380
/393
§ 8.5
5- 7-1985(Mo.) App. A,
§ 5.7
,
App. A,
§ 5.8
12- 3-1985(Mo.) App. A,
§ 5.1
—
App. A,
§ 5.4
App. A,
§ 5.4.A
App. A,
§ 5.5
App. A,
§ 5.7
,
App. A,
§ 5.8
App. A,
§ 9.1
—
App. A,
§ 9.4
86-02-01 2-11-1986
I 103-21
III 103-22
6-30-1986(Mo.) App. A,
§ 2.0
App. A,
§ 3.46
88-01-01 1-12-1988 1—5 22-1
—
22-5
6 22-39
7—1
1 22-6
—
22-10
88-03-01 3- 8-1988 art. I
1
11-2
art. II,
§ 1
1
11-3
—1
11-
5
art. II,
§ 3
art. III,
§ 1
1
11-6
—1
11-
8
art. III,
§ 3
art. IV
1
11-9
11- 1-1988(Ord.) App. A,
§ 11.1
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
381
/393
—App.
A, § 11.5
12- 6-1988(Ord.) 1(1) 6-1
1(2) 6-3
1(3) 6-5
1(4) 6-8
1(5) 6-4
1(6, 7) 6-6
1(8) 6-2
1(9) 6-1
1
1(10) 6-13
1(11) 6-12
1(12) 6-34
1(16) 6-35
1(17) —
1(22)
6-38
—
6-43
1(23) 6-10
1(24) 6-44
1(25) 6-7
1(26) 6-14
12- 6-1988(Res.) 6-15
4- 4-1989(Ord.) App. A,
§ 5.1
1
91-06-01 6-25-1991
1 103-48
92-11-01A
11-24-1992 3.2.1—
3.2.5
16-58
—16-
62
3.3.1—
3.3.8
16-83
—16-
90
3.4.1 16-92
1.1 16-1
1.2 16-2
3.1 16-23
3.2 16-24
3.3 16-25
3.4 16-26
16-91
3.5 16-27
4.1 16-117
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
382
/393
4.2 16-118
4.3 16-119
4.4 16-120
5.1 16-139
5.2 16-140
5.3 16-141
5.4 16-142
5.5 16-143
5.6 16-144
6.1 16-172
6.2 16-173
6.3 16-174
7.1 16-202
7.2 16-203
7.3 16-204
7.4 16-205
7.5 16-206
7.6 16-207
7.7 16-208
7.8 16-209
7.9 16-210
11- 2-1993(Mo.) App. A,
§ 3.38
94-12-01 12-20-1994 19-36 18-20
19-37 18-18
19-38
—19-
46
18-21
—18-
29
19-48,
19-49
18-30
,
18-31
19-51,
19-52
18-32
,
18-33
19-53 18-19
19-54
—19-
56
18-34
—18-
36
19-59 18-37
19-61,
19-62
18-38
,
18-39
19-65
—19-
72
18-40
—18-
47
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
383
/393
att. A 18-48
4- 7-1995(Mo.) App. A,
§ 3.47
App. A,
§ 5.2
—
App. A,
§ 5.4
App. A,
§ 5.4.A
App. A,
§ 5.5
96-02-01 2-27-1996
1
11-10
6-18-1996(Res.) 6-16
96-10-01 10- 8-1996 1—5 18-72
—18-
76
96-12-01 12-17-1996 20-1
97-03-01 3-11-1997 1—4 105-2
—105- 5
5 105-1
6, 7 105-6
,
105-7
20—22 105-33
—105-
35
30—32 105-59
—105-
61
40—50 105-81
—105-
91
97-06-01 6-24-1997 1—6 10-1
—
10-6
1998-005 9- 1-1998
1 App. A,
§ 3.48
1998-006 9- 1-1998 App. A,
§ 4.2
98-11-1
11-24-1998 1—6 121-1
—121- 6
99-04-01 4-13-1999 22-68
99-05-01 5-25-1999 att.
A(div.
1, § I)
22-69
att. 22-66
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
384
/393
A(div.
1, § II)
att.
A(div.
1, §
III)
22-70
att.
A(div.
2, § I),
22-71
,
22-72
att.
A(div.
2, § II)
att.
A(div.
4, § I),
22-73
,
22-74
att.
A(div.
4, § II)
att.
A(div.
4, §
III)
22-67
att.
A(div.
4, §
IV)
22-75
att.
A(div.
5, § I)
22-76
att.
A(div.
6)
22-77
99-12-01 12-14-1999 I—VI
119-1
—119- 6
VII(1) —
VII(3)
119-27
—119-
29
VIII(1) —
VIII(5)
119-51
—119-
55
IX(1) —
IX(3)
119-77
—119-
79
IX(5),
IX(6)
119-80
,
119-81
X(2)—
X(5)
119-
102
—
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
385
/393
119-
105
XI
119-
106
2000-002 10- 3-2000
I App. A,
§ 12.1
—App.
A, §
12.7
App. A,
§ 12.9
,
App. A,
§ 12.10
II—IV App. A,
§ 12.1
1
—App.
A, §
12.13
01-01-01 1-23-2001 8.5-1
—8.5- 4
109-1
—109- 4
01-01-02 1-23-2001 5-100,
5-101
123-1
,
123-2
01-09-01A 9-11-2001 101—
127
4-2—4-
28
201—
212
4-60
—
4-71
301—
305
4-101
—4-
105
2001-002
11- 6-2001
I 6-14
01-12-01 12-11-2001 22-78
10- 8-2002(Ord.)
1 6-36
03-01-01 1-30-2003 22-79
03-06-01 6-10-2003 22-8
03-08-01 8-12-2003
1 2-23
9- 2-2003(Ord.) App. A,
§ 3.15
04-04-01 4-22-2004
1 16-89 3 16-93
04-07-01 7-30-2004 I(1.01) 22-104
I(1.03),
I(1.04)
22-105
,
22-106
I(1.05) 22-66
I(1.05) 22-107
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
386
/393
—
I(1.08)
—22- 110
I(1.10) 22-103
05-11-01
11- 8-2005 8-1
06-05-02R 5- 9-2006(Res.) 101-3
88-01-01 9-26-2006 1, 2 22-1
,
22-2
07-03-01 3-16-2007 I—VI
115-1
—115- 6
VI—X
115-7
—115- 11
07-05-01 5- 8-2007
1 8-30 2 8-29
3, 4 8-31
, 8-
32
07-05-02 5- 8-2007 1, 2 8-3
, 8-4
07-05-03 5- 8-2007
1 8-5 2 8-4
07-05-04 5- 8-2007
1 8-54 2 8-53 3 8-55
07-09-01 9-11-2007 4.5-1
—4.5- 7
6-1—6- 7
4.5-8
—4.5-
15
6-9—6-
16
4.5-21
—4.5-
32
6-34
—
6-44
11-13-2007(Ord.) 1.1
117-1
1.2
117-2
1.3
117-3
2.1
117-25
2.2
117-26
3.1
117-56
3.2
117-57
4.1
117-88
4.2
117-89
4.3
117-90
4.4
117-91
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
387
/393
4.5
117-92
5.1
117- 113
5.2
117- 114
5.3
117- 115
5.4
117- 116
5.5
117- 117
6.1
117-
148
6.3
117-
149
6.4
117-
150
6.5
117-
151
6.6
117-
152
6.7
117-
153
6.8
117-
154
7.0
117-
177
7.1
117-
178
7.2
117-
179
7.3
117-
180
7.4
117-
181
7.5
117-
182
7.6
117-
183
8.1
117-
205
8.2
117-
206
9.1
117-
236
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
388
/393
10.1
117-
266
10.2
117-
267
11.1
117-
298
11.2
117-
299
11.3
117-
300
11.4
117-
301
,
117-
302
11.5
117-
303
12.1
117-
325
12.2
117-
326
12.3
117-
327
12.4
117-
328
12.5
117-
329
12.6
117-
330
13.1
117-
349
14.1
117-
372
15.1
117-
403
15.2
117-
404
15.5
117-
405
08-02-01(A) 2-12-2008 2-2
08-02-02 2-26-2008 I(1),
I(2)
18-96
,
18-97
08-02-01R 2-26-2008(Res.) 8-2
08-04-01 5- 8-2008
I 6-16
08-05-01 5- 8-2008 I(a)—
I(d)
12-40
—12-
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
389/393
43
2008-08-01 8-28-2008 I(1-1)
—I(1-
11)
107-1
—107-
11
I(2-1),
I(2-2)
107-41,
107-42
I(2-2) 107-43
I(3-1)
—I(3-
12)
107-75
—107-
86
08-09-01 9-25-2008 I(1)—
I(17)
12-1—
12-17
I(19) 12-18
08-10-01 10- 9-2008 I(1-3) 107-3
I(1-5) 107-5
2008-003 12- 2-2008 App. A,
§ 5.13
2008-004 12- 2-2008 I App. A,
§ 3.38
88-01-1 1- 2-2009 1—3 22-1—
22-3
09-05-01 5-14-2009 I 14-1
09-05-02 5-14-2009 I 14-2
09-05-03 5-28-2009 14-3,
14-4
7- 8-2010(Ord.) I(1)—
I(10)
2-43—
2-52
2010-08-01 8-12-2010 5-71—
5-80
115-1
—115-
10
5-81(c) 115-11
2010-12-01 12- 9-2010 I(1)—
I(3)
16-231
—16-
233
12- 9-2010(Ord.) II(1),
II(2)
22-131,
22-132
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of
references to Georgia state aw.
O.C.G.A.
Section
Section
this Code
1-3-3 22-131
115-3
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
390
/393
2-10-105 18-35
art. 3 R.L. § 4
art. 3, ch. 8 tit. 48 R.L. § 4
3-3-2(c) 4-61
3-3-20 4-13
3-3-23 4-7
3-3-23, 3-3-24 4-15, 4-16
3-4-80 4-1
3-5-80 4-1
3-6-60 4-1
4-8-20 et seq. 6-15
4-11-18 6-4
5-3-29 12-1
1
8-2-1 et seq. 12-2
8-2-20 Ch. 103, Art. II
8-2-110 et seq. App. A, § 2.0
8-2-160 et seq. App. A, § 3.48
12-2-8
115-4
12-4-72
115-3
12-5-20
115-2
12-5-23(5)(a)
115-6
12-5-30(f)
115-2 115-4
12-5-280 et seq. App. A, § 5.12
12-5-440 et seq.
115-2
12-7-1
115-4
12-7-1 et seq.
115-2 115-4
12-7-6
115-3
12-7-6(b)
115-3
, 115-4
12-7-6(c)
115-4
12-7-7(e)
115-7
12-7-7(f)(1)
115-6
12-7-7.1
115-3
12-7-8(a)
115-2 115-6
, 115-7
12-7-17(9), (10)
115-6
12-7-19(b)(1),
12-7-19(b)(4)
115-9
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
391
/393
12-7-20
115-6 115-9
12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 16
12-8-60 et seq. Ch. 16
15-10-60 et seq. 6-14
6-16
App. A, § 3.48
15-10-63 6-14
6-16
App. A, § 3.48
App. A, § 11.2
16-7-25 22-70
16-7-42 et seq. Ch. 16
16-8-14(b)(1) 14-4
16-10-71 Char. § 2-4
16-11-34 14-1
16-11-39 14-1
16-11-41 14-1
16-13-20 et seq. 12-2
21-2-1 et seq. Char. Art. V
21-2-9 Char. § 2-3
21-2-45(c) 2-23
21-2-540 et seq. Char. § 2-7
25-2-1 et seq. 12-2
25-2-12 8-2
31-3-5.2 22-131
31-19-5 6-35
31-19-7 6-15
32-6-75(9) App. A, § 3.38
33-3-5 18-72
33-3-5(1) 18-75
33-8-4 18-74
, 18-75
33-8-8 et seq. 18-35
33-8-8.1, 33-8-8.2 18-74
, 18-75
35-3-30 et seq. 14-3
36-18-1
115-3
36-30-8 1-8
36-32-1 Char. Art. VI
36-32-6 14-2
8/30/2019
Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
392
/393
36-32-9 14-3
36-34-5 Ch. 22
36-35-6(a)(2) 1-8
36-66-1 et seq. App. A, Art. IX
36-67-1 et seq. App. A, § 3.42
App. A, Art. IX
36-71-2(8) 18-18
36-76-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. IV
36-80-19 1-1
38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 8
38-3-3(5) 8-4
8-29
8-53
38-3-57 8-1
40-6-14 12-42
40-6-183 20-1
41-2-7 12-1
41-2-7—41-2-17 12-1
, 12-2
41-2-8 12-2
41-2-13 12-9
12-18
tit. 43 18-31
43-39A-1 et seq. 12-6
46-3-1 et seq. 18-35
46-7-15 18-35
48-3-9 12-2
48-4-1 et seq. 12-1
1
48-4-78 12-1
1
48-4-80, 48-4-81 12-1
1
48-5-355,
48-5-356
18-35
48-5-359 Char. § 1-3
48-5-359.1 12-1
1
48-6-93 18-35
48-8-1
1
1 R.L. § 1
R.L. § 4
48-13-5—
48-13-26
18-28
48-13-7 18-20
18-22
8/30/2019 Walthourville, GA Code of Ordinances
393/393
48-13-9 18-26
48-13-9(c)(1)—
48-13-9(c)(18)
18-26
48-13-10 18-22
48-13-55 18-35