CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF THOMSON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1992 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
____________ 
Adopted: January 14, 1993 
Effective: January 14, 1993 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
THOMSON, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robert E. Knox, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Kenneth L. Usry, Mayor Pro Tem 
Delmar B. Bradshaw 
Ray R. Roberts  John T. Wiley  G. Allen Young, Jr. 
City Council 
____________ 
Burton D. Patrick 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Jimmy D. Plunkett 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Audrey G. Eller 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Thomson, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the mayor and council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jan Shekitka, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Burton Patrick, City Administrator, Mr. Jimmy Plunkett, City Attorney, and Ms. Darlene Plunkett, Assistant to the City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 471 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Thomson, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Thomson, Georgia: 
Section 1. That the Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Thomson, Georgia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 22, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 11, 1992, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or a term of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or by both fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Mayor and Council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and Council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 11, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective January 14, 1993. 
Passed and adopted by the Council this 14th day of January, 1993. 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Thomson City Council of the City of Thomson, Georgia held on the 14th day of January, 1993. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the city adopted by the Legislature on March 15, 1973, being 1973 Ga. Laws (Act No. 49), page 2132, effective the same date. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the 1973 Charter. A uniform system of punctuation and capitalization has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. 

ARTICLE I. - CHARTER, CORPORATE POWERS AND CITY LIMITS 

Section 1.01. - Reincorporation. 
This act shall constitute the whole charter of the City of Thomson, Georgia, repealing and replacing the charter as provided by an act approved August 19, 1927 (Ga. Laws 1927, p. 1631), as amended, except certain provisions relating to the corporate boundaries of the City of Thomson and annexation thereto. The City of Thomson, Georgia, in the County of McDuffie, and the inhabitants thereof, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the "City of Thomson, Georgia," and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may contract and be contracted with, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all of the courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal and change it at pleasure. 
Section 1.02. - Corporate powers. 
The corporate powers of the city, to be exercised by the mayor and council, include the following: 
(a)	To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation for state and county purposes and to contract with any city, county or other governmental and political subdivision for the ministerial acts of billing and collection of city ad valorem taxes or other fees, assessments or taxes, as the mayor and council may by resolution authorize. 
(b)	To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions. 
(c)	To appropriate and borrow money, to provide for payment of the debts of the city, and to authorize the expenditure of money for any municipal purpose, or for matters of national or state interest, and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issues by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. Whenever the city shall desire to create a bonded debt for the purpose of carrying into effect any of the powers and provisions of this Charter, it shall have the right and authority to do so when authorized by a majority of the qualified voters of the city voting in an election. 
(d)	To acquire, dispose of and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal or mixed property, inside or outside the city. 
(e)	To condemn property, inside or outside of the corporate boundaries of the city, for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the mayor and council, under Code section 36-202 [now repealed], or under other applicable public acts. 
(f)	To acquire, construct, operate, distribute, sell and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a waterworks system, sewerage system, a natural gas system, an electrical power system and a community antenna television system, both inside and outside the corporate limits, subject to the provisions of applicable general law. For water, gas and electricity furnished, and for all sewerage and sanitary service rendered, said city may prescribe the charges, rates, fares, fees, regulations and standards and conditions of service to be provided, and shall have a lien against any property of the persons served. Said lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and with the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
(g)	To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services, but not limited to those stated above, not to exceed periods of thirty (30) years. The mayor and council may prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with laws of the State of Georgia, or the regulations of the public service commission or any other state or federal agency having jurisdiction in such matters. 
(h)	To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, conservational, athletic, curative, correctional, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate boundaries of the city, and to regulate the use thereof. Property may be acquired for such purposes by condemnation under Code section 36-202 [now repealed] or other applicable public acts. 
(i)	To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(j)	To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to provide power and authority to take all necessary and proper means for keeping the city limits free from garbage, trash and filth. Charges or fees may be imposed to cover the costs of such services, which, if unpaid, shall constitute a debt which shall be subject to a lien against any property of the persons served, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner, and under the same remedies, as a lien for city property taxes. 
(k)	To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental to the health, morals, safety, security, peace, convenience or general welfare of inhabitants of the city. 
(l)	To define a nuisance in the city and to provide for its abatement. The recorder of the city shall have jurisdiction of all nuisance abatement proceedings in the city. The city may provide by ordinance for any building, structure, or condition maintained in violation of any valid law of this state or any valid ordinance of the city to be adjudged a nuisance and for its abatement at the owner's expense upon his failure or refusal to abate the same within ten days after written notice from the city to do so and after an opportunity to be heard on same. 
(m)	To establish minimum standards for, and to regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing, and housing for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to authorize the establishment of standards for, or the regulation of the electrical wiring and equipment by or for a utility rendering communication services and required by it to be utilized in the rendition of its duty authorized service to the public. 
(n)	To provide that persons given jail sentences in the recorder's [municipal] court shall work out such sentences in any public works or on the public streets of the city as provided by ordinance; or the mayor and council may provide for the commitment of city prisoners to any county work camp, or other governmental agency or jail, by agreement with the appropriate county or governmental officers. 
(o)	To regulate, license, tax, or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same in violation of any ordinance or lawful orders; also to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; to provide punishment for violation of any ordinance enacted hereunder. 
(p)	To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in amounts prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles, or any other reasonable regulations as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(q)	To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the cost for any public improvements. 
(r)	To provide that upon conviction of the violation of any ordinance, rule, regulation or order, the offender may be punished within limitations prescribed by the mayor and council in such ordinance, rule, regulation or order, but not exceeding the limitation prescribed by this Charter or state law. 
(s)	To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, morals and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under the constitution or general laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this act shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to cities under the constitution or applicable laws of the state. 
(t)	To levy taxes and to make appropriations for the purpose of advertising said city and its advantages and resources so as to bring new capital and commercial, manufacturing and other enterprises into the city; and to levy taxes and to make payment from the general revenues and funds of the city for the support of public hospitals and libraries. 
(u)	To regulate and control public streets, public alleys and ways; and, in the discretion of the mayor and council, to alter, open or close public streets and public alleys and ways by ordinance. 
(v)	To contract with any state department or agency or any other political subdivision for joint services or the exchange of services; and to contract with such agencies or subdivisions for the joint use of facilities or equipment; and to contract with any such agency or subdivision to perform any service or execute any project in which the municipality has an interest. 
(w)	To authorize the providing for surety bonds for employees, said bonds to be payable to the city, with premiums payable by the city, when necessary or proper. 
(x)	To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen. 
(y)	To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city. 
(z)	To adopt by ordinance a plan or plans for the zoning of the city, in the interest of public health, safety, order, convenience, comfort, aesthetics, prosperity, and general welfare, and for the purpose of regulating the location of trades, industries, apartment houses, dwellings, or other uses of property; or for the purpose of regulating the height and location of the buildings, fences or other structures; or for the purpose of regulating the alignment of buildings or other structures near street frontages; or for the purpose of preserving buildings, structures or areas having national, regional, state or local historic significance; or for the purpose of maintaining or improving the aesthetic appearance of any buildings, structures or areas. The zoning regulations may be based upon any one or more of the purposes above described. The city may be divided into such number of zones or districts, and such districts may be of such shape and area as the mayor and councilmen of said city shall deem best to accomplish the purposes of the zoning regulations. 
Section 1.03. - Ordinances. 
All ordinances, by-laws, rules, and regulations, now in force in said city, not inconsistent with this act, are hereby declared valid and of force until amended or repealed by the mayor and council of said city. 
Section 1.04. - Construction. 
The powers of the city shall be construed liberally and in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the city as stated in this Charter. It is the intention hereof to grant the city full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the city within its corporate limits and to conduct all its affairs. 
Section 1.05. - Corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Thomson shall include all of the following property and territory: 
(a)	All of the territory lying and being within three-fourths (¾) of one mile from the official center of the City of Thomson, as specified and described in a resolution of the mayor and council of the City of Thomson, adopted on the 14th day of May, 1970, described as follows: 
"The Mayor and Council hereby designates and recognizes the official center of the City of Thomson, as specified and provided in the Georgia Laws of 1927, page 1639 [1927 Ga. Laws, p. 1639], as being located and situated at the Southwest corner of the property of Knox Investment Company (MCLELLAN'S STORE, FORMERLY THE KNOX HOTEL PROPERTY) at the point where the sidewalk on the east side of Main Street intersects with the north side of the sidewalk which parallels Journal Street; with a marker-disc to be placed on said spot, said marker to be not less than 12 inches in diameter." 
(b)	Also, all of the territory described in three acts of the General Assembly of Georgia, wherein certain territory was annexed to and made a part of the City of Thomson, to wit; 
An Act approved February 26, 1959 (Ga. Laws 1959, p. 2067). 
An Act approved February 21, 1964 (Ga. Laws 1964, p. 2196). 
An Act approved March 4, 1966 (Ga. Laws 1966, p. 3007). 
(c)	Also, all of the territory described in twenty-one (21) ordinances of the City of Thomson, duly adopted by the mayor and council in accordance with the statutes of the State of Georgia, said ordinances, with date of adoption being as follows: 
No. 224 - April 17, 1952; 
No. 228 - March 12, 1953; 
No. 231 - August 13, 1953; 
No. 233 - November 12, 1953; 
No. 236 - March 12, 1954; 
No. 239 - November 11, 1954; 
No. 246 - September 8, 1955; 
No. 250 - May 17, 1956; 
No. 254 - April 11, 1957; 
No. 256 - September 12, 1957; 
No. 297 - October 30, 1969; 
No. 300 - August 14, 1969; 
No. 303 - August 14, 1969; 
No. 306 - April 9, 1970; 
No. 309 - April 22, 1971; 
No. 310 - June 10, 1971; 
No. 311 - June 10, 1971; 
No. 317 - May 11, 1972; 
No. 320 - August 14, 1972; 
No. 321 - August 14, 1972; 
No. 322 - October 12, 1972. 
Editor's note— All annexations of the city completed after the adoption of the 1973 Charter are not listed in this section but copies of such annexation ordinances are on file and available in the city clerk's office. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY GOVERNMENT 

Section 2.01. - Establishment of city government. 
The corporate governmental powers of the City of Thomson shall be vested in a mayor and five councilmen to be known as the "Mayor and Council of the City of Thomson." The mayor and council shall be elected and shall exercise their powers in such manner as prescribed by this Charter, the Constitution, and applicable general laws of the State of Georgia, or if not prescribed, in such manner as prescribed by the duly established ordinances of the City of Thomson. 
(1978 Ga. Laws (Act No. 956), page 2132) 
Section 2.02. - Qualifications for mayor and councilmen. 
To be eligible for the office of mayor or councilman, elected or appointed, a person must be at least 21 years of age, and must meet the requirements of a qualified voter of said city, as prescribed by state law, and must have been a bona fide resident of the City of Thomson for at least one year next preceding the election in which he offers as a candidate; provided, however, that beginning with the election of councilmen in 1978 and continuing thereafter, a candidate for councilman shall have been a resident of the district from which he offers as a candidate for a period of at least 60 days prior to the date on which he officially qualifies as a candidate. 
(1978 Ga. Laws (Act No. 956), page 2132) 
Section 2.03. - Election of mayor and councilmen. 
(a)	Those persons presently elected to office shall continue to serve until the second Thursday in January, 1979, or until their successors are duly elected and qualified as hereinafter provided. 
(b)	The City of Thomson will be divided into two districts for the purpose of electing councilmen. The Northern District will consist of all that part of the city that lies north of a line beginning at the western end of Hickory Hill Drive, then east along Hickory Hill Drive to Lumpkin Street, then east along Lumpkin Street to Gordon Street, then east along Gordon Street to Holt Street, then east along Holt Street to White Oak Street, then east along White Oak Street to the city limits and then generally northeast along the city limits to the easternmost intersection of the city limits and Highway 223. The Southern District shall consist of the remainder of the city, being all that part that lies south of the Northern District. 
(c)	The governing body of the City of Thomson shall continue to consist of a mayor and five-member council. At the December, 1978, general election, two council seats will be elected from the Northern District and three from the Southern District. Each candidate will be required to live in the district from which he is elected and he shall be elected solely by the voters who reside in such district. The mayor will be elected at said December, 1978, general election by all of the voters of the city and may reside anywhere within the city. Candidates for the council shall designate the district in which they are offering as a candidate. The council shall be elected by plurality vote such that the two candidates running in the Northern District who get the highest number of votes will be elected to the council from said district and the three candidates from the Southern District who get the highest number of votes will be elected to the council from said district, and the candidate for mayor who gets the highest number of votes shall be elected mayor. 
(1978 Ga. Laws (Act No. 956), page 2132) 
Section 2.04. - Terms of office. 
The terms of office for mayor and councilmen shall begin on the second Thursday in January following their respective election, and shall continue for four years and until their successors are elected and qualified, except as provided in section 2.03 hereof. 
Editor's note— The provisions of this section and of section 2.03(a) of the Charter have been superseded by later state law found in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. The Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
State Law reference— State election laws to take precedence over conflicting municipal charter provisions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-14. 
Section 2.05. - City council. 
The governing body of said city shall be composed of a mayor and five councilmen, in which is vested all corporate, legislative and other powers of the city, except as otherwise provided in this act. The mayor and council shall hold regular public meetings at a stated time and place as provided by ordinance. The mayor and council shall meet in special session on call of either the mayor, or the mayor pro-tem and two councilmen, and notice of which has been served on the other members personally or left at their residence at least twelve hours in advance of the meeting. Alternatively, or in addition thereto, notice of a special session may be given by telephoning the other members. If this method is used, the first order of business in the special session shall be to enter upon the minutes of the meeting an oath or an affidavit by the mayor, or the mayor pro-tem and two councilmen calling the special session, attested to by the city clerk or by another member of the council, or any person authorized to administer oaths. Said oath or affidavit must contain a statement that each councilman was either notified personally by telephone by the person making the oath or affidavit or was not capable of being so notified by reason of lack of knowledge of his whereabouts, or his absence from the state. 
Any person who is found guilty of false swearing, as defined by Code section 26-2402 [O.C.G.A. § 16-10-71], as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, in the above proceeding shall be punished as provided by law. Any action taken in a special session which was called by a person later found guilty of false-swearing regarding the telephone notice of any member shall be void, unless ratified unanimously at a regular council meeting held after said person is found guilty. A ratification of action taken in such a special session by the mayor and council prior to a conviction for false swearing shall not be effective. Any liability to the city arising from action taken by the mayor and council pursuant to a special session in which telephone notice is given, and in which the person calling the meeting is found guilty of false swearing shall result in several liability for the person so convicted. Such notice of a special meeting shall not be required and shall be considered waived if the mayor and all council are present when the special meeting is called or convened. Only the business stated in the written call or stated as being the purpose in the oath or affidavit required in special sessions convened under the telephone notice provision of this charter may be transacted at a special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members of the council. The mayor and council shall exercise its powers in public meetings. Four members, which may include three councilmen and the mayor or mayor pro tem, shall constitute a quorum. The council may adopt rules and by-laws, by ordinance, to govern the conduct of its business; including procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of absent members. The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for punishment for contemptuous behavior conducted in their presence. 
Section 2.06. - Mayor as presiding officer. 
The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council; shall have the right to vote in the matter of the election or appointment of all city officers or employees, but on all other matters shall have a vote only in the case of a tie vote by councilmen; shall have veto power, and the mayor shall have four days after meetings of the council in which to file with the clerk in writing this dissent, but the council may at the same meeting or any subsequent meeting, within 30 days, pass any such ordinance, order or resolution, notwithstanding the veto, by a vote of four-fifths of the total number of councilmen to be taken by ayes and nays, and entered upon the minutes; shall be the chief executive officer of the city; shall sign ordinances and resolutions on their final passage; may obtain short term loans in the name of the city when authorized by the council to do so; shall sign deeds, bonds, and contracts when authorized by the council to do so; and shall perform such other duties imposed by this Charter and duly adopted ordinances. 
Section 2.07. - Mayor pro tem. 
At the first regular meeting, and after the newly elected councilmen have taken office following each regular election, the council shall elect from its membership a mayor pro tem for a term of two years. Upon the council's failure to elect a mayor pro tem at said first regular meeting, the incumbent councilman who received the highest number of votes, when last elected, shall be declared mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem shall perform the duties of the mayor during his absence from the city or his disability. 
Section 2.08. - Vacancy in office of mayor or councilman. 
A vacancy shall exist if the mayor or a councilman resigns; dies; moves his residence from the district from which elected or, in the case of the mayor, from the city; or is absent from four consecutive regular meetings of the governing authority, except if granted a leave of absence by the council and such leave of absence is entered on the minutes; or if he is adjudged incompetent; or is convicted of malfeasance in office or of a felony. 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of a member of the council from any cause other than the expiration of a term of office, the vacancy shall be filled in the following manner: 
If the vacancy occurs within twelve (12) months of the expiration of the term, the vacancy shall be filled by the mayor and council appointing a qualified person to serve out the unexpired term of office. If the vacancy occurs within thirty days prior to the regular city election, the vacancy shall be filled at such regular election. 
If the vacancy occurs at any other time not provided for above, the vacancy shall be filled by a special election pursuant to a call of a special election as provided by this Charter; provided, however, that the vacancy shall be filled by plurality vote. At no time shall there be more than one councilman so appointed holding office; and if a vacancy occurs on the council with one member so appointed on the council, a special election shall be held within a period of 45 days after the office becomes vacant pursuant to a call of a special election as provided by this Charter; however, if a special election is called pursuant to this Charter, the vacancy previously filled by appointment as well as the existing vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired terms in a special election; provided, however, that the vacancies shall be filled by plurality vote with the candidates getting the highest number of votes filling the said vacancies. 
In the event a vacancy should occur in the office of mayor, a special election shall be called and held in the manner prescribed by Code Title 34A [O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.], the Georgia Municipal Election Code, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, so long as the vacancy occurs at least six (6) months prior to the regular expiration date of the term; provided, however, that the mayor elected at the special election shall be elected by plurality vote. If the vacancy occurs within six (6) months of the expiration date of the term, the mayor pro tem shall serve until the expiration date and shall be authorized during said period to exercise all of the powers of the mayor hereinbefore or hereinafter provided. 
(1978 Ga. Laws (Act No. 956), page 2132) 
Section 2.09. - Compensation and expenses. 
The salary of the mayor shall be $8,000.00 per annum, and the salary of each city councilman shall be $5,000.00 per annum. Each councilman and the mayor, when authorized by the mayor and councilmen, and upon the presentation of itemized vouchers, shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
(Ord. No. 437, § 1, 1-14-88; Ord. No. 485, § 1, 9-7-95; Ord. No. 520, § 1, 9-4-03; Ord. No. 561, § 1, 2-11-16 ) 
State Law reference— Conditions and requirements governing increases for elective members of governing body, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Section 2.10. - City clerk. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city clerk who shall serve at their pleasure and who shall be ex officio treasurer. He shall be responsible for keeping and preserving the city seal and all records of the council; attending meetings of the council and keeping a journal of its proceedings at such meetings, including the names of members present and absent, the vote of each member on each question, each motion considered, and the text of each resolution or ordinance considered; preparing and certifying copies of official records in his office, for which fees may be prescribed by ordinance; and performing such other duties as may be required by the council or mayor. 
The mayor and council shall require the clerk-treasurer, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, to give good and sufficient bond in the amount to be decided by the mayor and council, but not less than $25,000, said bond payable to the City of Thomson, for the faithful performance of his duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations or unlawful expenditures. Said surety bond shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia and approved by the mayor and council, and the premium thereon shall be paid by the city. 
Section 2.11. - City legislation. 
Any action of the council having a regulatory or penal effect or required to be done by ordinance under this act, shall be done only by ordinance. Each resolution and ordinance shall be in written form before being introduced. The affirmative vote of at least three members of the council shall be required to pass any resolution or ordinance. After adoption of ordinances, the city clerk shall number ordinances consecutively, in the order of their final adoption, and shall copy them into a permanent record book used solely for this purpose. The city clerk shall do likewise for resolutions, using a separate series of numbers and a separate record book. The original copies of all ordinances, resolutions, and motions shall be filed and preserved by the city clerk. 
Section 2.12. - Readings. 
No ordinance, except in the case of an emergency which shall be stated in the ordinance, shall be approved and adopted until it shall have been read at two consecutive meetings not less than seven days apart, and one of which readings must be at a regular monthly meeting. 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION AND PERSONNEL 

Section 3.01. - Organization. 
The city government shall continue as presently organized, unless and until otherwise provided by ordinance. The mayor and council, by such ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge or consolidate officers, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city; may provide that the same person shall fill a number of offices and positions of employment, and may transfer or change the functions and duties of offices, positions of employment, department and agencies of the city. 
Section 3.02. - Administrative duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall be the executive head of the city government, responsible for the efficient and orderly administration of the city's affairs. He shall be responsible for the enforcement of laws, rules, and regulations, ordinances and franchises in the city. He may conduct inquiries and investigations into the conduct of the city's affairs and shall have such powers and duties as may be provided by ordinance not inconsistent with this Charter. 
Section 3.03. - City attorney. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized by ordinance. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a part; may be the prosecuting officer in the recorder's [municipal] court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; and shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city, concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs. Said city attorney shall be paid an annual salary to be fixed by the mayor and council not to exceed the salary paid a councilman, and in addition shall be paid reasonable compensation, as may be agreed upon between the mayor and council, for all extraordinary legal services rendered. 
Section 3.04. - Oath of office. 
Before a person takes any office in the city government, he shall take the following oath or affirmation before an officer of the state authorized to administer oaths: 
"I swear that I will faithfully and impartially uphold the Constitution of this State and of the United States, and will demean myself as Mayor (or Councilman, as the case may be) during my continuance in office. I have not, in order to influence my election to this office, directly or indirectly promised my vote or support to any person or officer in the said government of the City of Thomson, nor for any other office. I will not knowingly permit my vote in the election or appointment of any persons to a position in said government to be influenced by fear, favor or the hope of reward, but in all things pertaining to my office I will be governed by what in my judgment is for the public good and for the best interest of said city, so help me God." 
Section 3.05. - Political activity prohibited. 
No officer or employee of the city, other than the mayor and councilmen, shall continue in the employment of the city after becoming a candidate for nomination of election to any city office. Any council member, other than the mayor, who runs for the office of mayor must resign from the council prior to qualifying to run for said office of mayor. 
Section 3.06. - Suspension by mayor. 
All officers and employees of the city shall, at all times, be subject to suspension for cause by the mayor, in his discretion, but such suspension shall be reported within ten (10) days to the city council for action on their part, and unless such charges by the mayor be sustained by said council, the suspended officer or employee shall be reinstated. 
Section 3.07. - Suspension, removal from office, authority of city council. 
All officers and employees of the city shall, at all times, be subject to the jurisdiction of the city council and amenable to its discipline, and said city council, in their discretion and without a hearing, shall have the power to suspend or remove, with or without pay, any of said officers or employees by a majority vote of the whole body for any cause that may seem just and proper. 
Section 3.08. - City planning and renewal. 
The council may create and establish a planning commission pursuant to the provisions of general law as they now exist or as they may hereinafter be amended. 
ARTICLE IV. - FISCAL ADMINISTRATION 

Section 4.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of January and shall end on the thirty-first day of December of each year, but a different fiscal year may be fixed by ordinance for the entire city government or for any utility. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for fiscal accounting and reporting of every office, department, agency and activity of the city government, unless otherwise prohibited by law. 
Section 4.02. - Mayor to submit annual budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the council, but not later than forty-five days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit a proposed operating budget for the next fiscal year to the council, showing separately for the general funds, each utility, and each other fund the following: 
(a)	The revenue and expenditure during the preceding fiscal year, 
(b)	Appropriations and estimated revenue and recommended expenditures for the next fiscal year, 
(c)	A comparative statement of the assets, liabilities, reserves and surplus at the end of the preceding fiscal year, and estimated assets, liabilities, reserves and surplus at the end of the current fiscal year, and 
(d)	Such other information and data as may be considered necessary by the mayor and council. 
Section 4.03. - Action by council on budget. 
Before the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year, the council shall adopt the mayor's budget, with such modifications as the council considers necessary or desirable. Appropriations need not be in more detail than a lump sum for each department, office, and agency unless otherwise directed by the council. The council shall not make any appropriations in excess of estimated revenue, except to provide for an actual emergency threatening the health, property, or lives, safety or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, provided the council unanimously agrees that there is such an emergency. 
Section 4.04. - Additional appropriations. 
The council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budgets, at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose, but any such additional appropriations may be made for any public purpose only from an existing unappropriated surplus. 
Section 4.05. - Lapse of appropriations. 
All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse into the unappropriated surplus or reserves of the fund or funds from which such appropriations were made. 
Section 4.06. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)	On or before a date fixed by the council but not later than forty-five days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing such improvements. The council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such projects are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening the lives, health or property of inhabitants, when passed by four-fifths vote of the membership of the council. Such capital improvements budget may be revised and extended each year with regard to the capital improvements still pending on or in the process of construction or acquisition. 
(b)	Before the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year, the council shall adopt the proposed capital improvements budget, with such modifications as the council considers necessary or desirable. No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned, provided, the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a majority vote of the council. 
Section 4.07. - Sale of city property. 
The mayor and council shall have the power and authority to sell, lease, trade or convey any property of the city for such consideration as the mayor and council shall deem equitable and just for the city, as follows: 
(a)	Any personal property which the mayor and council may deem to be obsolete, surplus, or unusable and having a fair market value not exceeding $500.00 as determined by the council, may be sold and conveyed by the mayor and council at any time without any advertisement, or with such advertisement as they may deem necessary. Any personal property having a fair market value exceeding $500.00 shall be advertised in order to be sold and shall be advertised and sold in the same way and manner as provided in paragraph (b) of this section for the sale of real property. Personal property traded in on property of a like kind need not be advertised in order to be traded. 
(b)	Any real property which the mayor and council may deem to be of no use to the city may be sold at public outcry before the courthouse door in McDuffie County between the legal hours of sale to the highest bidder, under such terms as the mayor and council may feel to be proper, after advertisement in the "McDuffie Progress" for not less than two weeks nor more than four weeks, immediately preceding the date fixed for the sale, in the discretion of the mayor and council. After such sale the mayor and council shall have one hour within which to reject the high bid, and declare the sale to be void and of no effect, if they deem said bid to be insufficient to cover the value of said real property. 
(c)	The foregoing provisions shall not apply to any real property which has been or may be hereafter given or conveyed to the City of Thomson by the State of Georgia or any of its agencies. As to any property which has been or may be conveyed to the City of Thomson by the State of Georgia or any of its agencies, the mayor and council shall have the right and authority to cede, grant, sell, convey or give such property to any agency of the state, federal or county governments if such real property, in the discretion of the mayor and council, is of no use to the city, and the city stands to benefit by any such conveyance. 
Section 4.08. - Annual audit. 
The mayor and council shall employ a certified public accountant to make an annual audit of all financial books and records of the city. The accountant shall file his report with the mayor and council and shall prepare a summary of the report which shall be furnished or made available to the mayor and every councilman. 
Section 4.09. - Publication of financial statement. 
As soon as practicable after the close of the fiscal year, but within six months after the close thereof, the mayor and council shall cause to be published in a local newspaper, a statement of financial condition which shall contain a statement of revenues and expenditures showing all municipal accounts as of the close of the preceding fiscal year. Such statement of financial condition shall be prepared so as to fairly represent the general financial condition of the city as of the close of the preceding fiscal year. 
Section 4.10. - Property taxes. 
All property subject to taxation for state or county purposes, assessed as of January 1, in each year, shall be returned for taxes each year on or before April 1. If such return is not made, the mayor and council are authorized to assess a penalty of not more than ten percent (10%) of the taxes due on said property. Taxes shall become past due or delinquent if not paid on or before December 20th, of each year. The council may provide by ordinance for an independent city assessment as provided by law or may elect to use the county assessment for the year in which city taxes are to be levied as provided by Georgia Law. If an independent city assessment is made, a board of equalization, consisting of three freeholders of the city appointed by the mayor and council, with compensation fixed by ordinance, shall hear appeals of taxpayers taken within ten days after the city clerk has sent a notice, by ordinary mail, of a new or increased assessment; provided that such notice shall not be required, nor may appeals be taken, in the case of initial city assessments that are the same as county assessments. Except as otherwise provided in this section, appeals involving city property assessments may be taken as now or as may hereafter be provided by general law. 
Section 4.11. - Tax levy. 
The council shall be authorized to levy an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, and for any other public purposes as determined by the council in its discretion. The council is also authorized to provide for sufficient levy to pay principal and interest on general obligations. Said city is hereby authorized to levy taxes in excess of the limits prescribed by Georgia Code Sections 92-4101 through 92-4104 [now repealed] and the City of Thomson is hereby exempted from the provisions of Georgia Code sections 92-4101 through 92-4104 [now repealed], inclusive. 
Section 4.12. - Tax due date and tax bills. 
The city shall send tax bills to taxpayers, showing the assessed valuations, amount of taxes due, tax due dates and information as to delinquency dates and penalties. Failure to send tax bills shall not, however, invalidate any tax. Property taxes shall become delinquent if not paid on or before December 20 of each year, which time may be changed by ordinance, at which time a penalty of ten percent (10%) in addition to a fi. fa. charge may be added, and thereafter such taxes shall be subject to interest at the rate of nine percent (9%) per annum, from the due date until paid. On and after the date when such taxes become delinquent, the tax records of the city shall have the force and effect of a judgment of a court of record. Said city shall have the right, power and authority to provide by ordinance for the return of all real and personal property for taxation and to provide for the compelling of such return; and to provide penalties for failure to do so, after due notice and hearing to be prescribed by the mayor and council, for the current or any previous year, not in any conflict with any limitation prescribed by the laws of Georgia; and to prescribe the time or times when said taxes shall be due and payable. 
Editor's note— With respect to state law concerning the rate of interest on past due taxes see O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 which establishes a rate of one percent per month for delinquent taxes. 
Section 4.13. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi. fa. issued by the city clerk and executed by the chief of police under the same procedure provided by laws governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those for federal, state or county taxes. 
Section 4.14. - Transfer of executions. 
The clerk of the City of Thomson shall be authorized to transfer and assign any fi. fa. or execution issued for street, sewer, or any other assessment in the same manner, upon the same terms, and to the same effect, and thereby vest the purchaser or transferee, with the same rights as in cases of sales or transfers of tax fi. fas. as now provided by law; and in all sales of property hereafter made under execution in behalf of the city for the collection of street, sewer and other assessments, the owner or owners, as the case may be, are authorized to redeem same within the same time and on compliance with the same terms and payment of the same premium, interest and cost, as in cases of redemption of property where sold under state or county ad valorem tax fi. fa. as the same now exists, or as may from time to time be provided by law. 
Section 4.15. - Special assessments. 
The council may assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers or other utility mains and appurtenances, against the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent thirty days after their due dates, and may thereupon be subject, in addition to fi. fa. charges, to a penalty of ten percent (10%) and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate of nine percent (9%) per annum from due date until paid. A lien for such amount plus fi. fa. charges, interest and penalties, shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens, except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes, and said lien shall be enforceable by the same procedures and under the same remedies as provided in this article for city property taxes. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Section 5.01. - Regular elections. 
Time for holding and taking office. The regular election for mayor and councilmen shall be held on the first Wednesday in December of 1978 and on the first Wednesday in December every four years thereafter. Officials elected at any regular election shall take office on the second Thursday in January next following such election. 
(1978 Ga. Laws (Act No. 956), page 2132) 
Editor's note— The provisions of this section of the Charter have been superseded by later state law found in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. The Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
State Law reference— State election laws to take precedence over conflicting municipal charter provisions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-14. 
Section 5.02. - Qualification of candidates. 
Any person desiring to become a candidate in any regular election, shall file written notice of his candidacy with the municipal superintendent not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days, as provided by ordinance, prior to the date fixed for the holding of any such election. Written notice of candidacy for any special election shall be filed with said superintendent not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days, as provided by ordinance, prior to the date fixed for the holding of any such election. His notice of candidacy shall be accompanied by such qualification fee, if any, as may be required by ordinance. 
Section 5.03. - Qualification of electors. 
Any person meeting the qualifications of an elector for members of the General Assembly under state law who has been a bona fide resident of the City of Thomson for at least 90 days next preceding the election in which he desires to vote, shall be qualified to register as an elector in any city election held under this Charter. 
Section 5.04. - Applicability of general laws. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the election of all officials of the City of Thomson where provision is made for election by the qualified voters thereof, shall be conducted as to special or general elections in conformity so far as applicable with the provisions of Code Title 34A [O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.], the Georgia Municipal Election Code, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. Whenever any time period established by said Code Title is altered so as to change or supersede any time period provided herein, it shall be considered that said periods herein shall be correspondingly changed so as to avoid any conflict between this Charter and the general law. 
Section 5.05. - Time of election. Polls. 
The polls shall be opened from 7:00 o'clock a.m. to 7:00 o'clock p.m. 
Section 5.06. - Place of elections. 
The polling place or places for holding elections shall be prescribed by the mayor and council and shall be published in the election notice; provided, however, any change in a polling place shall be affected as provided by Code section 34A-604 [O.C.G.A. § 21-3-163], as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
Section 5.07. - Voter registration. 
In all elections held in the City of Thomson, whether special or general elections, the voters, in addition to the qualifications already prescribed, shall be registered as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Section 5.08. - Rules. 
The mayor and council are hereby authorized to enact by ordinance such additional rules consistent with this Charter and general laws as are deemed necessary for the conduct of elections. 
Section 5.09. - Absentee ballots. 
The mayor and council in its discretion is authorized to provide by ordinance for absentee ballots for any city election. 
Section 5.10. - Call for elections. 
Any call for an election which is required to be made by the laws of this state shall be made by the mayor and council. 
ARTICLE VI. - RECORDER'S COURT [MUNICIPAL COURT][3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— All courts in the state which have jurisdiction over the violation of municipal ordinances shall be deemed to mean "a municipal court … and when such terms [recorder's court] refer to a court of a municipal corporation … the term `municipal court' is inserted in lieu thereof" per O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1. 
State Law reference— Establishment and jurisdiction of municipal courts, Ga. Const. art. 6, sec. 1, par. 1; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Section 6.01. - Creation. 
There is hereby established a court to be known as the "recorder's court," City of Thomson, which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance, and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court, to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the City of Thomson constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof; to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations and to prescribe the condition of forfeiture of the same; and to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary and proper to the conduct of said court. The presiding officer of such court shall be known as the recorder. Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. The court shall sit at a place designated by the mayor and council. 
Section 6.02. - Recorder. 
(a)	No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as recorder unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall not have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude and shall be qualified to vote in McDuffie County. The recorder shall be appointed by the mayor and council, and shall serve at their discretion. The compensation of the recorder shall be fixed by the mayor and council. Nothing herein shall disqualify the mayor or any councilman from serving as recorder or recorder pro tem. 
(b)	The recorder pro tem shall serve in the absence of the recorder, shall have the same qualifications as the recorder, and shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(c)	Before entering on duties of his office, the recorder or recorder pro tem shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state, that he will truly, honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor or partiality. This oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the meeting of the mayor and council. 
Section 6.03. - Jurisdiction. 
The recorder shall have power to impose fines, costs and forfeitures, for the violation of any law or ordinance of the City of Thomson passed in accordance with this Charter, for each offense in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the violation of any ordinance, or the maximum amount as provided by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated for the violation of any law of the State of Georgia, to imprison offenders for a period of not more than sixty (60) days, or at labor on the roads and streets or other public works of said city for not more than sixty (60) days; and the said recorder shall have the power and authority to impose any one or more of these punishments when he shall find that the facts of the case so justify. Said recorder shall not have the authority to inflict a greater punishment for contempt than to impose a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) or such amount as may be provided by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, whichever amount is greater; or imprisonment not exceeding twenty (20) days, or any combination of the two. He shall be to all intents and purposes a magistrate, so far as to enable him to issue warrants for offenses committed within the limits of the City of Thomson which warrants may be executed by an officer of said city, and to commit the offenders to jail or admit them to bail in bailable cases for their appearance at the next term of court of competent jurisdiction to be held in said city. The recorder's court shall also have concurrent jurisdiction with that of the magistrate over offenses against the criminal laws of the state committed within the corporate limits. Except as may be herein otherwise specified, the recorder is vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers as to the entire area within the corporate limits of the City of Thomson. The recorder's court is specifically invested with all jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area within the corporate limits granted by state laws generally to mayors, recorders, police courts, and particularly such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. Said recorder is hereby authorized to administer oaths. 
(Ord. No. 463, 10-10-91) 
Section 6.04. - Right of appeal. 
The right of appeal and procedures pertaining to appeal bonds to the superior court of McDuffie County from the recorder's court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the court of ordinary. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding. 
Section 6.05. - Court cost. 
In all cases in the recorder's court of the City of Thomson the costs incurred and allowable herein may be computed under the provisions of the laws of the State of Georgia fixing costs in the justice of peace courts of said state, or the mayor and council may establish a schedule of fees to defray costs of operation and the city shall be entitled to reimbursement of the costs, meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to the superior court for violations of state law. The mayor and council may also provide a uniform scale of costs of the clerk and police officers of said city for all services in the arrest and prosecution of offenders in the recorder's court and in the issuance and collection of tax and other executions; and for their collection and payment into the city treasury. The recorder is hereby authorized to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses to said recorder's court, and to issue such other processes as may be necessary for the proper administration of said court. 
Section 6.06. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the mayor and council, the recorder shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the business of said court; provided, however, that the mayor and council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations relative to the procedures employed in the operation of the superior courts under the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE VII. - SEVERABILITY 

Section 7.01. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this act, which shall remain of full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part hereof. The general assembly hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REPEALER 

Section 8.01. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ACTS 
Editor's note— This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendatory acts. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
Editor's note— This table shows the location of any ordinances which amend the basic Charter. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The provisions in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances, City of Thomson, Georgia" and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the "City Code." 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Charter. The words "the Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Thomson, Georgia as printed in Part I of this volume. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Thomson, Georgia. 
City limits. The words "the city limits" shall mean the corporate limits or legal boundary of the City of Thomson, Georgia. 
Code. The terms "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Thomson, Georgia as cited in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided in O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6, when a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty; however, when the following day is a Saturday or Sunday, the party shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. 
State Law reference— Similar construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3). 
Council or city council. The words "council" or "city council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Thomson, Georgia. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean McDuffie County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, or granting some right of him as such official it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty, or it shall grant to them such right, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The word "may" is always permissive and never mandatory. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." shall mean the latest edition of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Office, officer, department, board, commission or other agent or agency. The naming of any officer, department, board, commission or other agent or agency shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Thomson, Georgia." Any such reference shall be deemed to include any person authorized by law to perform the duties of any such office, officer, department, board, commission or other agent or agency. 
Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as described in this section. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available or accessible to the public. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the city seal, the seal of the corporation. 
Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory and never permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of Code. 
Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Sec. 1-4. - Liberal construction of Code. 
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes generally, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-5. - Notes and catchlines of sections not part of law. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the descriptive headings or catchlines immediately preceding or within the text of the individual sections of this Code, except the section numbers included in the headings or catchlines immediately preceding the text of such sections, and title and chapter analyses do not constitute part of the law and shall in no manner limit or expand the construction of any section of this Code. All historical citations, title and chapter analyses, and notes set out in this Code are given for the purpose of convenient reference and do not constitute part of the law. 
Sec. 1-6. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same in substance as those of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)	Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special although permanent in effect. 
(2)	Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated. 
(3)	Any ordinance assessing a fee. 
(4)	Any right or franchise granted by the city council to any person, firm or corporation. 
(5)	Any administrative ordinance of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(6)	Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city. 
(7)	Any ordinance, resolution, policy or procedure pertaining to the regulation, retirement or pensioning of city personnel. 
(8)	Any appropriation ordinance. 
(9)	Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(10)	Any ordinance pertaining to rehabilitation grants in the community development plan. 
(11)	Any ordinance making any act or failure to do any act an offense against the city, when such ordinance is authorized under the state law. 
(12)	Establishing any one-way street, traffic device, signal or marking, any parking regulation, or any limitation placed upon the use of any specific street for vehicles or pedestrians. 
(13)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(14)	Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the grades of any street in the city. 
(15)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for the same. 
(16)	Any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes, or providing for the levying or collecting thereof. 
(17)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(18)	Any ordinance pertaining to zoning map amendments. 
(19)	Any ordinance annexing real property to the city. 
(20)	Any ordinance establishing a retirement plan. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. These ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-8. - Repeal not to revive former ordinance. 
When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall itself be repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision unless it be expressly so provided and the former ordinance, clause or provision is set forth at length. 
Sec. 1-9. - Repeal of ordinance not to affect liabilities, etc. 
Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified, either expressly or by implication, by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the ordinance repealing or modifying it shall go into effect unless therein otherwise expressly provided; but no suit, prosecution, proceeding, right, fine or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in anywise be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance or provisions had continued in force, unless it shall be therein otherwise expressly provided. 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)	Effect. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Thomson, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)	Manner. All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
(c)	Cite. All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
(d)	Language. Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of Ordinances of the City of Thomson, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)	New sections. If a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Thomson, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, article, chapter or other designation as the case may be, to be numbered ____________ , which reads as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(f)	New material. In lieu of subsection (e), when the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in this Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the city council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Thomson, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(g)	Subject to general penalty. In case of the amendment by the city council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-14 shall apply to the section as amended. In case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ ," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city, to be misrepresented thereby. 
State Law reference— Alteration of records prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102. 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, if any title, chapter, article, part, subpart, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, item, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this Code is declared or adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining portions of this Code, which shall remain of full force and effect as if such portion so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part of this Code, since the city council declares that it would have enacted the remaining parts of this Code if it had known that such portion hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement or nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 500, 4-9-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 500, adopted April 9, 1998, repealed the former § 1-14 and enacted a new § 1-14 as set out herein. The former § 1-14 pertained to similar subject matter. 
Charter reference— Authority to provide punishment for violators of municipal ordinances, § 1.02(r); power of municipal court to impose punishment for violation of municipal ordinances, § 6.03. 
State Law reference— Penalties for ordinance violations limited, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 6; emergency management, ch. 7; human relations, ch. 9; taxation and revenue, ch. 20; zoning administration, § 22-136 et seq. 
State Law reference— Powers relating to administration of government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Record of ordinances. 
(a)	It shall be one of the duties of the city clerk to maintain and keep current and up to date the chronological index and the subject matter index to the ordinances of the city. Upon passage of an ordinance, the city clerk shall enter the ordinance name, number, and page number into the appropriate place in the chronological index. In addition, the city clerk shall enter the above information and any other deemed necessary in the subject matter index and shall cross reference such entry throughout the subject matter index if and to the extent necessary. 
(b)	The city clerk shall accomplish the duties named in subsection (a) of this section within 30 days following the passage of an ordinance or by the time the ordinance is printed in the city ordinance book, whichever is sooner. 
(c)	Violation of the terms of this section shall subject the city clerk to such penalty as the mayor and council deem advisable, up to and including suspension or removal from office. 
(Ord. No. 373, §§ 1, 2, 9-14-78) 
Secs. 2-2—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City government, art. II. 

Sec. 2-26. - Compensation and expenses. 
The salary of the mayor shall be $3,600.00 per annum and the salary of each councilmember shall be $1,500.00 per annum. Each councilmember and the mayor, when authorized by the mayor and council, and upon the presentation of itemized vouchers, shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
(Ord. No. 437, § 1, 1-14-88) 
Sec. 2-27. - Meetings. 
The mayor and city council of Thomson shall hold regular public meetings at 6:30 p.m. on the second Thursday of each and every month. 
(Ord. No. 539, 6-12-08) 
Cross reference— Meetings, § 22-176. 
Secs. 2-28—2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 8-26 et seq.; personnel, ch. 13. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-46. - Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
(a)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 47-5-40, the City of Thomson hereby subscribes to a plan of employee benefits consisting of group health, life and accidental death insurance, offered through the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. Said benefits shall be provided to eligible employees and dependents. The city agrees to include only qualified active employees of the City of Thomson, on the original census of participants and on participant enrollment forms provided to GMEBS. The City of Thomson subscribes to the 80/60 PPO Plan. 
(b)	The City of Thomson agrees to remit to GMEBS the monthly contributions necessary to keep in force the coverage provided. Such contributions shall be due and payable on the first day of each month and late fees or charges, as established by the GMEBS Board of Trustees, shall be collected on any contributions not received by the fifteenth day of each month. The city agrees to provide 30 days advance written notice to GMEBS of its intent not to continue participation in the employee benefit program. 
(c)	The plan year for the provision of employee benefits offered by the City of Thomson to its employees shall begin on the first day of February 2008, with the next renewal plan year beginning on the first day of February 2009. The renewal date in succeeding years to be established by GMEBS in accordance with its operating rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 535, §§ 1—3, 1-10-08) 
Secs. 2-47—2-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-56. - Appointment, term. 
The mayor and council shall select and appoint a city administrator whose salary shall be fixed by the mayor and council and whose term of office shall be indefinite and whose powers, duties and qualifications shall be as hereinafter provided. The mayor and members of city council shall be ineligible for the office of city administrator for the period of two years from the time of the expiration of their term of office, or during their term of office. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 1, 3-8-79) 
Sec. 2-57. - Qualifications, residency. 
The city administrator shall be selected by the mayor and council on the basis of ability, experience in or his knowledge of acknowledged practice in respect to the duties of his office and experience and familiarity in dealing with state and federal agencies in city-related matters. During his tenure of office he shall reside within the city, normal moving and transfer of residence time excepted, and shall devote his entire time to the duties of his office and shall not engage in any other business or profession. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 2, 3-8-79) 
Sec. 2-58. - Powers generally. 
It shall be the duty of the city administrator to execute and administer the policies of the city government fixed by the mayor and council, and to have authority over all administrative matters of the city and to be accountable only to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 2, 3-8-79) 
Sec. 2-59. - Duties. 
The city administrator shall: 
(1)	See that the laws of the state and the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city are faithfully executed and enforced. 
(2)	Prepare the agenda and attend meetings of the mayor and council and recommend for adoption any measure deemed proper and suitable for the city. 
(3)	Make reports to the mayor and council from time to time upon the affairs of the city and keep the mayor and council fully advised of the city's financial condition and its future needs. 
(4)	Correspond with state and federal agencies and departments, regarding state or federal qualifications or rules for the city, or grants or loans available to the city, and report such correspondence to the mayor and council. 
(5)	Upon the direction and advice of the mayor and council, appoint and suspend or remove all city employees, except the city recorder, recorder pro-tem, city attorney, city treasurer or city clerk, in accordance with such general rules, regulations, policies or ordinances as the mayor and council may adopt. 
(6)	Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the mayor and council. 
(7)	Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, properties, and operations of the city, subject to the general direction and control of the mayor and council. 
(8)	Investigate the affairs, records, accounts and expenditures of the various commissions and boards created by the city and report thereon at least once a year to the mayor and council. 
(9)	Have the right to request the counsel, advice or opinion of the city attorney concerning any matter affecting the interest of the city; and it shall be the duty of the city attorney to respond to such request to the best of his ability. 
(10)	Act in a liaison capacity on behalf of the mayor and council with boards, offices, agencies and commissions of the city. 
(11)	Attest contracts, deeds, licenses and other public documents on behalf of the city with the city clerk as an alternate attesting signatory, after approval of the mayor and council. 
(12)	Exercise any other powers and perform any other duties required or authorized by the mayor and council and not inconsistent with the charter or ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 3, 3-8-79) 
Sec. 2-60. - Removal from office. 
The mayor and council may remove the city administrator by a majority vote adopting a resolution to that effect. In the event the administrator is sought to be removed by the action of the mayor and council, he shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal, with termination to become effective not sooner than 30 days from receipt of such notice. The city administrator may, within ten days after notice of adoption of such resolution, reply in writing and may request a public hearing, which shall be held not earlier than 15 or later than 25 days after filing of such request. The action of the mayor and council in removing the city administrator, however, shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 4(a), 3-8-79) 
Sec. 2-61. - Filling vacancies. 
When there shall be a vacancy in the office of the city administrator, the duties and functions of the city administrator shall be discharged by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 4(b), 3-8-79) 
Secs. 2-62—2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— City attorney, § 3.03. 

Sec. 2-71. - Compensation. 
The salary of the city attorney is set at $1,500.00 per annum. 
(Ord. No. 438, § I, 1-14-88) 
Secs. 2-72—2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - JUDGE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, art. VI. 

Sec. 2-81. - Compensation. 
The salary of the judge of municipal court is set at the sum of $1,500.00. 
(Ord. No. 438, § II, 1-14-88) 
Secs. 2-82—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Thomas-McDuffie County human relations commission, § 9-26 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-101—2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - THOMSON-McDUFFIE CLEAN COMMUNITY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-111. - Established. 
In conjunction with the county, there is hereby established the Thomson-McDuffie County Clean Community Commission. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 1, 11-8-79) 
Sec. 2-112. - Composition. 
(a)	The joint clean community commission shall consist of no more than 22 members who shall be residents of the city or county and who shall serve without remuneration. Members shall be appointed by the mayor and council, the board of county commissioners and the Thomson-McDuffie County Chamber of Commerce. 
(b)	In addition to the appointed members of the commission, the mayor, the chairman of the board of county commissioners and the president of the Thomson-McDuffie County Chamber of Commerce shall serve as ex-officio members of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 1, 11-8-79) 
Sec. 2-113. - Terms of office. 
The terms of office of the members of the joint clean community commission shall generally be for two years each. Members whose terms have expired shall continue as members until their successors shall have been appointed. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 1, 11-8-79) 
Sec. 2-114. - Election of officers. 
The joint clean community commission shall elect from its membership a chairman and such other officers as may be desired. Officers shall be elected on a calendar year basis but may be reelected for succeeding terms. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 1, 11-8-79) 
Sec. 2-115. - Compensation. 
All of the members of the joint clean community commission shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 1, 11-8-79) 
Sec. 2-116. - Duties. 
The duties of the joint clean community commission shall be to: 
(1)	Promote public interest in the general improvement of the environment of the city and county; 
(2)	Initiate, plan, direct and coordinate programs for litter control for the joint clean community system; 
(3)	Study, investigate and develop plans for improving the health, sanitation, safety, and cleanliness of the city and the county by beautifying the streets, highways, alleys, river and stream beds, lots, yards, and other similar places in the city and county; 
(4)	Aid in the prevention of fires, diseases and other casualties by the removal and elimination of trash and other debris from the streets, highways, alleys, lots, yards, plots and other similar places; 
(5)	Encourage the placing, planting and/or preservation of trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects or ornamentation in the city and county; 
(6)	Protect song birds and other wild fowl; 
(7)	Advise and recommend plans to other agencies of the city and county for the beautification of the city and county; 
(8)	Otherwise promote public interest in the general improvement of the environment of the city and county; 
provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge or change the powers and duties of other commissions, departments, boards and other like agencies of the city and county. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 1, 11-8-79) 
Sec. 2-117. - Powers. 
In order to perform the foregoing duties, the joint clean community commission shall have the following authority: 
(1)	To adopt by-laws to facilitate the attainment of its purpose and functions. 
(2)	To initiate, plan, direct and coordinate community wide efforts to achieve its goals. 
(3)	To solicit and accept donations and appropriations of money, services, products, property and facilities for expenditure and use by the commission for the accomplishment of its objects. 
(4)	To employ, to pay and to terminate the employment of such staff as may be required for the fulfillment of commission purposes. 
(5)	To make recommendations to city and county governing bodies as well as to the private sector regarding measures which it deems necessary to accomplish its objects. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 1, 11-8-79) 
Sec. 2-118. - Management of funds. 
(a)	The joint clean community commission shall have the power to receive and disburse funds within the limitations of appropriations, gifts which have been previously approved jointly by the city and county, and in connection with projects or undertaking previously approved. Within the same limitations the commission shall be empowered to contract with any private or public agency to the extent required for its proper operation. The commission shall report to the city and county its acting and doings in connection with each project or undertaking and shall include as part of its report, a statement of its receipts and disbursements, from whatever source and to every object, for the proceeding 12 months. Additionally, upon the completion of each project or undertaking, the commission shall make a complete report to the city and county with respect to such project or undertaking, showing the action in connection therewith and any funds received or expended in its behalf. The commission shall keep such records as will enable it to make such reports and accountings, and the same shall be subject to verification and examination by auditors of the city and/or county. 
(b)	Any project or undertaking begun by the commission shall be terminated at any time upon the decision of either the mayor and council or the board of county commissioners that the continuance thereof is not in public interest. 
(Ord. No. 380, § 1, 11-8-79) 
Secs. 2-119—2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - THOMSON-McDUFFIE COUNTY RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-131. - Established. 
There is hereby established the Thomson-McDuffie County Recreation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 10-10-68) 
Sec. 2-132. - Membership. 
The joint recreation commission shall be appointed jointly by the mayor and council and the board of county commissioners and shall consist of six persons serving without pay. The term of office shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member shall expire annually thereafter. Vacancies in such commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by another appointment for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 1, 10-10-68; Ord. No. 308, § 1, 6-11-70) 
Sec. 2-133. - Organization. 
Immediately after their appointment, the recreation commission shall meet and organize by electing one of their members president and such other officers as may be necessary. The commission shall have authority to adopt by-laws, rules and regulations for the proper conduct of recreation for the city and county. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 2, 10-10-68) 
Sec. 2-134. - General powers, duties. 
The joint recreation commission shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, play fields, indoor recreation centers and other recreation facilities owned or controlled by the city and county. It shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the people in a wholesome or constructive manner. It may conduct such activities on properties under its own control, on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof, and on private properties with the consent of the owners. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 3, 10-10-68) 
Sec. 2-135. - Personnel. 
The joint recreation commission shall have the power to appoint or designate someone to act as superintendent or director who is trained or properly qualified for the work, and such other personnel as the commission deems proper. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 4, 10-10-68) 
Sec. 2-136. - Budget, fiscal control. 
Annually the joint recreation commission shall submit a budget to the mayor and council and board of county commissioners for their approval. The commission may also solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 5, 10-10-68) 
Sec. 2-137. - Annual report. 
The joint recreation commission shall make an annual report to the mayor and council and the board of county commissioners and such other reports as from time to time may be requested by such governing bodies. 
(Ord. No. 294, § 6, 10-10-68) 
Secs. 2-138—2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 530, §§ I—VII, adopted May 11, 2006, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as §§ 2-141—2-147 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-141. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City of Thomson is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
The City of Thomson City Council hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this division to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the division. 
(Ord. No. 530, § I, 5-11-06) 
Sec. 2-142. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building. A building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the City of Thomson City Council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 2-144(b) of this division. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the City of Thomson City Council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 2-144(c) of this division. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)	A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)	Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)	Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)	A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)	The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Object. An object is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site. A site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure. A structure is a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. No. 530, § II, 5-11-06) 
Sec. 2-143. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
(a)	Creation of the commission: There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Thomson Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(b)	Commission position within the city government: The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the City of Thomson. 
(c)	Commission members; number, appointment, terms and compensation: The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of Thomson and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions. 
Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)	Statement of commission's power: 
(1)	The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
a.	Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the City of Thomson having the potential for designation as historic property; 
b.	Recommend to the Thomson City Council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
c.	Review application for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this division; 
d.	Recommend to the Thomson City Council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
e.	Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the City of Thomson; 
f.	Promote the acquisition by the City of Thomson of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A., §§ 44-10.1—10.5) 
g.	Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
h.	Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, the Thomson City Council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
i.	Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the Thomson City Council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
j.	Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties of historic districts designated; 
k.	Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the Thomson historic preservation program; 
l.	Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
m.	Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the City of Thomson without prior consent. 
n.	Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
o.	Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the Thomson City Council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)	Commission's power to adopt rules and standards: The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this division. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)	Conflict of interest: The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statutes and in the City of Thomson Charters. 
(g)	Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources: The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)	Records of commission meetings: A public record shall be kept of the commission resolution, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. No. 530, § III, 5-11-06) 
Sec. 2-144. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)	Preliminary research by the commission: 
(1)	Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources: The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the City of Thomson. 
(2)	Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the Thomson City Council for designation: The commission shall present to the Thomson City Council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)	Commission's documentation of proposed designation: Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the Thomson City Council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.	A physical description; 
b.	A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.	A map showing district boundaries and classification {i.e. contributing, non-contributing or historic, non-historic, vacant, intrusive} of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.	Representative photographs. 
(b)	Designation of a historic district: 
(1)	Criteria for selection of historic districts: A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.	Has special character of special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.	Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.	Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)	Boundaries of a historic district: Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Thomson, or in the absence of zoning, on an official map designated as a public record. 
(3)	Evaluation of properties within historic districts: Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.	Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.	Non-contributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in subsection (b)(1)) 
—-OR—- 
a.	Historic (more than 50 years old); 
b.	Non-historic (les than 50 years old, yet possessing architectural character); 
c.	Intrusion (structure less than 50 years old which do not contribute to the character of the district); 
d.	Vacant. 
(c)	Designation of a historic property: 
(1)	Criteria for selection of historic properties: A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the City of Thomson, the region or the State of Georgia for one of the following reasons: 
a.	It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.	It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
c.	It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the City of Thomson, State of Georgia, or the region; or 
d.	It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)	Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties: 
(1)	Application for designation of historic districts of property: Designations may be proposed by the Thomson City Council, the commission, or: 
a.	For historic districts—A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.	For historic properties—A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)	Required components of a designation ordinance: Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.	List each property in a proposed historic district of describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.	Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.	Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.	Require that the property or district be shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Thomson and be kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)	Require public hearings: The commission or the Thomson City Council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principle newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this division. 
(4)	Notification of historic preservation division: No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in subsection 2-144(a)(3), to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(5)	Recommendations on proposed designations: A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the Thomson City Council. 
(6)	The Thomson City Council actions on the commission's recommendation: Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the Thomson City Council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)	Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation: Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the Thomson City Council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the Thomson City Council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States mail shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this division. 
(8)	Notification of other agencies regarding designation: The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the City of Thomson of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)	Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending: If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. No. 530, § IV, 5-11-06) 
Sec. 2-145. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)	Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties: After the designation by ordinance of a historic property of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)	Submission of plans to commission: An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans and documentation as may be required by the commission. 
(c)	Interior alterations: In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)	Technical advice: The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)	Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard: The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)	Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness: commission action: The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(1)	The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.	Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation: The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features, and to the secretary of interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings. 
b.	Relocation: A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.	The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.	Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.	Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.	Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.	Demolition: A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, tress judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.	The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree or object. 
2.	The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.	The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.	Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
5.	Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.	Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse. 
7.	Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)	Undue hardship: When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this division would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this division. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)	Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)	The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)	Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)	Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)	In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)	In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)	Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)	All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)	The commission and the Thomson City Council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)	Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced: A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and is renewable. 
(l)	Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness: The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and or all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(m)	Acquisition of property: The commission may, where such action is authorized by the Thomson City Council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(n)	Appeals: Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the Thomson City Council. Any such appeal must be filed with the Thomson City Council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection 2-145(h)(1) of this division or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action, subsection 2-145(h)(2) of this division. Appeals for properties within the City of Thomson shall be made to the Thomson City Council. The Thomson City Council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the Thomson City Council may be taken to the Superior Court of McDuffie County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the City of Thomson ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 530, § V, 5-11-06) 
Sec. 2-146. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)	Ordinary maintenance or repair: Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
B.	Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair: Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect. 
(1)	The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a buildings structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)	In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 90 days in which to do this. 
(3)	In the event that the condition is not remedied in 90 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in subsection 2-147 of this division and, at the direction of the Thomson City Council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)	Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes: Nothing in this division shall be constructed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 530, § VI, 5-11-06) 
Sec. 2-147. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this division shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the City of Thomson. 
(Ord. No. 530, § VII, 5-11-06) 
Secs. 2-148—2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FISCAL CONTROL[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Fiscal administration, art. IV. 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-161. - Title, purpose. 
The purpose of this article, to be known as "The Fiscal Control Ordinance of the City of Thomson," is to provide for a system of financial administration, accounting, fiscal and budgetary control which conforms to generally accepted accounting practices. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-162. - Primary responsibility. 
The responsibility for the proper execution of the provisions of this article shall be with the mayor except where the responsibility is explicitly given to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-163. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accrual basis shall mean the basis of accounting under which revenues are recorded when earned or when levies are made, and expenditures are recorded as soon as the result in liabilities, notwithstanding that the receipt of the revenue or payment of the expenditure may take place, in whole or in part, in another accounting period. 
Appropriation shall mean an authorization granted by the mayor and council to make expenditures or to incur obligations for specific purposes. 
Appropriation balance shall mean the unencumbered balance of appropriation or allotment, and unexpended balance of appropriation or allotment. 
Assets shall mean property of all kinds of a government, including both current assets and fixed assets. 
Audit shall mean the examination of records, documents, reports, systems of internal control, accounting and financial procedures, and other evidence for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)	To ascertain whether the statements prepared from the accounts present fairly the financial position and the results of financial operations of the constituent funds and balanced account groups of the governmental unit in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to governmental units and on a basis consistent with that of the preceding year. 
(2)	To determine the propriety, legality and mathematical accuracy of a governmental unit's financial transactions. 
(3)	To ascertain whether all financial transactions have been properly recorded. 
(4)	To ascertain the stewardship of public officials who handle and are responsible for the financial resources of a governmental unit. 
Balance sheet shall mean a statement ordinarily prepared from books kept by double entry showing assets, liabilities, reserves and surplus of a fund of governmental unit at a specified date properly classified to exhibit the financial position of the fund or unit at that date. 
Budget shall mean a plan of financial operation embodying an estimate of proposed expenditures for a given time and the proposed means of financing them. The annual budget refers to a period of one year. 
Budgetary control shall mean the control of management of a governmental unit in accordance with an approved budget and keeping expenditures within the limitations of available appropriations or revenues. 
Cash basis shall mean the system of accounting under which revenues are accounted for only when received in cash, and expenditures are accounted for only when paid. 
Contingent account shall mean an appropriation to provide for unforeseen expenditures. 
Current surplus shall mean the excess of the current assets of a fund over its current liabilities and reserves. 
Debit and credit are terms commonly used to indicate the manner in which a transaction is to be recorded. Every entry on the left side of the ledger sheet is called a "debit." Every entry on the right side of the ledger sheet is called a "credit." 
Debt service shall mean the amount of money necessary annually to pay the interest on the outstanding debt and the principal of maturing bonded debt not payable from a sinking fund and to provide a fund for the redemption of bonds payable from a sinking fund. 
Delinquent taxes shall mean taxes remaining unpaid on and after the date on which a penalty for nonpayment is attached. Even though the penalty may be subsequently waived and a portion of the taxes may be abated or canceled, the unpaid balances continue to be delinquent taxes until abated, canceled or converted into tax liens. 
Encumbrances shall mean obligations in the form of purchase orders, contracts or salary commitments which are chargeable to an appropriation and for which a part of the appropriation is reserved. 
Fund shall mean a sum of money or other resources (gross or net) set aside for the purpose of carrying on specific activities or to attain certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions or limitations. A fund is a distinct financial and legal entity. 
Internal audit shall mean an audit made by persons on the staff on the governmental unit whose accounts are being audited primarily for the purpose of internal control. Note: An internal audit is usually a continuous audit. 
Liabilities shall mean debts owed. 
Millage shall mean a term used to express the property tax rate, derived from the term "mill," which is one-tenth of a cent. Thus, ten mills equal one cent or one percent. Millage is determined by dividing the total amount of money to be raised by the total assessed value of the municipality. 
Taxes receivable shall mean the uncollected portion of taxes which a governmental unit has levied. 
Trust funds shall mean amounts received or appropriated and held in trust in accordance with an agreement or legislative act which may be expended only in accordance with the terms of such trust or act. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 3, 6-10-82) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-164. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year shall begin on January 1 and shall end on December 31. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 4, 6-10-82) 
Charter reference— Fiscal year, § 4.01. 
Sec. 2-165. - Adoption of budget generally. 
An annual budget will be adopted by the governing authority prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than 45 days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget is not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, a resolution authorizing the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the city shall be adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year. The proposed budget shall be prepared by the mayor and transmitted to members of the governing authority for its review a minimum of 45 days before the required date of adoption. The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues (including appropriated unencumbered surplus) equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 5, 6-10-82) 
Charter reference— Action by council on budget, § 4.03. 
Sec. 2-166. - General restriction on expenditures. 
No expenditures in any fund shall be legal or proper unless appropriations adequate to meet that expenditure have been made in the budget. Purchase shall be made only after bona fide competitive bidding for any purchase exceeding $2,500.00 in value and bids shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder in such instances. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 6, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-167. - Submission of proposed budget, copies. 
At the time the proposed budget is transmitted to members of the council by the mayor, a copy of the proposed budget shall be made available for public inspection in the office of the mayor during regular office hours. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 7, 6-10-82) 
Charter reference— Mayor to submit annual budget, § 4.02. 
Sec. 2-168. - Budget hearing, notice. 
A budget hearing must precede the formal adoption of the budget by at least seven days. Notice of such public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality no more than 20 days and no less than seven days in advance of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 8, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-169. - Adoption, amendment of budget resolution. 
The adoption of the budget shall be accomplished by the approval of a budget resolution which specifies the anticipated revenues by appropriate categories and the appropriated expenditures for each department and each nondepartment expense and for each fund covered by the budget. Amendments to the budget shall be approved by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 9, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-170. - Increase in appropriation, transfer. 
Any increase in appropriation in a departmental budget or in a nondepartmental expense category, whether accomplished through a change in anticipated revenues or through a transfer or appropriations among departments and nondepartmental expenses, shall require the approval of the mayor and council in the form of an amendment to the budget resolution. The transfer of appropriations among the various accounts within a departmental budget or within a nondepartmental expense category shall only require the approval of the mayor and appropriate councilmember; except that any transfer of appropriations within a departmental budget so as to increase the salary appropriation for the purpose of employing additional personnel shall require the approval of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 10, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-171. - Transfers restricted. 
No appropriation transfer shall be made from a sinking fund or debt retirement fund until all the legal obligations and requirements of such fund have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 11, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-172. - Basis of estimates. 
The mayor shall present the statement of anticipated revenues on the basis of the ordinary and reasonable revenues which can be expected for the fiscal year. Property tax revenue estimates shall be based upon the anticipated tax digest, less a stated discount for delinquent taxes based on a consideration of the taxes which were delinquent at the close of the three prior fiscal years, plus a stated amount of delinquent taxes, including penalties and interest, to be collected in the fiscal year based on consideration of the actual experience in the collection of delinquent taxes in the three prior fiscal years. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 12, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-173. - Lapse of appropriations. 
All appropriations which are not obligated, encumbered or expended at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse and shall become a part of the unencumbered surplus which may be appropriated for the next fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 13, 6-10-82) 
Charter reference— Lapse of appropriations, § 4.05. 
Sec. 2-174. - Funds established. 
The following funds may be established and shall be used as necessary to provide for the proper accounting of all financial activities of this city: 
(1)	The general fund to account for the general governmental operations and all financial transactions not properly accounted for in another fund. 
(2)	Special revenue funds to account for the proceeds of special revenue sources, other than special assessments, or to finance specified activities as required by law or administrative regulation. 
(3)	Debt service funds to account for the payment of interest and principal on long term debt other than special assessment and revenue bonds. 
(4)	Capital projects funds to account for the receipt and disbursement of monies including bond funds used for the acquisition of capital facilities other than those financed by special assessment and enterprise funds. 
(5)	Enterprise (utility) funds to account for the financing of services to the general public where all or most of the costs involved are paid in the form of charges by users of such services. 
(6)	Trust and agency funds to account for assets held by a governmental unit as trustee or agent for individuals, private organizations and other governmental units. 
(7)	Intergovernmental service funds to account for the financing of special activities and services performed by a designated organization unit within a governmental jurisdiction for other organization units within the same governmental jurisdiction. 
(8)	Special assessment funds to account for special assessments levied to finance public improvements or services deemed to benefit the properties against which the assessments are levied. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 14, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-175. - Accounting for each fund. 
A complete self-balancing group of accounts shall be established and maintained for each fund used. This group of accounts shall include all general ledger accounts and subsidiary records necessary to reflect compliance with legal provisions and to set forth the financial position and the results of financial operations of the fund. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 15, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-176. - Additional accounts. 
Additional accounts, as follows, shall be maintained: 
(1)	A fixed asset account for the purpose of accounting for those assets which: 
a.	Are of a tangible nature, 
b.	Have a life longer than one fiscal year, and 
c.	Have a value greater than $500.00. 
Fixed assets shall be recorded at original costs, shall not be depreciated and shall be removed from the account when disposed of. 
(2)	A general long-term debt account for the purpose of accounting for long-term debt which is supported by general revenues and for recording and fairly representing the liability for long-term debt at any time from date of issuance until the debt is retired. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 16, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-177. - Modified accrual basis of accounting. 
To the extent possible, the modified accrual basis of accounting shall be used so that expenditures, other than accrued interest on long-term debt, are recorded at the time liabilities are incurred and revenues are recorded when cash is received, except for material or available revenues which shall be accrued to reflect properly the taxes levied and the revenues earned. All receipts and disbursements shall be posted promptly and at least on a monthly basis. To the extent possible, all interfund transfers shall be cleared by the end of the fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 17, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-178. - Financial statements, reports. 
Financial statements and reports showing the current conditions of budgetary and proprietary accounts shall be prepared and presented to the governing authority at least every six months. No later than six months after the close of the fiscal year, a comprehensive annual financial report covering all funds and financial operations shall be prepared and published. A summary of this report, containing at least a statement of revenues and expenditures as of the close of the preceding fiscal year and the combined balance sheet for all funds and account groups, will be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 18, 6-10-82) 
Sec. 2-179. - Annual audit. 
All the funds, accounts and financial transactions of the city shall be subjected to an annual audit by an independent certified public accountant who is to be selected by the governing authority of the city. The audit shall be conducted according to the standards set forth in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountant's publication, Audits of State and Local Governmental Units. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 19, 6-10-82) 
Secs. 2-180—2-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF ETHICS FOR CITY OFFICIALS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 517, adopted February 13, 2003, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, §§ 2-191—2-197 were added at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-191. - Purpose. 
Declaration of policy: It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public official be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all city officials is adopted by ordinance. 
This code has the following purposes: 
(1)	To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)	to establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth these acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; 
(3)	To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters which may affect the city; and 
(4)	To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(Ord. No. 517, art. I, 2-13-03) 
Sec. 2-192. - Scope of persons covered. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all members of the city council, the zoning advisory board, all advisory commissions, and committee members. 
(Ord. No. 517, art. II, 2-13-03) 
Sec. 2-193. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a difference meaning is intended: 
City official or officials, unless otherwise expressly defined, means the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city administrator, assistant city administrator, city clerk, director of utilities and public works and assistant director of utilities and public works, whether such persons are salaried, hired or elected, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as it may be amended from time to time. City official, unless otherwise expressly defined, includes individuals appointed by the mayor and city council to all city commissions, committees, boards, task forces or other city bodies, unless specifically exempted from this article by the city council. 
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board or commission, which can or may lead to a voter or formal action by that body. 
Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a council member in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decision is incidental to the extent that the council member would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest in another person or an entity if: 
(1)	The interest is ownership of ten percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity; or 
(2)	Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous twelve months or the previous calendar year, equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or 25 percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)	The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity, other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)	The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more, provided, however, a commercially reasonable loan made to a city official in a lender's ordinary course of business at prevailing rates and terms, and which does not discriminate against or in favor of a city official (because of that official's status as a public servant) shall not be included as a part of this definition. 
(5)	Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 517, art. III, 2-13-03) 
Sec. 2-194. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)	No council member or member of any board or commission shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(b)	No council member or member of a board or commission, in any matter before the council, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(c)	No council member or member of a board or commission shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or any board or commission. 
(d)	No council member or member of a board or commission shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office, which has a value of over $100.00, except for compensation from the city. 
(e)	No council member or member of a board or commission shall enter into any contract with the city, except as specifically authorized by state statutes. Any council member or member of a board or commission who has a proprietary interest in any agency doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)	All public funds shall be sued for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)	Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with Georgia law. 
(h)	No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a city official or employee, if the employment or compensation could reasonable be expected to impair judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)	If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or party which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the board or commission on which he serves or to his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)	No city official shall sue city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)	No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person and consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(Ord. No. 517, art. IV, 2-13-03) 
Sec. 2-195. - Conflict of interest. 
Prohibition of conflict of interest: A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity or property in which the official or employee has a substantial interest; in addition, a city official or employee who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a non-profit entity may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city of the entity. Where the interest of a city official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official or employee may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 517, art. V, 2-13-03) 
Sec. 2-196. - Exemptions. 
This code shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with, or interest in, any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educations, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
This article shall not apply to a municipal judge (including a substitute judge) when the judge is acting in a judicial capacity nor to an attorney at law who is a member of any city commissions, committees, boards, task forces or other city bodies, unless his personal or professional interest are or foreseeably may be in conflict with this official duties as such a member. 
(Ord. No. 517, art. VI, 2-13-03) 
Sec. 2-197. - Penalty. 
Any persons violating any provisions of this policy are subject to: 
(1)	Written and oral reprimand by the council, board, commission or committee of which said violator is a member; 
(2)	A fine greater than $100.00 but less than $500.00 to be imposed by the council, commission, board or committee of which the violator is a member. 
(3)	Request for resignation by the council, board, committee or commission of which the violator is a member. 
Each council, board, commission or committee shall have authority to establish rules and regulations to impose said penalties. 
(Ord. No. 517, art. VIII, 2-13-03) 
Secs. 2-198—2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 2-221. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 2, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 2-222. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(l), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
City means City of Thomson. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 2, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 2-223. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)	Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.	Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
b.	Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.	Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)	Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 2, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 2-224. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(1)	In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
a.	The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
b.	The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
c.	The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(2)	Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 2, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 2-225. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)	Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)	Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)	Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)	Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 2, 11-13-08) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 499, §§ 3-1—3-299, adopted April 9, 1998, repealed the former Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-123, and enacted a new Ch. 3 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 431, §§ 100—109, 200—204, 300—305, and 400—407, adopted Dec. 11, 1986; Ord. No. 493, adopted July 11, 1996; and Ord. No. 469, adopted Dec. 10, 1992. 
State Law reference— Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. 3, sec. 9, par. 6(e); Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by any fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Fortified wine includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Hotel means any building or other structure providing sleeping accommodations for hire to the general public, either transient, permanent, or residential. Such hotels shall maintain a minimum of 25 rooms available for hire. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this section for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of any licensed establishment, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of a hotel pursuant to this section. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued and, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation. 
Liter means metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Lounge means a separate room, with a seating capacity for a minimum of 50 people, connected with or a part of a restaurant or located in hotels, all booths, stools, and tables being unobstructed and open to view. A lounge which is operated on a different floor in the premises, or in a separate building, or is not connected to or part of a restaurant shall be considered a separate establishment and shall be separately licensed. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. Manufacturer also means: 
(1)	In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits. 
(2)	In the case of malt beverages, any brewer. 
(3)	In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Nightclub means an establishment having the seating capacity of at least 50 persons, with all booths and tables being unobstructed and open to view, and providing a band and/or other professional entertainment a minimum of 20 days per month, each and every month, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating. All such nightclubs shall maintain an adequate kitchen with a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for their patrons, provided that nightclubs located in hotels having dining room and kitchen facilities may be excluded from maintaining a kitchen in connection with such nightclub. The principal business of such nightclubs shall be entertainment, and the serving of food and of alcoholic beverages shall be only incidental thereto. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Private club means an association, partnership, or corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city at least one year immediately prior to the application for a license pursuant to this chapter; having at least 75 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, or semiannual dues; organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, and other nonprofitable purposes, no part of the net earning of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member; and owning, hiring, or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members; provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits of the sale of alcoholic beverages to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
Restaurant means any public place selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full service kitchen. A full service kitchen will consist of a three compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments. Such restaurant will be prepared to serve food every hour it is open and where these establishments can seat 50 or more persons. At least two meals per day shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating; and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. 
Retailer, retail dealer, retail licensee, or retail outlet means any person or other legal entity selling alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Tavern means any establishment or room, with a seating capacity for less than 50 people, serving only the alcoholic beverages for which it is licensed on the premises. 
Wholesaler or wholesaler dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Wine includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-2. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Thomson. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-3. - Distance requirements for sale. 
(a)	No person, knowingly or intentionally, may sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage in or within 100 yards of a church or within 200 yards of any school building. 
(b)	The school building referred to in this section shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. The term "school building" includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. 
(c)	The term "church building" as used in this section shall mean the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes of worship. 
(d)	For the purposes of this section, distance shall be measured in a straight line from the main entrance of the school or church building in question to the main entrance of the establishment for the sale of alcoholic beverages in question. 
(e)	No location which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be denied continued operation under an existing license, or denied any renewal of such license, nor shall any new owner of such location be denied a new license based upon the measurements set forth in this section. 
(f)	As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibited in this section shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-4. - Advertising sale. 
(a)	No outdoor advertising or signs with respect to the promotion of the sale of alcoholic beverages or the prices of such beverages shall be permitted on the exterior of any retail package outlet, consumption on the premises dealer, or in the windows of any such establishment that may be viewed from outside. 
(b)	A licensed retailer may display at his place of business such signs as are permitted by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3 and the state alcoholic beverage laws, rules and regulations as they may from time to time be amended. 
(c)	No advertising of alcoholic beverages by flier, coupons, or newspaper is allowed; provided, however, consumption on the premises establishments may advertise special days, nights, or events in the newspaper or by fliers. 
(d)	Retail package licensees shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the price of an alcoholic beverage exposed or offered for sale. No other sign may be exposed prominently within or without the retail establishment showing prices or indicating alcoholic beverages are for sale on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-5. - Audits of sales. 
If the city council deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, the city council shall so notify the licensee of the date, time, and place of the audit. The city council may designate the city's auditor or other designated person to perform any audit authorized in this chapter. Licensees shall cooperate with the audit or forfeit any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-6. - Collection of sums due. 
If any person shall fail to pay any sum due under this chapter, the city council shall issue an execution against the person so delinquent, and his property, for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-7. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. 
(a)	No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. 
(b)	The city council may request, from time to time, information concerning purchases and sales of alcoholic beverages from retailers and wholesalers. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-8. - Retail consumption dealers to store inventory only on premises. 
No retail consumption dealer licensed pursuant to this chapter shall keep any beer or wine or other alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. No retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to enter into any type of arrangement whereby distilled spirits ordered by a licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-9. - Licensees to maintain a copy of this chapter; employees to be familiar with terms; licensee responsible for violations. 
Each licensed alcoholic beverage dealer under this chapter shall keep a copy of this chapter in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms hereof. Each licensee, the licensee's agents, and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be responsible for any acts of agents or employees which are in violation of this chapter, or of the laws of the state, or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-10. - Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)	No persons shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries, or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(c)	It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter without written consent from the parents or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-11. - Failure to require and properly check identification of buyers. 
It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure that an underage person is not sold, served, or in possession of alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. Identification in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. The penalty for violation of this section shall be as set out in section 3-12(c). 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98; Ord. No. 554, pt. III, 2-25-14 ) 
Sec. 3-12. - Furnishing in violation of state law. 
(a)	No licensee or employee of a licensee authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)	Knowingly sell alcoholic beverages to an underage person, presently under 21 years of age, so as to constitute a violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as presently written or as such section may hereafter be amended from time to time. 
(2)	Knowingly sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, who is of unsound mind, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee or his employees. 
(3)	Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(b)	No licensee who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall allow any person under the age of 21 years, to be in, frequent, or loiter about the licensed premises of establishment, unless such minors are accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian. No person under the age of 21 years shall be in, frequent, or loiter about the licensed premises of an establishment holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink; provided, however, persons under 21 years of age shall be permitted in restaurants or private clubs without being accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian; and provided further that this section does not apply to those who are employees under the terms of this chapter. 
(c)	The penalty for violation of section 3-11 and this section 3-12 shall be as follows: 
(1)	For the first offense, a fine or civil penalty of $500.00, and a suspension of license issued pursuant to this chapter relating to the location where the offense occurred for a period of 30 days. 
(2)	For the second offense, a fine or civil penalty of $500.00, and a suspension of license issued pursuant to this chapter relating to the location where the offense occurred for a period of 60 days. 
(3)	For the third offense, a fine or civil penalty of $1,000.00, and a permanent revocation of license relating to the location where the offense occurred. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-13. - Purchase or possession by underage persons. 
(a)	No person under the age of 21 years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)	No person under the age of 21 years of age shall attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage or misrepresent his age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 6-1-89, § 2-125; Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-14. - Gambling in licensed premises prohibited. 
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punchboards, slot machines, pinball machines, or the operation of any scheme for hazarding money or any other thing of value, with the exception of the official state lottery, in any place, or any room adjoining the place, leased or controlled by a licensee. Any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of a license. 
State Law reference— Georgia Lottery for Education Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-27-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-15. - Regulations for employees. 
The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: 
(1)	An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in this chapter for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. 
(2)	No person shall be employed to sell, serve, or mix alcoholic beverages by an establishment holding a license pursuant to this chapter until such person has been fingerprinted and cleared by the city police chief indicating that the person is eligible for such employment. 
(3)	No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the city police chief, and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)	The city police chief shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this chapter, the police department shall notify the city council, who shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the police chief shall notify the city council, who shall notify the employer that this person is not eligible for employment. 
(5)	It shall be the duty of all persons, holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages, to file with the city council the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers, twice annually on or before June 1 and again on or before December 1. 
(6)	All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the city council. 
(7)	This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy, cook, or dishwasher. 
(8)	No licensee shall allow any employee, required to hold a permit, to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of such employee. 
(9)	If any permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender his permit to the city council. 
(10)	All permits issued pursuant to this chapter remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the city council. 
(11)	Separate permits are required for each employee working in more than one establishment serving alcoholic beverages. 
(12)	All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-16. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)	Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on-premises establishment in a patio/open-area-type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the city council. 
(b)	The requirement for approval is that the patio/open area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. 
(c)	The height of such structure shall be a minimum of four feet above ground level. It does not have to be solid, nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. It must be permitted and approved by the city's building inspection department and the city's fire department as required by their governing regulations or codes. 
(d)	The only exit from this type of area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through an approved fire exit, not for general public use unless an emergency exists. The fire exit should be of the type that sounds an alarm so that the establishment will be alerted in the event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists. 
(e)	If a licensee desires a patio/open sales area inside an existing structure, plans will be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by the city council. Interior type patio/open sales areas must also meet the requirements of the city's development and fire codes. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-17. - No outside the premises consumption. 
(a)	It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises with open alcoholic beverages, and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open beverages are sold and carried out. 
(b)	It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(c)	It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-18. - Solicitation of drinks prohibited. 
No retail-consumption dealer, licensed pursuant to this chapter, shall require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for himself, or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage or money with which to purchase the beverage; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment, or to his agent or manager to solicit for himself, or for others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage or money with which to purchase the beverage; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manager to solicit for himself for others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-19. - Noise from establishments prohibited. 
Noise will not be allowed that can be heard outside the physical boundaries of establishments licensed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-20. - Inspection of licensed establishments by law enforcement personnel. 
Any and all law enforcement officers, including city and county police, shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city or county officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-21. - "Happy hour" promotions prohibited. 
(a)	No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)	The giving away of any alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage. 
(2)	The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price. 
(3)	Selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person any alcoholic beverage at a price less than one-half the price customarily charged for such alcoholic beverage, provided nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit reducing the price of a drink by up to one-half the price customarily charged. 
(4)	Requiring or allowing the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first beverage has been consumed, by any one person. 
(5)	Increase the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage. 
(b)	It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour." 
(c)	As used in this section, the phrase "customarily charged" means the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-22. - Brown-bagging prohibited. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring in his own alcoholic beverage (brown bag) in any establishment either licensed or unlicensed to serve alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-23. - Hours for wholesalers. 
Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-24. - Nonprofit organizations temporary license. 
Any nonprofit organization may be issued a temporary permit for a period not to exceed five days in any one year. The nonprofit organization must make application and pay the fee required by section 3-203. Such organization shall be required to comply with all the general ordinances and the license and regulations for a consumption on the premises establishment with the exception of the full service kitchen requirement. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Secs. 3-25—3-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-46. - Sale in incorporated area of city; license a privilege. 
(a)	Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the incorporated area of the city under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(b)	All licenses in this article shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the licenses, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article and state law. 
(c)	All licenses pursuant to this article shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege, subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any future ordinances which may be enacted." 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-47. - Sale or possession for purpose of sale without license or beyond boundaries of premises covered by license. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage, where the person does not have a license from the city to sell or possess for sale these alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(b)	Violations of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-48. - Separate application and license for each location of sale. 
A separate application must be made for each location, and a separate license must be issued. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-49. - Application. 
(a)	All persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the city council. 
(b)	The application shall include, but shall not be limited to: the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers; the name and address of the registered agent for service of process; the name of the manager; the names and addresses of all shareholders, and the name of any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the governing authority and the city police department the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change. 
(c)	All applicants shall furnish data, fingerprints, financial responsibility, and other records as required by the city council to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. Failure to furnish data pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(d)	All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(e)	In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this article, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of denial. 
(f)	The city council shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provisions of this article. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal to the city council for a hearing. Any such hearing shall be conducted with the same requirements set forth in section 3-59. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-50. - Detailed plans of building in which business will be located must be submitted. 
(a)	No retail alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete, and detailed plans of the building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with all regulations of the state revenue commissioner, the fire marshall, and the laws of the state. The proposed building may also be subject to final inspection and approval, when completed, by the city building inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located, so as to reveal the inside retail area of a package sale business building, and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of all buildings. In a package sale business, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of such licensed premises which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such premises from the street or road at all times. No booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of such packaged licensed premises. All premises for which a consumption on the premises license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways, and open areas may be clearly seen by customers therein. 
(b)	Each applicant for a retail alcoholic beverage license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building, or a copy of the lease, if an applicant is leasing the building. 
(c)	Each applicant for a retail alcoholic beverage license shall attach to his application evidence of an approved certificate of occupancy issued by the proper authority or proof that no certificate of occupancy is required. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-51. - Advertising in official gazette of county and on-premises. 
(a)	A notice of each application to sell alcoholic beverages at retail shall be advertised in the official gazette of the county, once a week for four weeks immediately preceding the meeting of the governing authority at which the application is to be considered, using the form set out as Exhibit A. 
Exhibit A 
The following are the wording and specifications of the newspaper advertisement which must be published four times in the legal gazette (McDuffie Progress) during the 30-day period prior to the hearing of the application by the city council. 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT THE OWNER OF ____________ LOCATED AT ____________ WILL APPLY TO THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF THOMSON FOR A LICENSE FOR THE SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (FOR CONSUMPTION, BY THE PACKAGE) ON THE PREMISES 30 DAYS AFTER THE FIRST PUBLIC NOTICE. 

Applicant is responsible to show proof of four newspaper advertisements by affidavit of publisher or his designate and is responsible for expenses incurred in such publication. 
(b)	Further, there shall be a sign posted 30 days prior to the hearing of the application in a prominent position on the property, of a minimum size of 2 ½ square feet with letters of a minimum size of two inches, in a form and in specifications prescribed according to Exhibit B. 
Exhibit B 
The following is the wording and specifications of a sign which must be posted when applying for a new license for the sale of alcoholic beverages: 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT THE OWNER OF THIS ESTABLISHMENT WILL APPLY TO THE CITY OF THOMSON FOR A LICENSE FOR THE SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (FOR CONSUMPTION BY THE PACKAGE) ON THE PREMISES, 30 DAYS AFTER THE POSTING OF THIS NOTICE. 
Date 

This sign must be a minimum size of 2½ square feet and letters must be a minimum of two inches. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-52. - Qualifications of applicant for license. 
(a)	No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(b)	Where the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and stockholders. 
(c)	No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law, of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within ten years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(d)	No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state, or local law of any felony, within ten years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any city officer, employee, or his spouse or minor children, to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(f)	No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the city previously revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(g)	The city council may decline to issue a license when any person having any interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section for the licensee. 
(h)	All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the state, a registered agent upon whom any process, notice, or demand, required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner, may be served. Licensee shall file the name, address, and telephone number of such agent, along with the written consent to serve of such agent with the governing authority and shall be in such form as it may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-52.1. - Consideration of application; approval conditional. 
Each application provided for in this article shall be considered and passed upon by the city council in regular or special session, legally assembled. No license shall be granted to any person unless it is made to appear to the city council that the applicant is a suitable and fit person to carry on such business, and that the business will be conducted in an orderly manner and in compliance with all laws, municipal, state and federal. Upon approval of the application and payment of the required license fee, the applicant shall be entitled to the issuance of the license; provided however, the city council reverses the right to approve such issuance of the license or licenses conditioned upon full and final compliance by the licensee with all applicable city ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 554, pt. I, 2-25-14 ) 
Sec. 3-52.2. - Disqualification criteria. 
When contrary to the public interest and welfare no original application shall be considered and no license to sell beer, wine or distilled spirits beverages of any kind shall be issued by the city council to or for: 
(1)	Any person as determined by the city council by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, moral character, mental capacity, trade associations, personal associations, record of arrest, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, who is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulation. 
(2)	Any person who shall have been convicted or who shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere, or forfeited a bond, to any felony within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of any such application, or to any misdemeanor within a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of any such application, for any felony or misdemeanor of any state, or of the United States, or any municipal ordinance except a traffic violation, particularly, but not limited to, those involving force or violence, prostitution, alcoholic beverages, gambling or tax law violations, if such conviction, pleas or forfeiture tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. Notwithstanding this provision the city council, in their sole discretion, may direct the issuance of a license to persons who have in the past been convicted of, or plead guilty to, or entered a plea of nolo contendere, or forfeited a bond on any crime, and the city council after a thorough investigation of all the facts, including parole or probation officer's reports, judge's recommendations and any other evidence bearing on the character of the applicant have determined that such action is in keeping with the public good and ends of justice, or the public interest and welfare. 
(3)	A location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the city council because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties, or on the neighborhood. 
(4)	A location at which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the city council, the problems which have arisen from the operation of an alcoholic beverage license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of beer, wine or distilled spirits be permitted at such location. 
(5)	Any person who is an elected official (or that person's spouse) of, or employee (or that person's spouse) of, the city. 
(6)	Any person whose application is denied shall have the rights to a hearing as provided in section 3-59 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 554, pt. I, 2-25-14 ) 
Sec. 3-52.3. - Direct financial interest restricted. 
No person who has a direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any license or have an interest in any other license issued under the terms of this article. 
( Ord. No. 554, pt. I, 2-25-14 ) 
Sec. 3-53. - License fee scale. 
Before a license shall be granted, the applicant therefor shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the city council regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the scale fixed, from time to time, by the city council and contained in section 3-203 and kept on file in the office of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-54. - Display of license at place of business. 
The city alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view to the public at the place of business of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-55. - Transferability of license. 
(a)	No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)	In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death, or until expiration of the license, or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur; provided that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization with the city council. 
(c)	If a license is surrendered, or a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of surrender or from the date of severance, provided no such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made, such application indicating that no change of ownership has occurred, except as excepted in this section. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(d)	Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate ownership at the time of issuance of the license nor shall it prohibit transfer of stock which does not result in any person increasing his stock holdings to a total of ten percent or more of any class of stock. 
(e)	Should a transfer of location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(f)	Except as provided in this section, any change in the ownership of the business shall cancel and revoke any license issued pursuant to this article automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. 
(g)	Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used, and a fine on the new ownership and the old ownership of $500.00. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the city for one year from the date of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-56. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of any license issued pursuant to this article who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall, after the three-month period, automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-57. - License expiration; renewal. 
(a)	All licenses granted pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their licenses shall file application with the requisite fee with the city council on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year; otherwise, investigative and administrative costs, penalties, and interest will be assessed. No renewal license shall be granted after January 1, but such application shall be treated as an initial application, and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(b)	All licenses granted pursuant to this article shall be for a calendar year, and the full license fee must be paid for any license application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. A full license fee must be paid for a beer and wine license application filed after July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full license fee shall be paid for a distilled spirit license application filed after July 1 of the license year. License fees are not refundable. 
(c)	Any person renewing any license issued pursuant to this article, who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after the date set by law for such payment, shall, in addition to the annual fee, pay a late charge of 20 percent and shall pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-58. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)	A license may be suspended or revoked by the city council where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license, and for failure to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The city council, upon notice of this revocation from the state, shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease. 
(c)	Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of sections 3-12 and 3-18 shall be subject to immediate license revocation. 
(d)	The city council shall revoke the license of any licensee who shall have been found to have violated this article three or more times. 
(e)	The city council shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(f)	The city council may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this article at any time such knowledge becomes known to it. 
(g)	An act or omission of a licensee, stockholder, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment, willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law, or of any provision of this article, will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of its license in accordance with the provisions of this article, when the city council determines to its satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues. 
(h)	Whenever it can be shown that a licensee under this article no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned, or whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city, a license may be revoked. 
(i)	A license may be revoked if the licensee or the majority stockholder of the corporation holding a license moves his residence from the county. For the purposes of this subsection, the residence will be presumed to have been removed from the county if the licensee does not live therein more than six months per year. 
(j)	Any license may be revoked due to any conduct on the part of the licensee or his employees for the operating or conducting of a business in a manner that is contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-59. - Suspension, revocation, denial of renewal or transfer. 
(a)	Notice, hearing. Any license which has been issued under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked or transfer refused, by the city council for due cause. Before the city council shall deny any application for a license or for the transfer of any license, or shall revoke or suspend any existing license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing from the city to show cause before the city council at a time and place specified therein not less than three days nor more than 14 days from the date of service of this notice, why the application for, or renewal of, a license or transfer of license should not be denied, or why the license should not be revoked or suspended, as the case may be, stating the grounds therefor, and at the appointed time and place the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause, of any exists, why the application should not be denied or the license revoked or suspended, after which the city council shall take such action as it, in its judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. The hearing provided for in this subsection need not be at a regular meeting of the city council, but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in the notice. All decisions denying, suspending or revoking any license or application shall be in writing, with reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant. In addition, at any hearing as provided for in this subsection, the party afforded the hearing shall have the opportunity to present evidence, have an attorney, and have testimony recorded at his expense. The decision of the city council shall be by majority vote of the members present at the meeting. Within three days from the date of the hearing, the city council shall render a decision in writing and furnish a copy of the decision to the licensee. The decision of the council shall be effective immediately, whether or not the licensee can be personally served with the written copy of the decision. The decision of the city council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days from the date of said finding by certiorari to the county superior court. 
(b)	Due cause generally. "Due cause" for the suspension, revocation or denial of the renewal or transfer of any license shall consist of an act or omission found to be by the city council, after a hearing as above provided, a violation of any law or ordinance regulating such business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business, or for the violation of any state or federal law, or for the violation of any city ordinances, other than traffic violations or ordinances, or failure of the licensee or his employee to promptly report to the police department any violation of the law or ordinance breach of peace, disturbance or altercation, resulting in violence occurring inside the premises. 
(1)	Due cause may also be found should the licensed establishment have become a "trouble spot" in the judgment of the city council by reason of disturbances or acts of disorderly conduct or violence having occurred in the establishment or on the premises thereof; provided that when the license of any establishment has been revoked or renewal of license denied because such establishment has become a "trouble spot," no further license shall be issued under this article to any person at such location for a period of at least 12 months from the date of revocation. 
(2)	Due cause shall also consist of the business or the operation or location thereof, or the owner or any person connected therewith, ceasing to meet any of the qualifications for the issuance of license as stated in this article. 
(3)	Due cause may also be found upon the revelation of any false statement or material misrepresentation in any application hereunder. Any material omission from or untrue or misleading information which is contained in an original, renewal or transfer application for license hereunder shall be cause for the denial or refusal of a license, and if any license has previously been granted under such circumstances, the same shall constitute due cause for revocation of such license. 
(4)	Failure to control operation resulting in a public nuisance. If the failure to control the operation either inside the building or outside on the property results in controlled substance abuse, prostitution, gambling, flagrant indecent conduct or obscenity, fighting, excessive noise, loitering or illegal parking, to the number of times and extent that the city council, after proper hearing, should find the establishment to have become a public nuisance, such failure may be declared to be "due cause" for suspension or revocation of the beer, wine or distilled spirits license for such establishment, or the denial of renewal application for same. 
(c)	Discontinuance of sale. On evidence of failure or refusal of the licensee or employee hereunder to cooperate with any police officer on any reasonable request or action within such officer's duties, responsibilities or powers, including all policy powers, rights and duties to investigate to determine any pertinent fact relating to the establishment, the licensee, any employees or corporate officers or partners, the chief of police shall immediately order all sales of any alcoholic beverages suspended until after a hearing as set out in the "due cause" hearing provided for in subsection (a) of this section, such hearing to be concerning such failure or refusal to cooperate. 
(d)	Refund of license fee. When a license is revoked or suspended, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee. 
(e)	Effect of revocation by state. Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell any alcoholic beverage at retail, the city license to deal in such product shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the city council or any municipal officer. If the state has suspended the license or placed the same on probation, then the city license is automatically suspended or probated, as the case may be. 
(f)	Emergence situation. The mayor is the delegated authority to suspend any license hereunder in any emergency situation, and the said suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next regular or called meeting of the city council. In addition, in any emergency situation, the chief of police is hereby authorized to cause the business in question to close temporarily until he decides the emergency or possible riotous situation to be at an end, or until such decision is made by the city council at its next regular meeting, whichever occurs first. 
( Ord. No. 554, pt. II, 2-25-14 ) 
Sec. 3-60. - Notice of charge and hearing. 
For the purpose of this article, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served by certified mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail to the address given in the application for the license. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Secs. 3-61—3-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RETAIL SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS FOR CONSUMPTION ON-PREMISES 

Sec. 3-81. - Locations where permitted. 
No distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold, except in restaurants, nightclubs, lounges, and private clubs. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-82. - Investigative and administrative costs paid for by license applicant. 
Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a nonrefundable separate check or cash in the amount of $100.00 to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the applicant is denied a state license, or if for any other reason the applicant is denied a license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the $100.00 cost paid for investigation and administrative cost shall be retained; provided, however, that any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this article. Any applicant for a license under this article who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this article shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-83. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)	Distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption on the premises at any of the following times: 
(1)	At any time on Christmas day, Thanksgiving day or Sunday except as set out in subsections (a)(4) and (b) hereafter. 
(2)	At any time in violation of a local resolution, ordinance, or regulation or special order of the board of commissioners. 
(3)	At any time or place prohibited by state law or by regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(4)	On any Monday through Friday before 8:00 a.m. or after 3:00 a.m.; on Saturday before 8:00 a.m. or after 1:55 a.m. on Sunday mornings except as set out in subsection (b) hereof (EST or EDT, whichever shall be applicable). 
(b)	The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is hereby authorized on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight, in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98; Ord. No. 543, § 1, 1-14-10) 
Sec. 3-84. - Consumption sales only. 
Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell liquor by the package or bottle. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-85. - Beer and wine consumption permitted, if licensed. 
A licensee for the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall also have the right to serve beer and wine, provided he shall secure a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Secs. 3-86—3-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RETAIL SALES OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE FOR CONSUMPTION ON-PREMISES 

Sec. 3-106. - Type of retail establishments where permitted. 
No beer or wine shall be sold for consumption on the premises where sold, except in restaurants, nightclubs, lounges, taverns, and private clubs. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-107. - License fee and investigative and administrative costs to accompany application. 
(a)	Each application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable check or cash in the amount of $100.00 to defray investigative and administrative costs. 
(b)	If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded but the $100.00 cost paid for investigation shall be retained. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-108. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)	Beer and/or wine shall not be sold for consumption on the premises: 
(1)	At any time on Christmas day, Thanksgiving day or Sunday except as set out in subsections (a)(4) and (b) hereafter. 
(2)	At any time in violation of a local resolution, ordinance, or regulation or special order of the board of commissioners. 
(3)	At any time or place prohibited by state law or by regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(4)	On any Monday through Friday before 8:00 a.m. or after 3:00 a.m.; on Saturday before 8:00 a.m. or after 1:55 a.m. on Sunday mornings except as set out in subsection (b) hereof (EST or EDT whichever shall be applicable). 
(b)	The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is hereby authorized on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight, in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98; Ord. No. 507, § 2, 4-13-00; Ord. No. 543, § 2, 1-14-10) 
Sec. 3-109. - Package sales prohibited. 
Persons holding a license to sell beer and wine for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell beer and wine by the package. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Secs. 3-110—3-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 3-131. - Types of establishments where permitted. 
(a)	No distilled spirits by the package shall be sold at retail except in: 
(1)	Retail establishments devoted exclusively to the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package; 
(2)	Retail establishments in which space has been set aside, devoted exclusively to the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package, with ingress and egress provided directly to and only to the exterior of the building in which the facility is located and not to any other enclosed part of the building in which the facility is located, except as provided in subsection (a)(3) of this section; or 
(3)	Hotels, motels, and office buildings where every public entrance to this use shall be from a lobby, hallway, or other interior portion of the primary use structure. 
(b)	Nothing in this section shall prohibit the retail sale within these establishments of liquid commodities and mixes normally used in the preparation and serving of distilled spirits. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-132. - Coin-operated or amusement machines prohibited on-premises; exception. 
No retail dealer in liquors shall permit on his premises any slot machines of any kind or character or any coin-operated machines or any machine operated for amusement purposes. However, cigarette vending machines may be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-133. - Hours of sale. 
Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of spirituous liquors at any of the following times: 
(1)	On Christmas day or Thanksgiving day. 
(2)	Any time in violation of local resolution, ordinance, or regulation or special order of the city council. 
(3)	At any time prohibited by state law or by regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(4)	Before 7:00 a.m. or after 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and before the hours of 12:30 p.m. or after 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
( Ord. No. 563 , § 1 (part 1), 11-8-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563 , § 1 (part 1), adopted Nov. 8, 2016, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 3-134. - Investigative and administrative cost paid by license applicant. 
Each application for license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of $100.00 to defray investigative and administrative cost. If the application is denied and the license is refused or if the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the $100.00 cost paid for investigative and administrative cost shall be retained. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-135. - Information concerning interests of other persons to be declared. 
(a)	All applications for package liquor licenses, both original and renewals, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement, under oath, of information relative to any and all interest in retail liquor stores. This shall include names and addresses of all persons possessing a legal ownership in the subject establishment, together with any interest each person or any immediate relative has in any other retail store located in the city or any other place; the ownership of the land and the building where this retail business is operated; the amount of rental paid of this land building, the manner in which such rental is determined, and to whom and at what intervals the rental is paid; the names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sub-lessor of the land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other legal interest in and to the land and building on and in which this retail liquor store is located; and any other information called for by the city council to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Any change in relationship declared in this section must be filed when made with the city council, and failure to so file within a period of ten days after this change is made shall be grounds for the city council to cancel the license. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-136. - No consumption on licensed premises permitted. 
No establishment holding a package liquor license shall sell, offer to sell, possess, or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic or spirituous or venous liquors or beverages, the sale or the possession of which is not authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Secs. 3-137—3-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE 

Sec. 3-156. - Type of retail establishment where permitted. 
No beer and/or wine shall be sold in package at retail except in establishments licensed under this article. No establishment holding a package beer and wine license shall sell, offer to sell, possess, or permit the consumption on the licensed premises for any kind of alcoholic or spirituous or venous liquors or beverages, the sale or possession of which is not authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-157. - Hours of sale. 
Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of beer and/or wine at any of the following times: 
(1)	On Christmas day or Thanksgiving day. 
(2)	Any time in violation of local resolution, ordinance, or regulation of special order of the city council. 
(3)	At any time prohibited by state law or by regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(4)	On Sundays before the hours of 12:30 p.m. or after 11:30 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 563 , § 1 (part 2), 11-8-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563 , § 1 (part 1), adopted Nov. 8, 2016, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 3-158. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices. 
Retailers shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed the prices of all beer and wine exposed or offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-159. - License fee and investigative and administrative costs to accompany application. 
Each application for license under this article shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of $100.00 to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and a license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded but the $100.00 cost paid for investigation shall be retained. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-160. - No consumption on-premises permitted. 
No establishment holding a package beer and wine license shall sell, offer to sell, process, or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic or spirituous or venous liquors or beverages, the sale or the possession of which is not authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Secs. 3-161—3-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTORS 

Sec. 3-181. - Special provisions applicable to wholesale license. 
(a)	Any person desiring to sell at wholesale any alcoholic beverages in incorporated areas of the city shall make application to the city council for a license to do so, which application shall be in writing on the prescribed forms, and pay any license as set by the city council. 
(b)	No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale distilled spirit license. 
(c)	No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any distilled spirits to any person other than a retailer licensed under this article. 
(d)	No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesaler distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Secs. 3-182—3-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXCISE TAXES AND LICENSE FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 20. 

Sec. 3-201. - Excise tax; bond required on wholesalers. 
(a)	There is hereby imposed an excise tax upon all alcoholic beverages purchased by persons holding retail package licenses and/or consumption on the premises licenses at a rate set by the city council. 
(b)	The excise tax shall be collected by all wholesale dealers selling alcoholic beverages to persons holding retail licenses and shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the city council by the tenth of each month, based on the units of alcohol sold during the previous month. Interest shall accrue on late payments at a rate equal to the then rate charged by the Internal Revenue Service on delinquent income taxes. The wholesale dealer shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments. The monthly remittance shall be accompanied by a sworn statement showing but not limited to the type and volume sold to each retail licensee on a form or in a format as approved by the city council. 
(c)	Each wholesale dealer, prior to commencement of business operation in the city, shall post a performance bond with the city council equal to 1½ times the estimated highest monthly payment made in a calendar year of the excise tax, based on sales collected by the wholesale dealer for the retailers to secure the payments for the tax imposed in this section. These bonds shall be secured by cash which shall bear no interest, or a surety bond executed by a surety company licensed to do business in this state and approved by the city council. 
(d)	A wholesaler may be excused from posting the performance bond as provided in this section after demonstrating full and satisfactory compliance with the provisions required under this article for a period of 12 months subsequent to the commencement of business operations within the city. Continued exemption from the requirement of posting the performance bond shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the terms of this article for the payment of all sums, as required by the provisions in this article. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-202. - Audit by city council. 
The city council shall have the right to audit each wholesale dealer licensed to do business in the city. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-203. - License fees enumerated. 
(a)	License fees applicable to this chapter are set out as follows: 
(1)	Retail dealers of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises, $2,000.00 per year. 
(2)	Retail dealers of beer and/or wine to be consumed on the premises, $500.00 for the first year, and $300.00 for each succeeding year. 
(3)	Retail dealers of distilled spirits sold in original package for consumption off the premises, $2,000.00 per year. 
(4)	Retail dealers of beer and/or wine sold in original package for consumption off the premises, $500.00 for the first year, and $300.00 for each year thereafter. 
(5)	Wholesaler dealers in beer and/or wine, the maximum amount at any time allowed by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43. 
(6)	Wholesale dealers in distilled spirits, $2,000.00 per year. 
(7)	Distilled spirits wholesale dealers' excise tax: $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(8)	Wholesale wine dealers' excise tax: $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(9)	Wholesale malt beverage dealers' excise tax: Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15 ½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15 ½ gallons sold. 
(10)	Nonprofit organizations, temporary: $100.00. 
(b)	Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Secs. 3-204—3-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OPEN CONTAINERS 

Sec. 3-226. - Title of article. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Thomson Open Container Ordinance" 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 3-227. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Broken package means a bottle, can, keg or other original container which has been opened, or the seal to which has been broken, so as to allow the contents thereof to be immediately consumed. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
Occupant means any person who is occupying any vehicle on a public street, road or public place. 
Open container means a glass, cup, jar, can or other receptacle designed for or capable of being used to hold liquids. 
Street or road means the entire width between the right-of-way lines publicly maintained when any part thereof is opened to the use of the public for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-228. - Operation or occupancy of motor vehicle while possessing; exceptions. 
(a)	By operator. It shall be a violation of this article to operate a motor vehicle on a public road or street in the incorporated area of the city, while the operator or any occupant thereof has in his possession an open container or broken package containing alcoholic beverages. 
(b)	By occupant. It shall be a violation of this article for any occupant of a motor vehicle being driven on a public road or street in the incorporated area of the city to possess an open container or broken package containing alcoholic beverages. 
(c)	Exceptions. 
(1)	This article shall not apply to the passengers in any chartered bus designed for carrying more than ten persons when it is being used for the transportation of persons, or a passenger in a chauffeured limousine driven by a person holding a valid chauffeur's license issued by the state, which limousine service in addition has a valid county or City of Thomson business license, or to the occupants of living quarters of a camper or motor home. 
(2)	This article shall not apply to broken packages contained in a locked compartment of a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
State Law reference— Possession of open container of alcoholic beverage while operating vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253. 
Sec. 3-229. - Possession upon public streets and roads while afoot. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person on foot to be about or upon the public streets and roads of the city while having in his possession an open container or broken package containing alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 499, 4-9-98) 
Chapter 3.5 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3.5-1—3.5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 555, § 1, adopted Mar. 13, 2014, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 3.5-26—3.5-55, pertained to video arcades, and derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ I—III, 10-12-00. 

Sec. 3.5-26. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Thomson Bona Fide Coin-Operated Amusement Machine Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-27. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2), are prohibited in the city, and the ownership, use, or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a)—(k). 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-28. - Gambling places prohibited. 
Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(3), are prohibited in the city, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-29. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement game room means any location as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b), (c), or (d) where one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are operated that permit non-cash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(1)(B), (C), or a combination thereof. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) and (B) and any applicable regulations of the State of Georgia. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Pinball machines; 
(2)	Console machines; 
(3)	Video games; 
(4)	Crane machines; 
(5)	Claw machines; 
(6)	Pusher machines; 
(7)	Bowling machines; 
(8)	Novelty arcade games; 
(9)	Foosball or table soccer machines; 
(10)	Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
(11)	Target or shooting gallery machines; 
(12)	Basketball machines; 
(13)	Shuffleboard machines; 
(14)	Kiddie ride games; 
(15)	Skee-ball machines; 
(16)	Air hockey machines; 
(17)	Roll down machines; 
(18)	Trivia machines; 
(19)	Laser games; 
(20)	Simulator games; 
(21)	Virtual reality machines; 
(22)	Maze games; 
(23)	Racing games; 
(24)	Coin-operated pool table or coin-operated billiard table as defined in paragraph (3) of O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1; and 
(25)	Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. 
The term coin-operated amusement machine does not include the following: 
(1)	Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; 
(2)	Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
(3)	Gas and electric meters; 
(4)	Pay telephones; 
(5)	Pay toilets; 
(6)	Cigarette vending machines; 
(7)	Coin-operated vending machines; 
(8)	Coin-operated scales; 
(9)	Coin-operated gumball machines; 
(10)	Coin-operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
(11)	Coin-operated massage beds; and 
(12)	Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
Location means a business within the city that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to occupation taxes and owned or leased by the same proprietors where the lessor or lessors allow the space to be used for business purposes. 
Location owner or location operator means an owner or operator of a business where one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, or shall have the same definition as found in the O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, should that definition differ. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-30. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having obtained an amusement game room license, without first having paid the applicable occupation tax and obtained an occupational tax certificate required under this article. A separate amusement game room license must be obtained for each location in the jurisdiction which bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are operated. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-31. - Application for license. 
(a)	An applicant for an amusement game room license must be at least 18 years of age. 
(b)	A license will be issued only to a person who is a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States. Where an applicant is other than a natural person, such applicant must be a person representing an entity organized and existing under the laws of the United States or one of its states. 
(c)	Upon application, the applicant shall consent to a criminal background check and shall release the city, its elected officials, officer, agents, employees and representatives from any liability resulting from any criminal background check performed on the applicant. 
(d)	No application shall be processed by any applicant convicted or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to any charge under any federal, state or local law, constituting a felony, within ten years prior to the date of the filing of the application for a license. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-32. - License application. 
A person desiring to obtain a license shall make application of the forms prescribed by the city. 
(1)	The application form for a license shall require, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
a.	The name and address of the applicant. 
b.	The name and location of the proposed amusement game room, and the name and address of the owner of the location in which the arcade is/will be located. 
c.	A description of all of the amusement game machines, including the name, address and telephone number of the owner of each machine, and the registration number for each machine from the Georgia State Lottery Corporation decal on the amusement game machine. 
d.	Certification from the county tax commissioner that all taxes then due to the city have been paid on the property where the amusement game room is or will be located. 
e.	As required by the provision of section 3.5-31(c), all applicants shall furnish a background check through the office of the Sheriff of McDuffie County, and copy of the current City of Thomson occupation tax certificate, and other material or information as may be required by the designee. Failure to furnish data required by the designee shall be deemed to be a withdrawal of the application. 
f.	Each application for an initial license and renewal license shall provide the name and address of the master license issued by the Georgia Lottery Corporation to the owner of any amusement game machines located in the city as referenced in section 3.5-39. 
(2)	Application fee(s) as prescribed by the city shall be due and payable upon application for the license. Failure to pay and license, administrative, or investigative fees at the time of filing the application, or failure to furnish all information as required, will cause the application to be deemed as incomplete and no further action will be taken until such application is complete as determined by the designee. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-33. - License review. 
When it has to be determined by the designee that the initial application is complete, and applicable fees paid, the application shall be presented to the city council for review. Unless otherwise required or requested, no such council review shall be required for the annual renewal of an amusement game room license. 
Applications shall be presented to city council within 45 days after the date such application is deemed complete. The designee shall notify the applicant of the date and time that the application will be presented to the city council. Upon presentment to the city council, the council shall conduct a hearing at which time the applicant may appear and present any matters in support of the application, and, any other person may appear and present matters in support of, or in opposition to, the application. 
In determining whether or not a license applied for hereunder shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)	Reputation, character. The applicant's reputation, character, trade and business associates or past business ventures, mental, physical and financial capacity to conduct the business. 
(2)	Previous violations of city ordinance code. If the applicant is a previous holder of an amusement game room license, whether or not he/she has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(3)	Manner of conducting prior amusement game room business. If the applicant is a previous holder of an arcade or amusement game license, the manner in which he conducted the business, especially as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation of ordinance relating to such business. 
(4)	Location . The location for which the license is sought, as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding residents or properties. 
(5)	Number of licenses in trading area. The number of licenses already granted for similar business in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
(6)	Previous revocation of license. If the applicant is a person and/or other entity whose license issued under public powers of any governing authority has been previously suspended or revoked or who has previously had an arcade or amusement game room license suspended or revoked. 
(7)	Payment of taxes and other charges. If the applicant and business are delinquent in the payment of any local taxes, license, or other fees or charges. 
(8)	Congregation of minors. Any circumstances which may cause minors to congregate in the vicinity of the proposed location. 
(9)	Prior incidents. Evidence that a substantial number of incidents requiring police intervention which have occurred within the immediate area during the 12 months immediately preceding the date of application. 
(10)	Previous denial or revocation. The denial of an application, or the revocation of a license, occurring within the preceding 12 months, which was based on the qualifications of the proposed location. 
Upon presentation of the report and any recommendations by the designee to the city council, the counsel shall take action denying, approving, conditionally approving, or it may defer action for a period not to exceed 61 days in order to obtain further information. If the application is denied, the council shall set forth the reasons for such denial. 
In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this article, the applicant may not reapply for a similar license for the same location for at least one year from the date of such denial or revocation. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-34. - Occupation tax required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having completed the occupation tax certificate application form, paid the required occupational tax and obtained an occupational tax certificate. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-35. - Minimum distance requirements. 
(a)	No amusement game room operated pursuant to a license issued under this article shall be located closer than: 
(1)	One hundred yards of a church, shrine, chapel of a mortuary, or other place used exclusively for religious purposes; 
(2)	Two hundred yards of any school or college campus including public, private, or church supported schools which teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state. Such separation shall not be applicable to private residence schooling commonly referred to as "home schooling"; 
(3)	Two hundred yards of a private residence. Restriction applicable only for amusement game rooms having more than three amusement game machines; 
(4)	Two hundred yards of a public library or branch of any public library; 
(5)	Two hundred yards of a regular school bus stop for the transportation of school children in the public or private schools within the city which board or discharge passengers; 
(6)	Two hundred yards from an existing licensed arcade or amusement game room, regardless of jurisdiction. 
(b)	For the purposes of this section, distances shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest property boundary line of the location of the proposed amusement game room establishment for which the license is sought, or an existing amusement game room, to the nearest property boundary line of those uses referenced in subsection (a) above. For school bus stops, such measurement shall be made to the approximate location of the point of discharge. 
(c)	The measurement of such distances shall be confirmed by the McDuffie County/City of Thomson Planning Commission staff using the Geographical Information System (GIS) of McDuffie County/City of Thomson. Should a question arise as to the accuracy or authenticity of such measurement, resolution shall be obtained by the confirmation of same by a state certified land surveyor. The expense for the services of such land surveyor shall be borne by the applicant. 
(d)	An amusement game room which is operated pursuant to a license issued by the city prior to the adoption of this article shall not be denied, and shall continue operation under such existing license, nor deny and renewal of such license, nor shall any new operator of such amusement game room be denied a new license based upon the measurements set forth in this section. Upon cessation of the operation of the amusement game room pursuant to such license, such exemption shall expire. 
(e)	If the distance requirements as set forth are met at the time of the issuance of the license, the subsequent establishment of a property use referenced in subsection (a) shall not prevent the continued operation of the amusement game room pursuant to the license or the renewal of the license to any subsequent operator of such amusement game room as long as the business operation of the amusement game room or establishment does not cease. 
(f)	The council may waive the distance requirements of this section as they apply to a city park or playground. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-36. - Number of bona fide operated amusement machines at a location. 
No amusement game room in the city shall offer to the public more than six bona fide coin-operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2), or both at the same location. At a public meeting, the mayor and council may, after consideration of the nature and character of the business, waive the applicability of this provision to an individual location. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-37. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin-operated amusement machines and from business. 
(a)	Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by city officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the class B amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. 
(b)	Any location owner or location operator subject to O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(b)(1) is hereby required to provide monthly report to the receipts for each business location located with the jurisdiction of the city and shall be due by the 20th day of each month, subsequent to the month in which the sales have taken place. In addition, each owner or operator must allow the local government an annual audit of the reports from the owner or operator to the lottery corporation. 
(c)	No location owner or location operator may derive more than 50 percent of such location owner's or location operator's monthly gross retail receipts for this business location in which the class B machines are situated from such class B machines and any location owner or location operator found in violation of such provision may be fined and may have any city issued license suspended or revoked as allowed under this article. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the 50 percent of gross retail receipts requirement. Any violations of this provision shall be reported to the Georgia Lottery Corporation. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-38. - Notice requirements. 
(a)	Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or substantially similar language: 
GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE. 
(b)	Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the city conspicuously and permanently. 
(c)	The owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-39. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provision relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the city only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-78. In addition, the business owner where the machines are available for play by the public must pay a location license fee to the lottery corporation in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71(a.1) and (b). 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-40. - License suspension and revocation. 
(a)	The city may suspend or revoke any alcohol license of the owner or operator to manufacture, distribute, or sell alcoholic beverages as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g). 
(b)	The city may suspend or revoke any other license issued by the city to the owner or operator as a penalty for the conviction of the owner or operator for a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g). 
(c)	The suspension or revocation of licenses under this Code section shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: 
(1)	No license which has been issued or which may be issued pursuant to this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing and upon prior three-day written notice to the holder of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(2)	The term "due cause" for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.	Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees of any person holding an interest in the license for any felony, any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics, or tax laws. 
b.	Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any sex offense when the licensed business is for on-premises consumption. 
c.	Suspension or revocation of any state license required as a condition for the possession, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
d.	Material falsification of any fact given in an application for a license issued under this chapter or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor. Any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented. 
e.	Failure to meet or maintain any standard prescribed by this article as a condition or qualification for holding a license. 
f.	Any other factor known to or discovered by the city whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in a license, has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, local ordinance or administrative regulations involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics for all alcohol licensed business and including any sex offense under state law or local ordinances with respect to businesses licensed for on-premises consumption. With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the violative act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence that such licensee could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(3)	Notice of suspension or revocation proceedings shall be served on the person named as licensee in the application. Notice shall be in writing. The notice may be served personally or by first class mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the licensee at its address as provided by the licensee to the municipality. The burden shall be on the licensee to provide notice, in writing, of any change of address for service of notices and process. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Postal Service. 
(4)	The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the mayor of the city council. The hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the state who is disinterested in the proceeding. 
(5)	Hearings shall be only as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney shall present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent itself or be represented by counsel, any cross examine all witnesses offered by the city, and may call witnesses and present evidence in its own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the hearing officer shall have the right to exclude evidence which carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. 
(6)	The hearing officer shall make his final determination within ten business days of the completion of the hearing. The decision shall be placed in writing and contain the hearing officer's findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision as to sanction, if any. Such sanction may include one or more of the following: revocation of the license, suspension of the license for no more than 12 months, imposition of a probationary period not to exceed 12 months, and/or a civil monetary penalty not to exceed the amount allowed under the city charter. Progressive sanctions, depending on the severity of the violation, are encouraged but not required. Where the remaining term of the license is less than 12 months, imposition of suspension or probation for a period in excess of the term of the existing license shall be applied to any renewal license. A subsequent violation with a probationary period shall be cause for revocation and/or denial of license renewal. A total of three separate and unrelated violations within 24 months, whether or not within a probationary period, shall be grounds for permanent revocation. 
(7)	The hearing officer's decision shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the licensee and his attorney, with a copy to the city attorney, within ten business days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute final action by the city, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the superior court. 
(8)	Upon receipt of notice of adverse action against the licensee under this section, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and stipulate to a sanction, as recommended by the city manager, in consultation with the chief of police. Any stipulation entered under this subsection shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and non-appealable. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-41. - Criminal penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
(a)	Penalties for violation of the provisions of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, or other court of competent jurisdiction are as follows: 
(1)	First offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(2)	Second offense: Fine not to exceed $750.00 for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location for not more than three months, or both. 
(3)	Third offense: Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation, suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location, or suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city for not more than six months, or any combination of these penalties. 
(b)	The fines listed in the penalties for violation of this article may be imposed by the judge of the municipal court of the city, or the judge of any other court of competent jurisdiction. Suspension or revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city may be imposed by the mayor and council after a public hearing. 
(c)	Offering one or more bona fide coin amusement machine games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for the offering of any amusement game at the location is punishable, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-42. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin-operated machines in violation of law or ordinance. 
The municipal court of the city, or any other court of competent jurisdiction as authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing such bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine: 
(1)	First offense: Fine not to exceed $250.00 for each violation. 
(2)	Second and subsequent offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-43. - Operating regulations. 
All businesses operating as an amusement game room hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All bona fide coin-operated amusement machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and assessable to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)	Inspection . The chief of police may inspect or cause the inspection of any location in which any such bona fide coin-operated amusement machine(s) are operated or set up for operating, and may inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(3)	Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any location owner or location operator to open the location to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(4)	Loitering . As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licensed to operate an amusement game room to permit, loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
a.	Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
b.	Create or cause to be created any disturbance of the peace, as defined by law; 
c.	Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.	Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. 
(5)	Shirt and shoes required. All location owners and location operators shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their location. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-44. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. 
(a)	Licenses required in this article are nontransferable. All businesses that have bona fide coin-operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current amusement game room license and occupational tax certificate issued by the city. 
(b)	The issued license shall not be transferred to another owner at the same site within the city. A new owner or proprietor must first obtain a new license if they are going to operate in the same or different location in the city. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Sec. 3.5-45. - Enforcing officer. 
The chief of police or his designee is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and shall execute all requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-13-14 ) 
Secs. 3.5-46—3.5-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENTS 

Sec. 3.5-76. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments as defined herein, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse affect on property values and on the public health, safety, and welfare of the city, and on its citizens and property, and on the character and preservation of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. This article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment, or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(b)	Findings. Based on the experience of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to: Atlanta, Georgia; Fulton County, Georgia; Dekalb County, Georgia; Richmond County, Georgia; Floyd County, Georgia; Amarillo, Texas; Austin, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Houston, Texas; Renton, Washington; Phoenix, Arizona; Augusta, Georgia; LaGrange, Georgia; Dalton, Georgia; Whitfield County, Georgia; Carrollton, Georgia; Smyrna, Georgia; Rome, Georgia; Bartow County, Georgia; and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences are believed to be relevant to the problems faced by Thomson, Georgia, the City of Thomson, Georgia takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the findings of the commissioners that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed in the incorporated limits of the city and prohibiting the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in said establishment is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. Based on these findings, this article is adopted to regulate certain types of businesses and to establish where such activity may or may not be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 1, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-77. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Adult entertainment establishment: As used herein, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings, and the premises on which defined establishments operate on which defined activities occur shall constitute "adult entertainment establishments." Adult entertainment establishments include, but are not limited to: 
(1)	Adult bookstore: A business or establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)	Adult business: Either, (1) any business or establishment which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business or establishment; or (2) any business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or (3) any other business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)	Adult dancing establishment: A business or establishment that features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(4)	Adult motion picture theater: A business or establishment that is used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein, including a business or establishment wherein coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other images producing devices are maintained to show images and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(5)	Adult video store means a business or establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in video tapes or movies or other reproductions, for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or five percent of its net sales consisting of reproduced materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(6)	Bath house or massage parlor: A business or establishment in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(7)	Erotic entertainment/dance establishments: A business or establishment including, but not limited to, a nightclub, theater, or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers or entertainers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(8)	Lingerie modeling studio: A business or establishment whose primary business activity consists of live performers exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(9)	Encounter center or rap establishment: A business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Mayor and council: The Mayor of the City of Thomson, Georgia and the Council Members of the City of Thomson, Georgia. 
Church: A place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship; a body of communicates gathered into church order united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies; congregation, or organization assembled for religious purposes. 
Conviction: Adjudication of guilt, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the State of Georgia First Offender Act. 
Distance and measurement: The measurement of lineal feet from the nearest point of the property line of the proposed premises of an adult entertainment establishment to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence, or hospital. A radius shall be measured from the property line of the proposed premises to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence or hospital. 
Employee: Any person engaged to provide or in fact providing services for an adult entertainment establishment to patrons on a regular basis whether for legal consideration or otherwise. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors whose main purpose is to provide entertainment or other services to patrons, including, but not limited to, dancers and waitresses, employed or hired by an adult entertainment establishment shall be considered as employees. 
Good moral character: For the purposes of this article shall mean, although not limited to, having no convictions of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within the previous five years. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor: For the purposes of this article shall mean any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Park: Any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled or managed by county, city, state or federal government or any governmental entity or agency in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Parcel of land: Any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundaries, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
Residence: A house, apartment, mobile home, boarding or rooming house, duplex, or other multi-family housing, used as a dwelling for humans, or any properties owned therefore. 
School: A state, county, city, church school, or other school(s), public or private, that teach the subjects commonly taught in the commons schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post high school learning centers, kindergartens and day care centers for persons of any age. 
Specified sexual activities: Shall include any of the following: 
(1)	Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: sodomy, cunnilingus, fellatio, pedophilia, lesbianism, homosexuality; 
(2)	Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)	Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)	Fondling of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron; 
(5)	Sexually oriented torture; or 
(6)	Fondling or other sexual contact with an animal so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron. 
Specified anatomical areas: Shall include any of the following: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, or anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)	Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 2, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-78. - Regulations. 
The following regulations apply to all adult entertainment establishments as described herein and located within the incorporated areas of the City of Thomson, Georgia: 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for a licensee to employ, admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, materials, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment establishment. 
(3)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be located in any zoning district, other than I-1 or I-2 on at least three acres and within the following distances as defined and measured as stated herein: 
a.	Within 1,000 feet of an parcel of land upon which any single or multi-family residence or within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for single or multi-family uses or purposes; 
b.	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmentally-owned or operated building, library, civic center, public park, playground, hospital, nursing home or community club; 
c.	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment is located; 
d.	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
(4)	No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with any person to provide services or perform in said establishment who is a person not permitted for employment pursuant to this article. 
(5)	An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, dates of birth, photograph, and social security numbers of all employees. 
(6)	An adult entertainment establishment shall be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, on Sunday, and on Christmas Day. 
(7)	No booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any adult entertainment establishment so as to prevent a clear view throughout the premises, except for separate offices, kitchens, restores, or other areas not frequented by patrons. 
(8)	No premises for an adult entertainment establishment shall have any interior connections or doors with any other place of business. 
(9)	No adult entertainment establishment shall be operated such that the activity on the interior or the premises is visible from the exterior of the premises. 
(10)	No licensee shall permit the use of alcoholic beverages of any kind to be sold, possessed or consumed in or on the premises. 
(11)	No licensee shall permit the use of illegal drugs or controlled substances of any kind to be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted in or on the premises. 
(12)	No licensee shall permit an employee to expose for public view his or her specified anatomical areas in a lewd or obscene fashion. 
(13)	Every act or omission of an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee or as a result of the licensee's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct. 
(14)	No licensee shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area, breasts, or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. All public signs or other forms of advertisement shall comply with this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 3, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-79. - Additional regulations—Adult dancing establishments, erotic entertainment/dance establishments, and lingerie modeling studios. 
The following additional regulations apply to adult dancing establishments, erotic entertainment/dance establishments and lingerie modeling studios (herein "adult dance establishments") as described herein: 
(1)	All live dancing and entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the next highest level of the remainder of the floor. 
(2)	All live dancing or entertainment shall occur no closer than ten feet from any patron. 
(3)	No dancer, entertainer or employee shall fondle or caress any patron nor allow any patron to fondle or caress any dancer, entertainer or employee so as to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron. 
(4)	No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(5)	No dancer or entertainer shall solicit or accept any pay or gratuity directly from any patron nor allow any patron to directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or entertainer. 
(6)	All areas of the licensed premises shall be fully lighted at all times when open for business, which shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
(7)	No licensee shall permit any employee to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this article. 
(8)	No licensee shall permit an employee to insert an object into her vagina or her or his anal orifice, except for personal hygiene or necessity. 
(9)	No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation. 
(10)	No licensee shall permit a male employee to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
(11)	No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in, or simulate bestiality. 
(12)	No licensee shall permit an employee to engage in actual or simulated sexual activity with another person. 
(13)	No licensee shall permit an employee to sit upon or straddle the leg, legs or body of an patron therein. 
(14)	No licensee shall permit or allow a patron to participate in any act or activity upon the licensed premises which an employee is prohibited from performing. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 4, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-80. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, or legal entity to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the incorporated area of the City of Thomson, Georgia any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article, without a license so to do. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 5, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-81. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 6, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-82. - Application for license. 
(a)	Any person or legal entity desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to or with the Zoning Administrator of the City of Thomson, Georgia, or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a non-refundable fee of $100.00 shall be paid to the Planning Commission of Thomson to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. 
(b)	The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)	All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable provisions of this article and other ordinances and resolutions of the city relating to such business. 
(d)	All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and/or revoked under the provisions of the Ordinances of the City of Thomson, Georgia." 
(e)	A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(f)	Where the applicant: 
a.	Is a corporation, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either (1) the majority shareholder thereof, or (2) a person employed full time in a managing capacity by the corporation; 
b.	Is a partnership, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either (1) the managing general partner thereof, or (2) a person employed full time in a managing capacity by the partnership; 
c.	Is a sole proprietor, any license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working full time in a managing capacity on the premises, and if not, then to the sole proprietor or a person employed full time in a managing capacity by the sole proprietor; 
d.	For purposes of this subsection, the words "managing capacity" shall mean the president or chief executive officer or managing or general partner of a corporation or partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations at the location to be licensed and who is a full time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor, or other ownership. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 7, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-83. - Application contents; supporting documents. 
(a)	Application for license shall be written and on forms supplied by the Planning Commission of the City of Thomson. Such application shall state the name, address, social security number and date of birth of the applicant(s), and the nature and character of the business to be carried on. 
(b)	The previous addresses, if any, of the applicant for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence for each. 
(c)	The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and color of hair. 
(d)	Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within six months prior to the application. 
(e)	Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for five years immediately proceeding the date of the application. 
(f)	If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, and the names, addresses, dates of birth and social security numbers of each of its current officers and directors as well as all stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, whether general or limited, the applicant shall set forth the names, residence addresses, dates of birth and social security numbers of the partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. 
(g)	Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(h)	The name of the owner of the premises and, if leased, a copy of the lease agreement. 
(i)	A plat, filed in triplicate, by a registered land surveyor, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing all structures and the location of the proposed premises which shall not be inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 3.5-78(3). 
(j)	The name, address, social security number and date of birth of any and all persons who have a financial interest of any type in the entity which is applying for the license. 
(k)	Any other information reasonably required by the City of Thomson Zoning Administrator in order to verify the information furnished by the applicant to obtain a license. 
(l)	Should the requirements of this article dictate that more than one individual and/or entity apply for and a license issued to such applicants, then all such applicants shall, on such application, designate the name, address and telephone number of an individual resident of McDuffie County, Georgia to act as agent for all applicant(s)/licensee(s) for the purpose of receiving communications and notices under this article. Proof of delivery to said agent shall be conclusive proof of receipt by a licensee(s) of such notice, process or information. 
(m)	Each application must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the city for filing and processing. 
(n)	All applicants for licenses as to any premises which is to be subsequently renovated or improved shall furnish in triplicate plans and renderings of the premises as it is to exist at the time of opening. Any premises to be constructed or renovated prior to opening shall be constricted, renovated or built so as to be equal to and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood or better. The premises shall comply with all building, fire, health and similar city codes. 
(o)	Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)	If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
(2)	If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
(3)	If a corporation, by the president of the corporation. 
(4)	If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 8, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-84. - Notice of intent to engage in business. 
(a)	All applicants for licenses thereunder shall give notice that an application has been filed and of the purpose of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for four consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the City of Thomson, Georgia in the newspaper in which legal advertisements are published. The first advertisement shall not appear more than 40 days prior to the date of such consideration. The advertisement shall be of type not smaller than ten point capital and lower case and shall be at least a one-inch column. The advertisement shall appear on the same days as legal advertisements are regularly published. 
(b)	The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, the name of the applicant(s), the date, time and place of hearing, and a statement that any legal objections to the issuance must be made at or prior to the time of hearing, and, if prior to the time of hearing, must be in writing and received by the office of the planning commission on or before the date and time of hearing. 
(c)	Applicants shall provide proof of such notice by providing the planning commission, prior to the time of the hearing on license issuance, the affidavit of the publisher of the newspaper in which said notice was published, which affidavit shall reflect the content of the notice and the dates of publishing. 
(d)	The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign or signs stating the following: 
"City of Thomson, Georgia Adult Entertainment License Applied For." 
"A hearing before the City of Thomson Mayor and Council shall be held on the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , at ____________ : ____________ o'clock (a.m./p.m.) in the Council Meeting Room, Thomson City Hall, Main Street, Thomson, Georgia." 
"All interested persons take notice." 
The sign or signs shall be at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalk, or other public property which adjoin or adjoins the location so as to be clearly visible by persons using such public area. The sign shall be posted on the property from the date of the first publication of the legal advertisement through the date of consideration by the Mayor and Council of the City of Thomson, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 9, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-85. - Application; investigation; issuance. 
The zoning administrator shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed 45 days, to investigate the application and the background of the applicant(s) following the acceptance and filing of the completed application. Upon completion of the investigation, the city council may, upon two readings, grant the license if the commission finds: 
(1)	The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(2)	The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(3)	The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application. 
(4)	The applicant (if an individual, or any officers or directors or shareholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership), has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving sexual assault, sexual battery, prostitution, rape, sexual offenses against children, unnatural sex acts, public indecency, or any other sex act, whether attempted or consummated, prohibited by law for which (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24 month period. 
(5)	The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors or shareholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not, during the past ten years, had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked in this city or any other local governmental jurisdiction located within or without this state prior to the date of application. 
(6)	The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable distance provisions of this article and would qualify to receive a certificate of occupancy. 
(7)	The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(8)	That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all time during which the business is open. 
(9)	Notwithstanding the above, no license shall be issued to an applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of an application the same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of this article applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection for reasons related to the location itself. 
(10)	An annual license fee, established by resolution of the city and prorated on a calendar month basis, is paid to the Planning Commission of City of Thomson. Said annual license fee is hereby resolved to be $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 10, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-86. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments shall be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the licensee continues to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and Council of the City of Thomson, Georgia. Said renewal fee is hereby resolved to be $2,000.00. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 15 of each year prior to January 1 of the year for which such license is requested. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 11, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-87. - License non-transferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that is the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without affecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the licensee shall immediately notify the Zoning Administrator of the City of Thomson. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license hereunder is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 12, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-88. - Change of location. 
No licensee shall change the location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 13, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-89. - Change of name. 
No licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 14, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-90. - Modifications of licensed premises. 
After issuance of any license, no change in the location of the building within the premises, customer entry locations, or other changes shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance or other requirement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 15, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-91. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)	No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)	An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)	Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)	Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capitol stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)	Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)	Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; or 
(6)	Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the State of Georgia or the City of Thomson, Georgia. 
(b)	Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desire of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 16, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-92. - License—Refusal. 
If the zoning administrator, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, he shall notify the applicant(s) of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Any such decision shall be final unless an appeal is filed with and to the Mayor and Council of the City of Thomson, Georgia by any aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of the decision of the zoning administrator. A hearing by the mayor and council of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing at a regular or special meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 17, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-93. - Suspension; revocation; appeal; violations/penalties; service of notice. 
(a)	Suspension. The zoning administrator shall suspend a license for period of 180 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee has violated any sections of this article. If the zoning administrator deems a license suspension appropriate, he shall so notify the licensee of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Such suspension shall take effect ten days following the zoning administrator's notification unless an appeal is filed with and to the City Clerk of Thomson by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the zoning administrator. A hearing by the mayor and council of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing in a regular or special meeting of the mayor and council ruling on the licensee's appeal. 
(b)	Revocation. 
(1)	The zoning administrator shall revoke a license if a cause for suspension occurs and the license has been suspended within the past 12 months. 
(2)	The planning administrator shall also revoke a license if he determines that: 
a.	A licensee gave false or misleading information in the materials submitted during the application process. 
b.	A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
c.	A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act prohibited by this article to occur in or on the licensed premises. 
d.	The owner or operator of the licensed establishment knowingly allowed a person under 18 years of age to enter the establishment. 
(3)	If the zoning administrator deems a license revocation appropriate, he shall so notify the licensee of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Such revocation shall take effect ten days following the zoning administrator's serving of his written decision upon the licensee unless an appeal is filed with and to the City of Thomson, Georgia by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the zoning administrator. A hearing by the Mayor and Council of the City of Thomson, Georgia on the decision shall occur within 30 days of its filing in a regular or special meeting of the commission. Revocation shall continue for 12 consecutive months from the date the revocation becomes effective. 
(c)	Appeal procedure. An applicant or licensee who has timely filed an appeal with the mayor and council as allowed by this article shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor and council. At the time set for the hearing, the mayor and council shall receive all relevant testimony in evidence from city staff or interested parties, and from the licensee or employee. In all hearings pursuant to this article, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)	The Clerk of City of Thomson, Georgia shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications against the charged party. He/she shall then read or cause to be read any response filed by the charged party. 
(2)	The mayor and council shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications as filed against the charged party and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)	The order of proof shall be as follows: The city representative shall present his evidence in support of the charges; the charged party shall then present his evidence. Evidence of each party may be supported by submission of pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)	The charged party and city may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross-examine witnesses. Additionally, the mayor and council may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. 
(d)	Violations and penalties. 
(1)	Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(2)	Should any license be revoked or suspended, all signs indicating that such business is conducted on the premises shall be removed from the premises during the period of revocation or suspension. 
(3)	The violation of provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such action may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. 
(c)	Service of notice. 
(1)	Any notice required to be given under this article to any applicant, licensee or employee may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States Mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for license/permit, or such updated address which may have subsequently been provided in writing to the zoning administrator. Notices mailed as described above shall be deemed on the third day subsequent to their deposit in the United States Mail. 
(2)	It shall be the duty of each applicant, licensee and employee to furnish notice to the zoning administrator in writing of any change of mailing address. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 18, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-94. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)	Qualifications. 
(1)	Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No person who has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving sexual assault, sexual battery, prostitution, rape, sexual offenses against children, unnatural sex acts, public indecency, or any other sex act, whether attempted or consummated, prohibited by law for which (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense: (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later offenses occurring within any 24 month period shall be employed by an adult entertainment establishment. 
(2)	No person who is convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the above-noted crimes while employed in an adult entertainment establishment shall thereafter work on any premises requiring a license under this article for the applicable time period described above. 
(3)	Application for permit shall be written and on forms supplied by the Office of the Zoning Administrator of McDuffie County. Such application shall state the name, address, social security number and date of birth of the applicant, the name and address of the employer, the name and address of the place of employment and any other information reasonably required by the zoning administrator in verifying the right of the applicant to obtain a permit, including a set of fingerprints on regular sheriff's department or United States Department of Justice forms. 
(b)	Approval for employment. 
(1)	A permit to work in or be employed by an adult entertainment establishment shall be required for all employees thereof. 
(2)	No person requiring a permit may be employed by or work in an establishment until such person has filed an application, paid the fee to and obtain a work permit from the Zoning Administrator of the City of Thomson. The zoning administrator shall immediately issue said permit upon the filing of an application and payment of the fee, which permit shall be conditional and subject to revocation upon the determination by the zoning administrator following investigation of the applicant that the applicant is not qualified to be an employee under this article. Upon such determination the zoning administrator shall notify the applicant of such decision in writing and the basis thereof. Any such decision shall be final and revocation shall become effective unless an appeal is filed with and to the City of Thomson by the aggrieved party on or before ten days of the date of receipt by the aggrieved party of the decision of the zoning administrator. A hearing by the mayor and council of the appeal shall occur within 30 days of its filing at a regular or special meeting of the commissioners. 
(3)	Any permit for employment issued hereunder shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless earlier revoked. A non-refundable annual fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the Planning Commission of Thomson to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. 
(4)	It shall be the duty of all licensees of an adult entertainment establishment to file with the Zoning Administrator of Thomson the names of all employees with their home addresses, home telephone numbers, dates of birth, social security numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees must be filed with the Zoning Administrator of Thomson within three days from the date of any such change. 
(5)	For the purpose of this section, independent contractors shall be deemed employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or license of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(6)	Employees holding permits issued pursuant to this article shall at all times during their working hours have said permits available for inspection at the premises. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 19, 3-9-00) 
Sec. 3.5-95. - Severability. 
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 506, § 20, 3-9-00) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate, license or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals, § 1.02(o). 
Cross reference— Collection of dead animals, § 16-8. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(3); animals generally, O.C.G.A. Title 4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Bird sanctuary. 
(a)	The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests. Provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the city, such health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, bird club, garden club or humane society, or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the city after having given at least three days actual notice of the time and place of said meeting to the representatives of such clubs. 
(c)	If as a result of such meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(d)	Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 283, 2-10-65) 
Sec. 4-2. - Running at large. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any horse, mule, ass, cow, hog, dog, or other animal, used or fit either for food or labor, to run at large within the limits of the city, beyond the premises of its owner or manager. 
(b)	Any person who shall be found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 126, §§ 1, 2, 2-10-25) 
Sec. 4-3. - Rabies control. 
To prevent the spread of rabies and to control and regulate matters pertaining to dogs O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq., the Rabies Control law, is adopted and incorporated into this section as if fully printed herein. 
(Ord. No. 365, § 3, 9-14-78) 
Secs. 4-4—4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS 

Sec. 4-26. - Title and purpose of this article. 
(a)	Title. This article shall be known as the City of Thomson Animal Control Ordinance. 
(b)	Purpose. The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)	Protect the people of the City of Thomson from dangerous or uncontrolled animals; and 
(2)	Supplement, not supercede the state rabies control statutes or the City of Thomson Dangerous Dog Ordinance. 
(3)	Repeal all ordinances in conflict herewith. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 4-27. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning defined herein, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the present tense include the future and past tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the masculine gender include the feminine gender. 
Animal. Every vertebrate non-human species of animal, wild or domestic, male or female, including but not limited to dogs and cats. 
Animal control officer. A city employee, representative or agent so designated by the City of Thomson as a dog warden. All City of Thomson Police Officers are designated as animal control officers. 
Animal shelter. Any premises designated by McDuffie County for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found running at large or otherwise subject to impounding in accordance with the provisions of this article or any other county ordinance or directive or state law. 
At large. An animal shall be deemed to be at large when it is off the property of its owner and not under the restraint of a competent person. 
Cat. A domestic feline. 
City. The City of Thomson. 
County. County of McDuffie. 
Dog. A domestic canine. 
Identified animal. An animal with an identification tag, tattoo, or other marking on which is described the owner's name, address, and telephone number. 
Owner. Any person, group of persons, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other entity owning, keeping, having charge of, sheltering, feeding, harboring, or taking care of any animal. The owner is responsible for the care, actions, and behavior of his animals. 
Public nuisance animal. Any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endanger the life or health of domestic animals or persons, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than its owner, to enjoyment of life or property. The term shall include, but is not limited to, any animal that: 
Is repeatedly at large; 
Damages the property of anyone other than its owner; 
Molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby; 
Chases vehicles; 
Excessively makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued or repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored due to the neglect of the animal's owner; 
Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
Attacks other domestic animals; or 
Has been found by the animal control committee, after notice to its owner and a hearing to be a public nuisance animal by virtue of being a menace to the public health, welfare, or safety. 
Restraint. An animal is under restraint within the meaning of this article if it is: 
(a)	Controlled by means of a chain, leash, or other like device; 
(b)	On or within a vehicle being driven or parked; 
(c)	Within a secure enclosure; or 
(d)	Within the property limits of its owner or keeper. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 4-28. - Animal control committee. 
There is created by the dangerous dog ordinance an animal control committee which shall have the rights duties and privileges to act under this article. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Secs. 4-29—4-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOST OR STRAY ANIMALS 

Sec. 4-41. - Dog and cat identification. 
Every owner of a dog or cat found within the city shall provide the same with an identification tag, tattoo, or other marking or device on which is inscribed the dog or cat owner's name, address, and telephone number. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 4-42. - Impoundment. 
Any domestic animal which appears, in the sole discretion of the animal control officer, to be lost, stray, unwanted, or in imminent danger may be impounded by an animal control officer. If the animal is identified, the animal may be confined in the animal shelter in a humane manner. If the animal is not identified, the officer may remove the animal to the animal shelter or proceed to have the animal destroyed in a humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 4-43. - Injured, sick, or diseased animals. 
When the owner of an injured, sick, or diseased animal can be located, it shall be his responsibility to provide veterinary care for the animal or have the animal humanely euthanized. If the owner cannot be located, the injured, sick, or diseased animal may be destroyed under the direction of the animal control officer in a humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Secs. 4-44—4-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ANIMALS CREATING A NUISANCE 

Sec. 4-61. - Animal at large creating a nuisance. 
The owner of an animal shall not permit the animal to be a public nuisance as defined in section 4-27. If, after investigation of a written complaint, as required under division 4, below, the animal control officer determines that an animal is creating or has created a public nuisance, the animal control officer may orally notify the owner of the nuisance animal and may instruct the owner to remedy the nuisance, issue the owner a written warning from the animal control officer instructing the owner to remedy the nuisance or charge the owner with a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 4-62. - Capture and transport of animal creating nuisance. 
If following an investigation of a written complaint regarding a public nuisance animal, the animal control officer is unable to determine ownership of an animal creating a nuisance, the animal control officer may capture and transport the animal to the animal control shelter. It shall be presumed that such animal is unwanted in such instance. Said presumption may be rebutted by its owner redeeming the animal in compliance with this article. The animal control officer is not required to attempt to locate owners of unidentified animals before impounding, sheltering or humanely destroying the unidentified animal. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Secs. 4-63—4-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REPORTS, COMPLAINS AND INVESTIGATIONS 

Sec. 4-81. - Emergency complaints. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 4-62 above, any person may in the case of an emergency make a verbal complaint through the city police department or directly to the animal control officer or the director or his designee, as appropriate, of a violation of division 3. Such verbal complaint shall, as soon as practicable after response to the emergency, be confirmed by the complainant in writing on a standard incident report completed by the complaining party. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 4-82. - Verbal reports. 
Any person may make a verbal report to the city of a violation of division 2 of this article, or of an animal which appears to be lost, stray, unwanted, or in imminent danger. All such reports may be made by telephone to the city police department or in person to an animal control officer or appropriate designee under this article. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 4-83. - Written complaints. 
Any person may make a complaint to the city of a violation of division 3 of this article. All such complaints shall be written and shall be on a form prescribed by the city police department. The form complaint shall require the signature of the person making the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Sec. 4-84. - Investigations. 
The animal control officer upon complaint of a violation shall conduct such investigation as he shall deem appropriate in determining whether such violation has occurred and whether impoundment of an animal is appropriate or required under the provisions of this article. Investigations may include but are not limited to, the interviewing of witnesses and taking of written statements, inspection of premises where an animal is owned or held, reasonable examination of a person or property to determine if injury or damage has been inflicted by an animal under the provisions of division 3, reasonable examination of an animal being investigated, and such other steps as shall be determined to be necessary or appropriate in carrying out investigations of violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Secs. 4-85—4-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 4-101. - Penalties. 
(a)	Misdemeanor. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished accordingly. For a continuing violation, each day's violation shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Secs. 4-102—4-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 4-111. - Interference with enforcement of ordinance. 
No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest the animal control officer or any agents or employees of the animal control officer in their performance of any duties under this article, nor seek to release any animal in the custody of the same or of the animal shelter unless otherwise specifically authorized by law. The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in division 5 above. 
(Ord. No. 525, 11-11-04) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate building construction, § 1.02(m). 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 8; planning and development, ch. 14; soil and sedimentation control, ch. 15; hazardous refuse and building materials, § 16-141 et seq.; stormwater management, ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, ch. 18; numbering buildings, § 18-56 et seq.; subdivision of land, ch. 19; utilities, ch. 21; building sewers and connections, § 21-116 et seq.; zoning, ch. 22; building permits required, § 22-137. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, sec. II, par. III(a)(12); buildings and housing, O.C.G.A. Title 8. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Codes, standards adopted. 
The latest edition of the following codes as adopted by the department of community affairs are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied fully in this section: 
(1)	International Building Code. 
(2)	International Mechanical Code. 
(3)	International Fuel Gas Code. 
(4)	International Plumbing Code. 
(5)	National Electrical Code. 
(6)	International Fire Code. 
(7)	International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 
(8)	International Energy Conservation Code (Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code). 
(9)	International Property Maintenance Code. 
(10)	International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1, 2-9-89; Ord. No. 464, § 1, 2-13-92; Ord. No. 556, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 5-2. - Electrical rules. 
The following are supplemental rules which shall apply to and govern electrical installations in the city: 
(1)	The wiring diagram provided for mobile homes will be followed as shown on file in the office of the department of community affairs. 
(2)	Appliance circuit receptacles in the kitchen, breakfast room and dining room shall have no other outlets on them. Kitchen receptacles shall have at least two appliance circuits. 
(3)	Range circuits shall have a separate circuit provided for each cooking appliance. Cables must be protected if run exposed through a cabinet. 
(4)	The single range receptacle shall have a minimum of number 6 copper wire. 
(5)	The washing machine receptacle shall be on a separate circuit. 
(6)	All taps and splices shall have some type of connector or crimp. A crimp or connector is to be used on bare ground wires. When used on other taps and splices they shall be taped properly. 
(7)	Number 12 and number 14 wire will not be mixed on the same circuit. Number 14 wire is acceptable on lighting circuits and will have a 15-amp breaker installed on them. All circuit wire shall have the right size breakers. 
(8)	Nonmetallic shielded cable shall be stapled 12 inches from boxes and approximately 4½ feet where installed, except when run through bored holes. Holes will be bored in useable attic and basement space. 
(9)	Metal boxes shall have bare ground wire attached to the box by screw. 
(10)	Furnaces and central air conditioning units shall have a disconnect at their location. 
(11)	All residences shall have a minimum size number 2 service conductor and service equipment shall not have smaller than 100-amp rating. 
(12)	A weatherhead will be installed on the service entrance cable. When the service is brought out through the roof a conduit or mast shall extend through the roof and it shall not be less than two inches in diameter and extend through the roof more than two feet except by special permission from the electrical inspector or building official. Permission will be granted in circumstances where additional height is required for clearance. This shall be fastened extremely well. 
(13)	Service switches shall be installed in readily accessible locations approximately four feet from the floor, and shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.	Service switches shall have a main breaker. 
b.	Service switches shall not be installed in bedrooms, bathrooms, or closets. 
c.	Service equipment shall be grounded. 
d.	Note: Service switches include panel boxes. 
(14)	Doorbell transformers shall be installed in a box that is flush in the wall next to the service equipment or within two feet of the access opening to the attic or crawl space under the house. The transformer should be installed 24 inches above the ceiling when being installed in the attic. In the attic or crawl space, the transformer should be mounted on a box that contains the line voltage connection. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1, 2-9-89) 
Sec. 5-3. - Permit fees; inspections. 
(a)	The permit fee schedule for construction within the city shall be as follows: 
(1)	Single-family permit fee schedule: 

 
(2)	Commercial, industrial, multi-family, public and accessory permit fees schedule: 
a.	Building: 

 
b.	Electrical permit fees schedule: 

 
c.	Mechanical permit fees schedule: 

 
d.	Plumbing permit fees schedule: 

 
e.	Reinspection fee schedule: If it is necessary to make a reinspection for a required building, electrical, mechanical, or plumbing inspection because of improper work, the contractor responsible shall pay a reinspection fee of $5.00. Where the adopted codes of section 5-1 require certain permit fees the provisions of this section shall prevail over the fees to be charged pursuant to the adopted codes. Where there is no permit fee addressed in this section, the fees adopted and the approved codes shall be the fee schedule followed. 
(b)	Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the codes adopted by section 5-1, or whenever the building inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exist any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official inspector may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon said official by the adopted codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry if such does appear. If such building or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the building official inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure the entry. If during the inspection of a building, the building or any of the building systems, in whole or in part, constitute a danger to human life or a hazard to health or safety, the building official inspector shall issue such notice or order to remove or remedy the condition. 
(c)	Any violation of any of the codes adopted in section 5-1 or provisions of this section shall subject the violator to such penalty as permitted by law. 
(d)	The City of Thomson shall set and charge such permit fees as adopted by the City of Thomson, relating to the construction, maintenance, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and reinspection fees of buildings, including but not limited to single-family, commercial, industrial, multi-family, and public structures located within the corporate limits of the City of Thomson. 
(Ord. No. 464, 2-13-92; Ord. No. 464(Rvsd.), § 1, 6-12-03) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to require permits and fix charges therefor, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 
Sec. 5-4. - Dilapidated buildings. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any dilapidated building or other structure which is permitted to continue in an offensive or unsanitary condition, or which is unsafe either from a liability to fall, or which, from its structure, is likely to become ignited and cause the spread of fire in the city, or is otherwise dangerous or offensive. 
(b)	The owner, occupant or lessee of such property shall have a reasonable time to remedy the situation. A reasonable time is that which is decided upon by said owner, occupant or lessee and the city manager. If after the specified time the problem continues the city manager or his representative is hereby authorized to enter the premises and to correct the situation. Any and all costs incurred will be collected from the violator in the same manner as property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 33.1, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 5-5. - Water conservation plumbing implements. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(b)	Residential requirements. On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)	Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1 6/10 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)	Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2½ gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)	Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; 
(4)	Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)	Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2½ gallons of water per minute. 
(c)	Commercial requirements. On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)	Applicability. The requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or additon to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(e)	Exemptions. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection (b) of this section when: 
(1)	The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing building; 
(2)	When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this section were installed; 
(3)	Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)	Units to be installed are: 
a.	Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.	Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.	Toilets for juveniles. 
The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector. A fee of $15.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(f)	Enforcement; penalty. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 462, §§ 1—6, 5-9-91) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 
Secs. 5-5—5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE OR UNHEALTHFUL PREMISES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 521, § 1, adopted December 11, 2003, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, § 5-26 was added to a new division under a new article II at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 5-26. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)	The governing authority of the City of Thomson, Georgia find and declare that within the city limits of the City of Thomson there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the City of Thomson, or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)	It is further found and declared that in the City of Thomson where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)	It is the intention of the governing authority that this article shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the City of Thomson, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 521, § 1, 12-11-03) 
Secs. 5-27—5-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 522, § 1, adopted December 11, 2003, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefor, §§ 5-36—5-41 were added as a new division under a new article at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 5-36. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this division shall construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this division shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 522, § 1(A), 12-11-03) 
Sec. 5-37. - Definitions. 
Applicable codes means 
(a)	Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(b)	Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and 
(c)	Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 of Title 8 after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the Mayor and Council of the City of Thomson, Georgia. 
Municipality means any incorporated city within, this state. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)	Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)	Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located, any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50 year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)	Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)	Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, § 41-2-8 and §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this division adopted under § 41-2-7, § 41-2-8, and §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this division or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 522, § 1, 12-11-03) 
Sec. 5-38. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)	It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)	The Mayor and Council of the City of Thomson appoint or designate the community service department. City fire marshall, city fire chief, city police chief, and his/her designees as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this division. 
(c)	Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the City of Thomson charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause a summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner of the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less that 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)	If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this division, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair alter, or improve a structure may be considered income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 41, of the O.C.G.A. qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction; 
(e)	If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."; 
(f)	If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; 
(g)	The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax, commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)	The lien provide for in subsection (g) of this section of this division section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in McDuffie County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (g) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of McDuffie County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it we re a real property ad valorem tax," using all methods available for collection real property ad valorem tax" including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; provided, however that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the City of Thomson. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(2)	The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering alien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of McDuffie County. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(3)	The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(4)	Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(5)	The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this division. 
(6)	Nothing in this division shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 522, § 1(C), 12-11-03) 
Sec. 5-39. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)	Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)	Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)	Dilapidation; 
(4)	Disrepair; 
(5)	Structural defects; 
(6)	Uncleanliness; and 
(7)	Other additional standards which may from time to time by adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 522, § 1(D), 12-11-03) 
Sec. 5-40. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)	To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)	To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses and to receive evidence; 
(3)	To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)	To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinance; and 
(5)	To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. No. 522, § 1(D), 12-11-03) 
Sec. 5-41. - Service of complaints. 
(a)	Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. In all cases a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)	Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the city; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)	Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5 Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; or 
(3)	Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)	If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)	Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)	In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (f) of this section of this division. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)	In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of the protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)	In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this division, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section of this division, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)	A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)	Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this division on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 522, § 1(F), 12-11-03) 
Chapter 5.1 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 5.1-1—5.1-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VENDORS AND PEDDLERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 553, §§ 1—10, adopted July 11, 2013, was not specifically amendatory. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. II, §§ 5.1-21—5.1-30. 

Sec. 5.1-21. - Vendor's license—When required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person without first obtaining a vendor's license from the City of Thomson: 
(1)	To peddle, vend, sell or offer to sale any goods at public or private sale upon any city street, highway, sidewalk, public place, state highway within the city or land abutting such city and state streets or highways (hereafter "vending" or vend"); or 
(2)	To solicit, take or attempt to take orders for the sale of such goods, including magazines and other printed mater, for future delivery if full payment, whether by cash, check, credit card, debit card or financing is required at the time of solicitation of such goods, or for services to be performed at that time without previous arrangement with such persons being solicited for such services. 
( Ord. No. 553, § 1, 7-11-13 ) 
Sec. 5.1-22. - Peddler's license—When required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person without first obtaining a peddler's license from the City of Thomson: 
(1)	To peddle, vend, sell or offer to sale any goods, wares, merchandise, food and/or beverage items (hereinafter collectively referred to as "goods") from house to house, or by entering upon residential property, within the City of Thomson (hereinafter "peddling" or "to peddle"); or 
(2)	Enter upon residential property to solicit, take or attempt to take orders for the sale of such goods, including magazines and other printed mater, for future delivery if full payment, whether by cash, check, credit card, debit card or financing is required at the time of solicitation of such goods, or for services to be performed at that time without previous arrangement with such persons being solicited for such services. 
( Ord. No. 553, § 1, 7-11-13 ) 
Sec. 5.1-23. - Application for license—Information required. 
An applicant for a vendor's license or peddler's license shall complete and application form provided by the City of Thomson which application shall contain such information as deemed necessary by the city council but at a minimum the following information shall be required: 
(1)	The name, permanent home address, local address if any and business address of the applicant; 
(2)	A physical description of the applicant including age, height, weight, color of their and eyes; 
(3)	Applicant's State of Georgia taxation number; 
(4)	The name and address of the applicant's employer and if applicable the name and address of the person for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited cleared or approve; 
(5)	The length of service of the applicant with said employer; 
(6)	A description of the goods to be peddled, vended, sold, offered for sale or for which orders will be solicited, or of the services to be performed by the applicant; 
(7)	Where applicable, the name and address of the manufacture, publisher distributor or parent company of the goods to be peddled or for which orders will be solicited; 
(8)	The make, model color identification number and state marker number of the vehicle if any to be used by the applicant in the performance of the vending or soliciting activities, whether said vehicle be owned by applicant, his or her employer or any other persons; 
(9)	Two prints of a full face photograph taken not more than 30 days prior to the date of the application of any person who will be vending or peddling with the City of Thomson; 
(10)	Proof of an insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia, protecting the applicant and the City of Thomson from all claims for damages to property and bodily injury including death, which may rise from operations under or in connection with the license in a single limit amount of not less than $1,000,000.00. Such insurance shall name as an additional insured the City of Thomson and shall prove that the policy shall not terminate or be cancelled prior to the expiration date without 30 days' advance written notice to the City of Thomson; 
(11)	A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any offense and if so the nature of the offense and the penalty imposed, if any; and 
(12)	The applicant's fingerprints to be taken by the police department which will remain with said application for a period not to exceed five years. 
( Ord. No. 553, § 1, 7-11-13 ) 
Sec. 5.1-24. - Individual permits required. 
Any and every person wishing to peddle or vend goods within the City of Thomson is required to possess an individual permit. The city will not issue company-wide permits. 
( Ord. No. 553, § 1, 7-11-13 ) 
Sec. 5.1-25. - Denial, revocation or suspension of license. 
A license to peddle or vend may be denied, revoked or suspended for any of the following reasons: 
(1)	Fraud or misrepresentation contained in the application for the license; 
(2)	Fraud or misrepresentation made in the course of carrying on the business of vending or peddling; 
(3)	Conduct of the licensed business in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety, welfare or morals; 
(4)	Conduct which is contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this article; or 
(5)	Conviction of a crime. 
( Ord. No. 553, § 1, 7-11-13 ) 
Sec. 5.1-26. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Yard sales conducted by City of Thomson residents on their own premises; 
(2)	The display of goods by persons having established places of business in the city on the sidewalks or areas adjacent to their places of business if and as permitted by the zoning regulations of the City of Thomson and/or other applicable laws; 
(3)	Sales by farmers and gardeners of the produce of their farms and gardens; 
(4)	The sale, distribution and delivery of milk, teas, coffees, spices, groceries, meats and bakery goods; 
(5)	Sales on approval, conditional sales of merchandise, or the taking of orders for merchandise for future delivery when full payment is not required at the time of solicitation; 
(6)	Sales by sales persons selling foods to retail or wholesale stores for resale; 
(7)	Sales of goods in the manner and in the places described in sections 5.1-21 and 5.1-22 hereof on behalf of an organization, society or association for charitable, religious, patriotic, philanthropic or city purposes or if authorized by the City of Thomson licensees or contractors of such an organization, society or association for such purposes. 
( Ord. No. 553, § 1, 7-11-13 ) 
Sec. 5.1-27. - Vendor's license application requirements. 
At time of submitting an application for vending, the application shall be: 
(1)	Completed and notarized; 
(2)	Submitted with a $25.00 check or such other fee as may be designated from time to time payable to the City of Thomson. This fee is per person for the duration of the event; 
(3)	Submitted with a $65.00 money order payable to City of Thomson or such other fee as may be designated from time to time. This fee is charged by the McDuffie County Sherriff's Department for fingerprint processing; 
(4)	Submitted with proof of an insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia of not less than $1,000,000.00. Such insurance shall name as an additional insured, the City of Thomson; 
(5)	Submitted with two prints of a full face photograph taken no more than 30 days prior to the date of any person who will be vending within the City of Thomson; and 
(6)	Submitted with a valid motor vehicle operator's license or other state issued photo identification. 
( Ord. No. 553, § 1, 7-11-13 ) 
Sec. 5.1-28. - Peddler's license application requirements. 
At the time of submitting an application for peddling, the application shall be: 
(1)	Completed and notarized application; 
(2)	Submitted with a $125.00 check or such other fee as may be designated from time to time payable to City of Thomson; 
(3)	Submitted with a $65.00 money order payable to City of Thomson or such fee as may be charged by the McDuffie County Sherriff's Department for fingerprint processing; 
(4)	Submitted with proof of insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia of not less than $1,000,000.00. Such insurance shall name as an additional insured, the City of Thomson; 
(5)	Submitted with two prints of a full face photograph taken no more than 30 days prior to the date of any person who will be peddling within the City of Thomson; and 
(6)	Submitted with a valid motor vehicle operator's license or other state issued photo identification. 
( Ord. No. 553, § 1, 7-11-13 ) 
Sec. 5.1-29. - Vendors and peddlers licensed separately. 
Vendors and peddlers will be licensed separately than those entities and persons doing business within the City of Thomson who must pay an occupational tax. The fees charged for peddling and vending shall be in lieu of and not in addition to an occupational tax. 
( Ord. No. 553, § 1, 7-11-13 ) 
Sec. 5.1-30. - Penalty for violation of article. 
A violation of this article shall be punishable by the maximum allowed under Chapter 1 of the City of Thomson Code. 
( Ord. No. 553, § 1, 7-11-13 ) 
Chapter 5.5 - CABLE SERVICES AND OTHER TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FRANCHISING[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 487, § I, adopted Nov. 9, 1995, amended the Code by the addition of provisions which have been codified herein at the discretion of the editor within the substantive sections of Ch. 5.5 hereof. 
Cross reference— Occupation Tax Ordinance, Ch. 10; taxation and revenue, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 21. 

ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 5.5-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
Cable services means cable services as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system means any "Cable System" as defined in the Cable Act. 
City means the City of Thomson, Georgia. 
City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable or telecommunications services or both, to inhabitants within the franchise area. 
May is permissive. 
Ordinance means this Ordinance No. 487 and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications services means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial cable, optical fiber, or satellite or microwave transmission, of one or more audio, voice or data signals. Telecommunications services includes both cable services and noncable telecommunications services. 
(Ord. No. 487, § I(1.1), 11-9-95) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 5.5-2—5.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 5.5-21. - Granting authority. 
(a)	No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and no person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications service other than cable services without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)	The city council may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this ordinance, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this ordinance by amendment hereof. 
(c)	The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. 
(d)	Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services. 
(e)	A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city and for all or less than all telecommunications services, and for telecommunications services for all or less than all purposes. 
(f)	The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, governing cable television franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 487, § I(2.1), 11-9-95) 
Sec. 5.5-22. - Franchise applications. 
(a)	Submission of application. Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)	Contents of application. Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)	Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)	A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.	The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.	The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.	The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
d.	A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications or cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable or telecommunications system in the city; 
e.	A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statements; and 
f.	A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system or telecommunication franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable or telecommunication system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof. 
(3)	A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.	A description of the cable services and any other telecommunications services proposed to be provided; 
b.	A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
c.	A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other telecommunications service charges; 
d.	A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
e.	A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable or telecommunications services; and 
f.	A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
(4)	A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and 
(5)	Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law. 
(c)	Non-refundable application fees for new franchises. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(1)	Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)	Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this ordinance, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $3,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Thomson. 
(Ord. No. 487, § I(2.2), 11-9-95) 
Sec. 5.5-23. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 487, § I(2.3), 11-9-95) 
Sec. 5.5-24. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 487, § I(2.4), 11-9-95) 
Sec. 5.5-25. - Evaluation criteria. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(1)	The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)	The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)	The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)	The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to be provided, including the type of telecommunications services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
(5)	The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(6)	Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(Ord. No. 487, § I(2.5), 11-9-95) 
Sec. 5.5-26. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)	The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)	If the city council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider one or more applications, the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)	The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(d)	Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Ord. No. 487, § I(2.6), 11-9-95) 
Sec. 5.5-27. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
(a)	The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)	The term of the franchise; 
(2)	The franchise area and the cable services and other telecommunications services and purposes of such other telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of the franchise; 
(3)	The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)	The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)	The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise; 
(6)	The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee; 
(7)	Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee; 
(8)	The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)	Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)	Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(11)	Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the franchisee by the city; 
(12)	Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)	Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(14)	Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)	Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(16)	Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(17)	Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 487, § I(2.7), 11-9-95) 
Sec. 5.5-28. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 1-10-08) 
Sec. 5.5-29. - Authorized designee. 
The city hereby authorizes (mayor), upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 2, 1-10-08) 
Secs. 5.5-30—5.5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 5.5-51. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this ordinance is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 487, § I(3.1), 11-9-95) 
Sec. 5.5-52. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation and redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this ordinance to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this ordinance or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or franchisee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 487, § I(3.2), 11-9-95) 
Chapter 6 - ELECTIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Election of mayor and councilmen, § 2.03. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Voting and elections, Ga. Const. 1983, art. II; elections generally, O.C.G.A. Title 21; municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Terms of office. 
The terms of office for mayor and councilmen shall begin on the second Thursday in January following their respective election, and shall continue for four years and until their successors are elected and qualified, except as provided in section 2.08 of the city Charter. 
(Ord. No. 442, § I, 12-21-88) 
Charter reference— Terms of office, § 2.04. 
Sec. 6-2. - Opening date. 
The opening date to file notice of candidacy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132(d)(3) for the office of mayor and councilmember of the City of Thomson, Georgia for the general election shall be the last Monday in August immediately preceding the general election. 
(Ord. No. 459, § I, 10-11-90; Ord. No. 560, § I, 1-12-95 ) 
Sec. 6-3. - Closing date. 
The closing date to file notice of candidacy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132(d)(3) for the office of mayor and councilmember of the City of Thomson, Georgia for the general election shall end no later than 4:30 p.m. on the following Friday. 
(Ord. No. 459, § II, 10-11-90; Ord. No. 560, § II, 1-12-95 ) 
Sec. 6-4. - County voter registrar to conduct city elections. 
The City of Thomson authorizes and directs the McDuffie County Voter Registrar to conduct any and all elections held by the City of Thomson from August 10, 1995 forward. 
(Ord. No. 484, 8-10-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 484, adopted Aug. 10, 1995, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as § 6-4. 
Chapter 7 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 8; planning and development, ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70; authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

Sec. 7-1. - Joint organization—Formed. 
The city civil defense organization is merged with and to the county emergency management agency and such organizations shall be known as the Thomson-McDuffie County Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 7-2. - Same—Execution of documents. 
The mayor is authorized to execute such documents as are necessary to perfect the merger of the city and county emergency organization provided such documents are approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 2, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 7-3. - State of emergency curfew. 
(a)	No curfew shall exist in the city except in a state of emergency. The circumstances necessary to declare a state of emergency shall be defined at the discretion of the mayor and council. The mayor or the council, or both, may declare such a state of emergency and impose curfew at any hour they deem necessary; provided however that if the mayor alone declares a state of emergency and imposes a curfew, his action will only be valid for a period of three days unless approved and extended by the council prior to the expiration of the three-day period. 
(b)	A curfew is defined as the hour (time) after which it shall be illegal for any person to be walking, strolling, loitering or on the streets of the city in any like fashion. If such person can show good cause or reason for being upon the streets after the curfew hour, they will not be in violation of this section. It shall be the duty of each law enforcement officer to inquire of curfew violators, prior to making an arrest, his purpose in being upon the streets after the curfew hour. If good cause or reason is given, the officer shall not arrest such person. Good cause or reason is defined as that which a reasonable man would deem as necessitating being upon the streets after the curfew hour. Provided however, that there shall be no cause of action against such law enforcement officers, his supervisors, or the city, for false arrest if he does not consider the violator's cause to be good or sufficient when in fact it is and proceeds to make an arrest. This section shall not apply to persons traveling in or upon motor vehicles on the city's streets. 
(c)	Any person convicted of violation of this section shall be subject to either a fine of not more than $200.00 or a sentence of not more than 60 days in jail or both or any part of either or both at the discretion of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 368, §§ 2—4, 9-14-78) 
Chapter 8 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; emergency management, ch. 7. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(1); The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-2 et seq.; authority to enact ordinances or fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-2 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; blasting standards act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 25-8-1 et seq.; blasting near underground gas pipes and facilities, O.C.G.A. § 25-9-2; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; electronic security systems installed and serviced by counties or municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1—8-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-46 et seq.; personnel, ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-26. - Workers' compensation coverage. 
Volunteer firefighters who are members of the fire department providing services to the residents and taxpayers of the city are hereby extended coverage for workers' compensation in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 1, 9-8-83) 
Sec. 8-27. - Fire protection outside city limits. 
(a)	All industrial or manufacturing firms located outside the city limits, but within the county, which desire fire protection and other services from the city fire department for buildings, property, etc., shall file a registration form provided by the city clerk or the chief of the fire department and pay the corresponding registration fee as set by the mayor and council. 
(b)	Nothing in this section shall imply or allow the furnishing of fire protection to buildings located outside the city limits which are used for or in conjunction with residential purposes. 
(c)	The fire protection outlined in this section shall be limited to such vehicles, persons and other resources as the city may possess for the purpose of fire protection, fire prevention and firefighting at the time such assistance is requested. The city shall in no way be responsible for the failure of the firemen to respond, nor the failure of the fire engine or other vehicles to operate properly, nor the failure of the fire department to answer the call because of another call from a firm outside the city limits at the same time. 
(Ord. No. 369, §§ 2—4, 9-14-78) 
State Law reference— Operation of fire departments within municipalities or counties, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-5; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1 et seq. 
Secs. 8-28—8-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to adopt fire codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4. 

Sec. 8-51. - Adoption. 
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and explosion, that certain code known as the Standard Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by the department of community affairs, being particularly the latest edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which code not less than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the city clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 1, 10-9-80; Ord. No. 464, § 1, 2-13-92) 
Sec. 8-52. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken or shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the chief of the fire department shall upon conviction be punished in accordance with section 1-14. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each day that the prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 9, 10-9-80) 
Sec. 8-53. - Definitions. 
(a)	Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, it shall be held to mean the City of Thomson. 
(b)	Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the city attorney. 
(c)	Wherever the term "chief of the bureau of fire prevention" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the chief of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 3, 10-9-80) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-54. - Duties of the chief of the fire department. 
(a)	The fire department code shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. 
(b)	The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(c)	A report of prevention activities shall be made annually and transmitted to the city council; it shall contain all proceedings under this article, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein. The chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to the code adopted by this article which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 2, 10-9-80) 
Sec. 8-55. - Storage of explosives, blasting agents. 
The limits referred to in section 12.5b of the fire prevention code adopted in this article, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as the city. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 4, 10-9-80) 
Sec. 8-56. - Installation of aboveground tanks. 
The limits as referred to in section 16.22 of the fire prevention code adopted by this article, in which installation of outside aboveground tanks are prohibited, are hereby established as the city. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 5, 10-9-80) 
Sec. 8-57. - Modifications. 
The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 6, 10-9-80) 
Sec. 8-58. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code adopted by this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 7, 10-9-80) 
Sec. 8-59. - New materials, processes or occupancies requiring permits. 
The city council and the chief of the fire department shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code adopted by this article. The chief of the fire department shall post list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 8, 10-9-80) 
Chapter 8.5 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 547, adopted Sept. 9, 2010, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included as §§ 8.5-1—8.5-61. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 8.5-1. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council of the City of Thomson, Georgia do hereby ordain as follows. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of the City of Thomson, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health; 
(2)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)	To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-5. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request by an aggrieved party to a higher authority for a review of a decision or action by the director for the administration of the provisions of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 8.5-12. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Board means the City of Thomson Planning Commission Board. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Director means the Director of the McDuffie County Planning Commission or his/her assignee or agent. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 29, 2010. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of this chapter. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 29, 2010 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after the effective date of this chapter [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after the effective date of this chapter. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its "before damaged condition" would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Secs. 8.5-6—8.5-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8.5-11. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Thomson, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-12. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 29, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 29, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for McDuffie County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the McDuffie County Planning Commission. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-13. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-14. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-15. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-16. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. The interpretation of the provisions of this chapter, or any words or phrases therein, shall be vested to the director as defined herein. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-17. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Thomson or the office of the McDuffie County Planning Commission or any officer, employee, agent, or assignee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter, associated documentation, or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-18. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Thomson from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Secs. 8.5-19—18.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8.5-31. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The director, as defined herein, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-32. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the director on forms furnished by the planning commission prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
In addition to the documentation requirements referenced above, the applicant shall remit any administrative cost as may be assessed. Such administrative costs shall be in addition to any building permit fees as are normally assessed. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage. 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 8.5-42(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the director an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The director shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-33. - Duties and responsibilities of director. 
Duties of the director shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. Where the health and safety of the occupant, or the integrity of any structure is/may be in question, the director shall cause to remedy same. 
(4)	When base flood elevation (BFE) data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 8.5-12, then the director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article IV. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 8.5-32(2). 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 8.5-32(2). 
(7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the director shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 8.5-32(1)(c) and 8.5-42(2) or 8.5-44(2). 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the director shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the McDuffie County Planning Commission, and shall be open for public inspection. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Secs. 8.5-34—8.5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 8.5-41. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)	Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the lowest interior grade or finished floor elevation; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.	So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-42. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data is available or established, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8.5-41(4), "elevated buildings." 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30 1 , AE 1 , or AH 2 zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 8.5-33(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data is available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, such structure must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches above the highest adjacent grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. section 8.5-41(6) above.) 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and 
2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); 
(or) 
3.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of section 8.5-42(3)(a)—(c), above. 
(4)	Floodway . Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 8.5-12, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to floodwater velocity, debris, or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if section 8.5-42(4)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article IV. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
  1  A zones with BFE's. 
  2  Shallow flood zones—BFE's may be indicated. 
Sec. 8.5-43. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8.5-12, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 8.5-12, then the director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article IV. 
[If the above data is not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2 and 3) shall apply:] 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(and) 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site or such higher elevation as the director shall establish based upon field inspection and conditions. (NOTE: The lowest floor shall be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study 1 has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8.5-41(4), "elevated buildings." 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
  1  Re: See Ga. DNR—Floodplain Management "Quick Guide" reference publication, page 21. 
Sec. 8.5-44. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8.5-12, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 8.5-12. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-45. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 8.5-12 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8.5-41(4), "elevated buildings." 
The director shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 8.5-32(1)(c) and (2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-46. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, and are within established areas of special flood hazard, base flood elevation data shall be provided for such subdivisions and all other proposed developments, including manufactured home parks and mobile home subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Sec. 8.5-47. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Secs. 8.5-48—8.5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 8.5-61. - Procedures generally. 
(a)	The City of Thomson Planning Commission Board as appointed by the mayor and council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, interpretation or determination is made by the director in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal such decision to the mayor and council; and thereafter to the Superior Court of McDuffie County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)	In the review and granting of a variance, the board shall consider the following: 
(1)	A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.	A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)	The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any approved variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 547, 9-9-10 ) 
Chapter 9 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1—9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - THOMSON-McDUFFIE COUNTY HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-101 et seq. 

Sec. 9-26. - Establishment. 
There is hereby created a human relations commission for the city and the county, to be called the "Thomson-McDuffie County Human Relations Commission." 
(Ord. No. 453, § 1, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-27. - Composition. 
The commission shall be composed of 12 members with equal representation from all ethnic segments of the city and county, ten of which shall be bona fide adult residents of the city and/or county, and two of which shall be student residents of the city and/or county, with all members appointed by the City Council of Thomson and the Board of Commissioners of McDuffie County, with the advice of the human relations commission. Its membership shall represent a cross section of the community from the following interests or groups: industry, government, health, housing, labor, commerce, agriculture, law enforcement, ministry, etc. The chairman of the commission shall not vote unless it is necessary to break a tie vote. The mayor of the city and the chairman of the board of county commissioners or their designees, shall be ex-officio nonvoting members of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 2, 1-11-90; Ord. No. 505, § 2, 2-10-00) 
Sec. 9-28. - Terms of office. 
Initial appointments to the human relations commission shall be for staggered terms. Following the expiration of the initial terms of office, all other appointments shall be for a period of four years, except in the event of death or resignation of any member, when the successor shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired term for which such member has been appointed, and provided the ethnic balance is maintained. All members shall continue in office until their successors shall have been appointed and there shall be no limit to terms of office. Any student member shall serve a term to expire upon graduation from high school. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 3, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-29. - Quorum. 
Seven members of said commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 11, 1-11-90; Ord. No. 505, § 4, 2-10-00) 
Sec. 9-30. - Officers. 
The human relations commission shall elect a chairman and such other officers as it deems necessary from its members. Such officers shall serve in their respective offices for a term of one year or until their successors shall be appointed. They may be reelected. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 4, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-31. - Compensation. 
All members of the human relations commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 5, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-32. - Executive directors and staff. 
The appointment of the executive directors of the commission shall be made by the City Council of Thomson and the Board of Commissioners of McDuffie County, with the advice of the human relations commission. The executive directors shall be persons with training and/or experience in intergroup and interracial relations. Initially this position shall be in total part-time, 20 hours per week until a greater time commitment is warranted. He shall coordinate the activities of the commission and staff. He may, with the approval of the commission and within the budget of the commission, employ such staff as needed. The compensation, if any, of the executive directors and other staff shall be as provided, in the budget approved by the city council and board of county commissioners; provided, however, that the termination of the executive director or the employment of new executive director shall receive the concurrence of the city council and the board of county commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 6, 1-11-90; Ord. No. 505, § 3, 2-10-00) 
Sec. 9-33. - Office space and facilities. 
The city council and the board of county commissioners are authorized to secure adequate office space and facilities for the commission. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 7, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-34. - Budget and finance. 
The human relations commission shall annually adopt the budget to be submitted for approval to the city council and the board of county commissioners. The commission shall be authorized to contract with the state and federal agencies, but such contracts must first be approved by the city council and county commission. All expenditures of the commission shall be limited to those as specified by the budget. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 8, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-35. - Inspection and audit of financial records. 
The financial records of the human relations commission shall be audited annually by a qualified external auditor. Such audit, when completed, shall be submitted to the commission for approval and a copy shall be provided to the internal auditor of the city council and the board of county commissioners. All financial records of the commission shall be open for inspection by the county grand jury. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 9, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-36. - Meetings. 
The human relations commission shall set forth the time, place, and frequency of its meetings to effectuate the purpose of this article and such meetings shall be open to the public. The commission reserves the right to deliberation in closed session, consistent with state law. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 10, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-37. - Rules and by-laws. 
The human relations commission shall adopt such rules as it deems expedient for the conduct of its business. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 12, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-38. - Reports. 
The human relations commission shall report in writing its activities to the city council and the board of county commissioners annually and make such other reports from time to time, or after the completion of any hearing as it may determine necessary, setting forth the facts found by it and its recommendations in the furtherance of its objectives. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 13, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-39. - Duties and powers. 
It shall be the duty of the human relations commission to: 
(1)	Seek fair and equal treatment under the law for all citizens. 
(2)	Attempt to act as conciliator in controversies involving human relations. 
(3)	Promote mutual understanding, tolerance, and respect among all economic, racial, religious and nationality groups and work to discourage and prevent discriminatory practices against any such groups. 
(4)	Study the problems of group relationships and promote amiable relations among racial and cultural groups and strive to eliminate whatever sources of interracial friction may exist. 
(5)	Take appropriate steps by conference and education to deal with conditions that strain relationships. 
(6)	Aid in the coordination of the activities of private organizations concerned with these relationships. 
(7)	Make such investigations, studies, and surveys; and conduct such public hearings and make such recommendations to the city council and the board of county commissioners as in its judgment will effectuate the policy of this article and as are necessary for the performance of its duties. 
(8)	Maintain contacts with groups concerned with interracial and intercultural understanding. 
(9)	Serve as a source of accurate and reliable data on the problems in the above mentioned fields. 
(10)	Work to remove inequalities, if any, which pertain to minority groups' status such as on problems of housing, recreation, education, law enforcement, employment, vocational guidance and related matters. 
(11)	Investigate and study complaints, problems and specific situations arising between groups or individuals which result or may result in tensions, discrimination or prejudice in the county on account of race, color, religion, national origin, handicap or age. 
(12)	Receive and investigate complaints alleging discrimination in employment and public accommodations because of race, religion, color, sex, national origin, handicap or age. 
(13)	Endeavor by education to induce public and private employers labor and professional organizations and employment agencies to institute nondiscriminatory practices in employment, promotion, wages, working conditions, layoffs and job opportunities. 
(14)	Endeavor by education to engender respect for law and order, lawful authority and amenability to law enforcement; to desire to distinguish between peaceful dissent and illegal disorder and violence; and a sense of individual responsibility and respect for each other without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or age. 
(15)	Endeavor by education to increase racial pride without resentment toward other races, and to point out that the manifestations of racial hatred and acts of lawlessness directed toward other races generate and intensify counteracting racial prejudice and retaliatory racial discrimination. 
(16)	Disseminate information that no group or individual is entitled to special privileges, treatment, protection or immunity by reason of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, social or economic condition, handicap or age, but that all have equal responsibility to strive for self-advancement and improvement, civic good and community welfare and best interests. 
(17)	Secure the furnishings of equal services to all residents, and where the need is greater in meeting that need with additional services. 
(18)	Train city and county employees to use methods of dealing with intergroup relations which develop respect for equal rights and which result in equal treatment without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age or handicap. 
(19)	Assist in improving the equality of opportunity for employment and advancement in the city and county government. 
(20)	Adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind suitable rules and procedures to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(21)	Recommend to the city council and the board of county commissioners such additional ordinances as will aid in carrying out the purpose of this article. 
(22)	Advise, consult with, and make recommendations to the city council and the board of county commissioners, agencies and officials, for the betterment of intergroup relationships and ways and means of discouraging and combatting prejudice, intolerance and bigotry in all groups and in their relations with one another. 
(23)	Discover practices and policies calculated to create conflicts, tensions, unfair or unjust discrimination which would be deemed detrimental to the community's best interests and recommend ways and means for their elimination. 
(24)	Inform and warn the public of false and sinister propaganda subversive to public interest and search out and reveal sources of inflammatory, lewd, vulgar and profane racial propaganda. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 14, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-40. - Procedures. 
(a)	Any person alleging a practice contrary to this article must file a written complaint with the human relations commission or its designated representative no later than 180 days after the alleged practice occurred. 
(b)	Upon receipt of a complaint, the commission shall be certain that all avenues of reconciliation have been expired at the source of the conflict. If warranted, it shall serve a copy of the complaint on the respondent within ten days of receipt thereof and shall conduct an investigation of the complaint. 
(c)	If the commission determines after such investigation that there is reasonable cause to believe the charge is true, the commission shall endeavor to eliminate any such alleged practice by informal and voluntary methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion. During such informal endeavors, the commission may seek from the respondent such relief as may be appropriate. 
(d)	All investigations, conferences and negotiations for conciliation pursuant to this article shall be confidential. Further, at no time shall the results of any conciliation be made public without the expressed written consent of the parties involved. 
(e)	If within ten days after the commission has determined that conciliation efforts have failed, it shall so notify the parties in writing, and the respondent may request a hearing before the commission within ten days of the receipt of such notice. 
(1)	If the commission determines that the complaint as alleged is not true, it shall dismiss the complaint and notify the parties in writing of such determination. Within ten days of receipt of such notice of dismissal, the complainant may request a hearing from the commission. 
(2)	A request for a hearing shall be granted expeditiously. 
(3)	No hearing may be had from a finding and determination of a lack of jurisdiction. 
(4)	At such hearing, the commission may affirm or set aside its findings as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, in whole or in part. 
(f)	If the commission determines after a hearing that any respondent has committed an unlawful act prohibited by this article, and the respondent refuses to comply with an order of the commission within 60 days after notification of such final disposition, or if the respondent fails to request a hearing before the commission within ten days after receipt of notice of failure of conciliation, the commission may refer the complainant to EEOC or other agency for appropriate legal action. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 16, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-41. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to religious corporations, religious associations, religious educational institutions or religious societies with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the carrying on by such corporations, associations, educational institutions or societies of its activities. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 17, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-42. - Cooperation. 
The human relations commission shall invite and enlist the cooperation of all ethnic, racial, religious groups and community organizations in carrying on its work and act as a coordinating agency among them and such other groups in the establishment and maintenance of education programs with a view to bringing about better intergroup and interracial relationships necessary or desirable to carry out specific programs designed to lessen the tensions or improve understanding. The commission shall also cooperate with the mayor, city council, all other city agencies, the board chairman, board of county commissioners, all other county agencies, all state and federal agencies, citizens, citizens' organizations, the board of education, parochial and private schools in formulating and developing courses in education to stimulate the interest of the entire population in the improvement of services wherever such cooperation is appropriate in effectuating the purposes of this article and in accomplishing the objectives of the commission to promote better human relations. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 18, 1-11-90) 
Sec. 9-43. - Legal services. 
Legal representation, advice and review of contracts and other records shall be provided by the city and the county attorneys. Obtaining legal representation other than from the city or county attorney shall require the written approval of the city council and board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 19, 1-11-90) 
Chapter 10 - OCCUPATION TAX ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 482, adopted Dec. 19, 1994, deleted former Ch. 10, relative to licenses and business regulations, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Ch. 10 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Ch. 10 derived from Ord. No. 125, 2-10-25; Ord. No. 164, 5-28-34; Ord. No. 175, 6-13-38; Ord. No. 260, 12-12-57; Ord. No. 347, 2-23-76; Ord. No. 366, 9-14-78; Ord. No. 367, 9-14-78; Ord. No. 370, 9-14-78; Ord. No. 390, 1-5-81; Ord. No. 477, 9-9-93. 
Charter reference— Authority to levy and collect license fees and taxes on occupations, trades and professions, § 1.02(b). 
Cross reference— Taxation and revenue, ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Power of taxation, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; certain persons prohibited from investigating business for issuance of county or municipal license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9; levy of license, occupation or professional tax by counties and municipalities only at place of principal office, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 

Sec. 10-1. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings with the city. 
(a)	For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the City of Thomson, Georgia, whether with a location in the City of Thomson, or a location in Georgia with no location in the City of Thomson, or in case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the City of Thomson, Georgia. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the City of Thomson, Georgia, such business tax certificate shall be shown to the chief of police or any police officer of the City of Thomson, Georgia upon his or their request. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-2. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)	Whenever the term "City of Thomson" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean "Thomson, Georgia"; whenever the term "city" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean "Thomson, Georgia." 
(b)	As used in this chapter, the term: 
(1)	Location of office shall not include a temporary worksite which serves a single customer or project. 
(2)	Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
(3)	Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by Paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(4)	Person wherever used in this chapter shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships or any other form of business organization. 
(5)	Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
(6)	Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-3. - Regulatory fee structure. 
A regulatory fee will only be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-4. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)	An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the City of Thomson, Georgia and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
(1)	The number of employees of the business or practitioner employed during the fourth quarter of the calendar year. The fractional working times of part-time employees are combined and rounded to provide a more accurate estimate of full-time equivalent employees. The owner and any family members working for the business, whether paid or not, should be included in this count. 
(b)	Occupation tax schedule. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation will be developed and updated from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(c)	(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)	The city shall not require an occupation tax from those real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the city and sell property inside the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-5. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state of Georgia if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in Thomson and the business or practitioner: 
(1)	Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of Thomson for the purpose of soliciting business or serving clients; or 
(2)	Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of Thomson. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-6. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-7. - The number of businesses considered operating in Thomson. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-8. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), paragraphs (1) through (18). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)	The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 10-4. 
(2)	A fee per practitioner will be developed and updated from time to time by the mayor and city council for those licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)	This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1st of each year. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-9. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentality's of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-10. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax that only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 to § 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-11. - When tax due and payable, effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)	Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable on January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by March 31 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in section 10-17 of this chapter. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in Thomson in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the business registration clerk and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in Thomson, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling subject to this chapter without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon the conviction of the city judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, either or both in the discretion of the city judge. 
(b)	In addition to the above remedies, the chief of police may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-12. - Exemption on grounds that business operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this chapter shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 75 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-13. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)	Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued 
(b)	Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-14. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-15. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this chapter shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this chapter, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in Thomson after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in Thomson, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-16. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)	Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before January 31 of each year. Every person commencing business in Thomson after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in Thomson any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 10-17. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)	The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the business registration clerk, and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in Thomson, any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94; Ord. No. 515, § 1, 9-12-02) 
Sec. 10-17. - Penalty of chapter violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction before the city judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 in the discretion of the city judge. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94; Ord. No. 498, 4-9-98) 
Sec. 10-18. - Businesses not covered by this chapter. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by act of local law. 
(1)	Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)	Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)	Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)	Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)	Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by § 48-5-356. 
(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-19. - When occupation tax due and payable. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the said city, at City Hall, on January 1 each year and delinquent if not paid on or before January 31 each year. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94; Ord. No. 515, § 1, 9-12-02) 
Sec. 10-20. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of Thomson in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-21. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the number of employees of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and each different line of business will have the number of employees of that line of business identified on a form to be furnished by business registration clerk. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-22. - Amendment, repeal of provisions. 
This chapter shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-23. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by council. 
This chapter shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions hereto relating to any of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-24. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the mayor and council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-25. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this chapter between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-26. - Severability. 
If any section, provision or clause of any part of this chapter shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this chapter as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to affect the portions of this chapter not so held to be invalid, or the application of this chapter to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. lt is hereby declared as the intent that this chapter would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-27. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter, and not preserved hereby, be, and the same are, hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 10-28. - Effective date. 
The effective date of this chapter [Ordinance No. 482] shall be January 1, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 482, 12-19-94) 
Chapter 11 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, § 16-111 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, ch. 18; parades and demonstrations, § 18-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1—11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION 

Sec. 11-26. - Uniform rules adopted. 
Those sections of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-393 and 40-6-394, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(Ord. No. 371, § 1, 9-14-78) 
Sec. 11-27. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 371, § 2, 9-14-78) 
Sec. 11-28. - Operation of trucks, buses restricted. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any trucks or buses to be driven upon any of the streets of the city other than those streets which have been designated by the state highway department as state highways. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to trucks which have their cargoes loaded or unloaded within the city. This section is intended to apply to through trucks whose cargoes are loaded or unloaded at any point outside the city. 
(c)	This section shall not apply to trucks of the type known as "pickup" trucks. 
(d)	This section shall apply to all buses which are licensed to carry passengers by the public service commission of the state, by the Interstate Commerce Commission or by the public service commission of any other state. 
(e)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to any streets which, for any reason, are used temporarily as a detour or bypass because of wrecks, construction, repairs or other cause when the highways are temporarily blocked. 
(f)	Upon conviction of violation of this section in the municipal court the driver of such bus or truck shall be subject to punishment in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 282, §§ 1—6, 12-9-65) 
Sec. 11-29. - Speed limits. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183 there are established within the city certain speed zones a schedule of which is on file and available in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 465, § 1, 5-14-92; Ord. No. 468, 11-12-92; Ord. No. 486, 10-12-95) 
Secs. 11-30—11-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-37(a)(1). 

Sec. 11-51. - General restriction. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to stop an automobile or other vehicle in the streets of the city at any place other than a regular parking place. 
(b)	Any person violating the provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 2, 3-13-34) 
Chapter 12 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitations on home rule powers of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Spitting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate upon any paved sidewalk or street in the city. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 32, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 12-2. - Weed control. 
(a)	Generally. It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any lot, area, or place located within the city to permit any weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthy growths to obtain a height exceeding ten inches on such property under such circumstances that the grass or weeds may be breeding places for insects, rodents, or reptiles or is a fire hazard. 
(b)	Enforcement. If the person responsible for the conditions named in subsection (a) above has not acted to correct the violation within two weeks after notice to him by the city manager, the city manager or his representative may enter upon the premises where the violation occurs and correct the problem, and the city shall assess costs incurred by it, and this shall be a charge against the person responsible, and shall be a lien against the property. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 25, 1-8-81) 
Charter reference— Authority to define and abate nuisances, § 1.02(l). 
Sec. 12-3. - Abandoned shopping carts. 
(a)	For this section, "shopping cart" means those pushcarts of the type which are commonly provided by grocery stores, drug stores, or other merchant stores or markets for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets and incidentally from the store to a place outside the store. (See O.C.G.A. § 16-8-21(a). 
(b)	All stores within the Thomson City Limits, which provide shopping carts for patrons must post notice of O.C.G.A. § 16-8-21 in a prominent place near the entrances and exits of the store. When possible each store should post signs on each cart that includes the store name and notification to patrons that it is illegal to remove shopping carts from the store premises. 
(c)	Each and every store should implement physical measures to prevent cart removal from the store's premises. Such physical measures may include bollards, security guards, security fencing, warning signs, cart retrieval companies, or any other measures approved by the City of Thomson. 
(d)	Within 24 hours of retrieving an abandoned shopping cart, the City of Thomson will notify the owner. The shopping cart's owner has seven business days to retrieve the cart(s). The City of Thomson will charge the shopping cart's owner for retrieval and notification, the amount of which is to be decided and periodically reviewed by the Thomson City Council. For any shopping cart that is not retrieved within seven business days of notification, the shopping cart owner will be charged an additional storage fee to be determined by the Thomson City Council per shopping cart. Any cart that is not retrieved within 30 days of notification will be sold by the City of Thomson and the proceeds of the sale shall be retained by the city as administrative and storage costs. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for an individual to possess or to be in control of a shopping cart anywhere except the storeowner's premises. 
(f)	It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a shopping cart upon any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or parking lot, other than a parking lot on the premises of the owner. 
(g)	It shall be unlawful to abandon a shopping cart on the property of another. 
(h)	It shall be unlawful for any individual to permit the placement or storage of a shopping cart upon that person's property. 
(i)	Any individual who finds or discovers an abandoned shopping cart upon his property shall notify the storeowner of the shopping cart immediately disclosing the shopping cart's location. If the shopping cart is not claimed by the owner within 24 hours of the property owner's notification, the property owner shall notify the City of Thomson of the shopping cart's whereabouts. 
(j)	Failure to comply with subsections (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), or (j) of this section shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 523, 4-8-04) 
Secs. 12-4—12-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 476, adopted June 10, 1993, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. II, §§ 12-51—12-53. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 12-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
City building means any building or any portion of any building owned or leased to the city and used for governmental purposes. 
Public meeting means all meetings of the city open to the public, including meetings of the city council and other city boards. 
(Ord. No. 476, § I, 6-10-93) 
Sec. 12-52. - Non-smoking areas and smoke free meetings. 
All city buildings are declared to be non-smoking areas and all public meetings are declared to be smoke free meetings. 
(Ord. No. 476, § II, 6-10-93) 
Sec. 12-53. - Signs. 
No smoking signs shall be immediately placed in each and every building heretofore subscribed. 
(Ord. No. 476, § III, 6-10-93) 
Sec. 12-54. - Smoking prohibited—Thomson-McDuffie Government Center and McDuffie County Historic Courthouse. 
(a)	Definitions. "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning, holding, or carrying any lighted or heated pipe, cigar, cigarette, or other lighted or heated tobacco product in any manner or form. "Smoking" also includes the use of an e-cigarette which creates a vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing prohibition of smoking. 
(b)	Prohibition of smoking. Smoking shall be prohibited within the Thomson-McDuffie Government Center located at 210 Railroad Street, Thomson, Georgia and at the McDuffie County Historic Courthouse located at 337 Main Street, Thomson, Georgia, including all levels, sections, rooms, hallways, corridors, and any other areas located within the courthouses and any annexes; and upon the entirety of real property upon which government center/courthouse(s) are located and this prohibition of smoking shall be effective during all hours of the day, including regular and after-business hours. 
(c)	Posting of signs. Signs providing notice to employees and the public at large that smoking is prohibited on the premises shall be posted at each entrance to the McDuffie County Courthouses and any annexes thereto at each sidewalk entering the property and each automobile entrance into the property; and, notwithstanding the provisions of this section, smoking is prohibited on said property and within said buildings, whether posted or not. Further, all ashtrays shall be removed from all areas in and around the McDuffie County Courthouses. 
(d)	Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights. No administrator, supervisor, or official of the City of Thomson government shall discharge, refuse to hire, or retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, citizen, or any other person who exercises any rights afforded by this section or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this section and, an employee, citizen, or other person who enters the McDuffie County Courthouse properties, where smoking is prohibited, does not surrender his or her rights as a nonsmoker and retains the right to file a complaint in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section. 
(e)	Enforcement and penalty. This section shall be enforced in the Municipal Court of the City of Thomson; and any person who violates any provision of this section may be found guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00. Further, each day a violation of this section occurs shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 549, §§ I—V, 8-11-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 549, §§ I—V, adopted Aug. 11, 2011, was not specifically amendatory. These provisions have been included as § 12-54 at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 12-55—12-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CEMETERY RULES AND REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 480, adopted Dec. 8, 1994, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. III, §§ 12-71—12-79. 

Sec. 12-71. - Purpose. 
The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted by the Council of the City of Thomson as the rules and regulations of West View Cemetery, and all owners and visitors within the cemetery are subject to said rules and regulations, and subject further to such other additional rules and regulations, amendments or alterations as shall be adopted by the city council from time to time; and the reference to such rules and regulations in instruments conveying such rights, shall have the same force and effect as if same were set forth in full herein. 
(Ord. No. 480, 12-8-94; Ord. No. 501, 9-10-98) 
Sec. 12-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cemetery or municipal cemetery means West View Cemetery and additions thereto, or any other cemetery which may be established by the city. 
Crypt means above ground construction of a grave site using first quality granite or marble for purpose of interment. 
Department means the Department of Streets and Sanitation of the City of Thomson. 
Lot means a surveyed plat that includes sufficient space to inter not more than two persons for burial. 
Marker means a small individual memorial placed at either the head or foot of a grave. This is sometimes referred to as a headstone or footstone. 
Memorial is a collective term referring to commemoration of the dead by the use of a marker or a monument. 
Monument means a large memorial for use on family lots and commonly inscribed only with the family name. 
Mound means an elevation formed of earth, sand, stones, etc. over a grave. 
Rules means the rules and regulations as may be from time to time adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Thomson. 
Superintendent means the Superintendent of the Streets and Sanitation Department of the City of Thomson. 
(Ord. No. 480, 12-8-94; Ord. No. 501, 9-10-98) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-73. - Purchase and conveyance of lots. 
(a)	Lot valuation. The city council shall place a value on all unsold lots in West View Cemetery and shall record such valuations in an official rate plan to be kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b)	Method of purchase. Any person desiring to purchase a particular lot or lots, for the purpose for which it is intended, shall be permitted to do so upon payment in full of the price affixed according to the rules and regulations that may be established. Burial lots shall be sold only in multiples of two. Not more than two persons shall be interred for burial on each lot. 
(c)	Manner of conveying. Conveyances of burial lots shall be executed in the name of the city by the mayor and have affixed thereto the seal of the city. Such conveyance shall not convey fee simple title, but shall convey to the purchaser of the burial site an easement for the exclusive right of interment and sepulcher in such lots; and by reference therein made, shall convey said lots subject to all of the provisions of this article. 
(d)	Recordation of deed. At the time the city conveys any burial lots, the city clerk, in addition to collecting the purchase price thereof, shall collect from the purchaser an amount sufficient to have such conveyance recorded in the office of the Clerk of McDuffie County Superior Court, and shall have such conveyance recorded before delivery thereof to the purchaser. No sale or transfer of any such burial lots by any purchaser or those claiming under him, shall be valid unless approved in writing by the city or until the deed of transfer and such written approval are recorded in the office of the Clerk of McDuffie County Superior Court. 
(e)	Records of ownership. The city clerk's office shall keep full and complete records of the ownership of all lot easements in the municipal cemetery, of the burial capacity of each lot, of the location of each grave, of the names and ages of the persons buried in each grave that has been or shall hereafter be used, and of the date of burial of each. 
(f)	Sale or transfer by owner. Owners of lots shall not be permitted to sell or transfer lots without the written consent of the city, and no lots may be acquired solely for resale. In the event that a purchaser desires to sell such lots, he must first offer, in writing, the same to the city at the original purchase price and the city shall have 30 days from the receipt of such offer in which to purchase the lot. In the event the city does not purchase the lot in 30 days, the owner shall be free to sell the same to any buyer he may select under terms, conditions, and prices decided between them. No sign indicating that a lot or vault is "For Sale" will be permitted in the grounds. 
(Ord. No. 480, 12-8-94; Ord. No. 501, 9-10-98) 
Sec. 12-74. - Rules of interment. 
No deceased person shall be interred in the municipal cemetery until the city has determined: 
(1)	The lot in which burial is to be made has been fully paid for; and 
(2)	That the person arranging for such burial has the right to use such lot; and 
(3)	That such lot is not used beyond its capacity (two graves per lot); and 
(4)	That proper record is made of the name and age of the deceased person; and the exact location of the grave. 
The funeral home in charge will arrange for the opening and closing of the grave site only after direct coordination with the city clerk's office. A vault or burial liner in which the casket is placed is required without exception. All graves must be constructed to sufficient depth so as to allow for not less than 12 inches of soil to be placed on top of the vault or burial liner up to ground level. The replacement of layer of grass sod is also required, and any excess soil will be promptly (same day) completely removed from the grounds of West View Cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 480, 12-8-94; Ord. No. 501, 9-10-98) 
Sec. 12-75. - Care of lots. 
The city shall provide generalized care of the walks, drives, and common areas of the cemetery, and shall provide reasonable specialized care for the burial lots to the extent practicable but such care shall not include maintenance of memorials. 
(Ord. No. 480, 12-8-94; Ord. No. 501, 9-10-98) 
Sec. 12-76. - Restrictions on use. 
(a)	Enclosures. No coping, curbing, fencing, or enclosure of any sort shall be erected on, in, or around any burial lot unless the plans thereof are approved in writing in advance by the city council. The city reserves the right to erect curbing along walkways or driveways. 
(b)	Plantings. The planting of flowers and shrubs or any other effort to improve or beautify any lot within the cemetery shall be done only after the plans for such work are submitted to and approved by the city council. The city reserves the right to enter upon any lot and remove any trees, flowers, or shrubs that they might decide detrimental, unsightly, or inconvenient. Should the roots or branches of any tree or shrub become detrimental to any adjacent lot owner, unsightly or inconvenient to passengers, the same can be removed at the pleasure of the city council. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the decoration or adornment of any grave site with potted or cut flowers or plants. 
(c)	Mounds. No grave mounds will be permitted in West View Cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 480, 12-8-94; Ord. No. 501, 9-10-98) 
Sec. 12-77. - Memorials. 
(a)	Foundations for memorials or monuments must be constructed by the owner or monument installer hired by the owner and no material other than mortar or cement shall be used so that the memorial, gravestone, or monument has a firm and secure foundation preventing the same from falling, sinking, or leaning, and shall not exceed 42 inches in height on the width of two connecting gravesites. 
(b)	Materials other than bronze, first quality granite or marble will not be permitted on lots except that temporary markers will be allowed for not more than 90 days. Lettering, appropriate ornaments, or plaques of bronze or aluminum shall be acceptable. 
(c)	Owners of lots shall have the right to erect proper stones or monuments marking the burial site, except that no slab shall be set except in a horizontal position and flush with the ground. 
(d)	The city shall not be financially responsible for any loss or damage to any memorial caused by thieves or by windstorms or any other act of God or the common enemy. 
(e)	Crypts: Above ground crypts will be restricted to curbside burial lots only to facilitate related heavy equipment operations and to prevent damage to other grave sites in West View Cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 480, 12-8-94; Ord. No. 501, 9-10-98; Ord. No. 558, 9-11-15 ) 
Sec. 12-78. - Conduct of visitors in the cemetery. 
No person shall: 
(a)	Enter or remain within the cemetery between sundown and sunrise. 
(b)	Enter or depart from the cemetery except through an established gate. 
(c)	Carry into or consume within the cemetery any intoxicating beverages. 
(d)	Cut, remove, or injure any growing flowers, plants, shrubs, or trees in the cemetery. 
(e)	Deface, disturb, injure, or mark or write upon any memorial, fence, or structure in the cemetery. 
(f)	Trespass upon, damage, disturb, or desecrate any grave or lot. 
(g)	Deposit litter, trash, or debris within the cemetery except in receptacles which may be provided for that purpose. 
(h)	Permit any dog or other domestic animal to walk with a leash or run loose in the cemetery. 
(i)	Take or fire any firearm or explosive within the cemetery except for the observance of memorial services, or in the conduct of burial services in which a fired salute is a part. 
(j)	Hold or participate in any meeting, parade, exhibition, recreational activity, or any other use of cemetery grounds and facilities which is not in keeping with the commemoration of the dead. 
(k)	Park, or cause to remain parked, any vehicle within the cemetery unless in attendance at burial services or otherwise be engaged in activities which call for presence within the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 480, 12-8-94; Ord. No. 501, 9-10-98) 
Sec. 12-79. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14 of the City of Thomson Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 480, 12-8-94; Ord. No. 501, 9-10-98) 
Secs. 12-80—12-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 12-101. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 12-102. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 12-103. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Thomson. 
Covered account means (i) An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 12-104. - Findings. 
(a)	The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)	Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer and water services. 
(c)	The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: Sanitation services. 
(d)	The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts, have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)	The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)	The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)	Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)	Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)	Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)	Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment; 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 12-105. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)	As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer in the form of a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer, or for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such applicant may also be required to provide any information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)	Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 12-106. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)	Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)	Such password(s) shall be changed by the director of the department providing the service for which the covered account is created, or by the director of information technology on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)	Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)	Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 12-107. - Credit card payments. 
(a)	In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)	All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)	Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 12-108. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)	Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.	A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.	A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.	A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.	Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
i.	A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
ii.	An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
iii.	A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
iv.	An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)	Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.	Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.	Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.	An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)	Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.	Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.	The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.	The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.	Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.	Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.	Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.	The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.	The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.	The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.	Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.	The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)	Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.	Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account; 
b.	A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
1.	The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.	An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.	Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.	A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.	An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors. 
e.	Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.	The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.	The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.	The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)	Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 12-109. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)	In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to their department head. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the department head, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the department head in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by department head: 
(1)	Contact the customer; 
(2)	Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.	Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.	Close the account; 
(3)	Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)	Notify a debt collector within twenty four hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)	Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)	In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the department head. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the department head, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the department head in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the department head: 
(1)	Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)	Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)	Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 12-110. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)	The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)	Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)	Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)	Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)	Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 12-111. - Program administration. 
The department head is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)	The department head will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.	The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts: 
b.	Service provider arrangements; 
c.	Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.	Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)	The city manager is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city manager shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-13-08) 
Sec. 12-112. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city manager shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 11-13-08) 
Chapter 13 - PERSONNEL[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Organization and personnel, art. III. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-46 et seq.; fire department, § 8-26 et seq. 

Sec. 13-1. - General purpose of personnel system. 
The general purpose of this article is to establish a system of personnel administration that ensures equal access based on merit to employment opportunities within the government of the city; to establish a framework for the systematic review and evaluation of the quality with which these jobs are performed; and to guarantee to those employees both fairness and equity in all matters pertaining to personnel administration. This system shall be consistent with the following merit principles: 
(1)	Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their relative ability, knowledge and skills, including open competition of qualified applicants for initial appointment; 
(2)	Establishing pay rates consistent with the principle of providing comparable pay for comparable work; 
(3)	Training employees, as needed, to assure high quality performance; 
(4)	Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance and separating employees whose inadequate performance cannot be corrected; 
(5)	Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, creed, national origin or ancestry, age, sex or religion; 
(6)	Establishing a procedure for the presentation and adjustment of employee grievances based on alleged inequitable treatment because of some conditions of their employment or based on alleged discrimination because of race, color, creed, national origin or ancestry, age, sex or religion; and 
(7)	Assuring employers protection against partisan political coercion and prohibiting their use of official authority for interfering with or affecting the results of an election or the nomination for an office. 
(Ord. No. 382, Art. I, 3-13-80) 
Sec. 13-2. - Composition of permanent service system. 
(a)	The personnel system set forth by this article shall be a permanent service comprised of all permanent employees, whether full-time or part-time, hired into existing or hereinafter established positions of the public service with the following exceptions: 
(1)	Members of mayor and council and other elected positions; 
(2)	Members of appointed or elected boards and commissions, judges and the attorney; 
(3)	Persons employed to make or conduct a temporary and special inquiry, investigation, or examination on behalf of the mayor or council or a committee thereof; 
(4)	Part-time temporary, full-time temporary or provisional position unless specifically covered by action of the governing authority; 
(5)	Volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the governing authority; 
(6)	The administrator. 
(b)	Although the positions listed in subsection (a) are excluded from tenured status, the procedures followed for recruitment, hiring and maintenance of pertinent records for them may be the standard procedures established for positions included in the personnel system. 
(Ord. No. 382, Art. II, 3-13-80) 
Sec. 13-3. - Administration. 
(a)	There shall be in the city an employee designated by the governing authority to serve as personnel officer, having full responsibility for all administrative and technical activities of the personnel division and its employees. It shall be the duty of the personnel officer to: 
(1)	Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of effective personnel administration within the several departments in the government service, and to make available the facilities of the division of personnel to this end; 
(2)	Advise the mayor and council on manpower utilization; 
(3)	Foster and develop programs for the improvement of employee effectiveness, including training, safety, health, job-related counseling and employee relations; 
(4)	Investigate on an annual basis the operation and effect of this law and of the policies made thereunder and to report the findings and recommendations to the mayor and council; 
(5)	Establish and maintain records of all employees in the government service, in which there shall be set forth as to each employee the class, title, pay, status, and other relevant data; 
(6)	Make an annual report to the mayor and council regarding the work of the department; and 
(7)	Apply and carry out this article and the policies thereunder and to perform any other lawful acts which may be necessary or desirable to carry out the purpose and provisions of this article. 
(b)	The mayor and council shall adopt by resolution personnel policies which shall have the force and effect of law and which may be amended by a majority vote of the mayor and council. As needed, the personnel officer shall submit recommendations for revised or additional personnel policies to the mayor and council for consideration. The personnel policies shall provide: 
(1)	For the preparation, maintenance and revision of a position classification plan for all positions in the personnel system based upon similarity of duties performed and responsibilities assumed, so that the same qualifications may reasonably be required for, and the same schedule of pay may be equitably applied to, all positions in the same class. After such classification plan has been approved by the mayor and council, the personnel officer shall allocate or reallocate the position of every employee in the career service to one of the classes in the plan. Any employee affected by the allocation or reallocation of a position to a class shall, after filing with the personnel officer a written request for reconsideration thereof in such manner and form as the director may prescribe, be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard thereon. 
(2)	For the annual submission to the mayor and council of a recommended pay plan based on competitive job market surveys, departmental management recommendations, and cost of living index. 
(3)	For recruitment of capable persons and for administering evaluation to determine the relative fitness of applicants for positions in the public service. 
(4)	For promotions which shall give appropriate consideration to the applicant's qualifications, record of performance and ability. 
(5)	For, upon appointment or promotion, a six-month period of employee probation. 
(6)	For emergency employment for not more than 90 days with the consent of the personnel officer and for provisional employment when there is no qualified applicant available. No such provisional employment shall continue longer than six months, nor shall successive provisional appointments be allowed unless approved by the mayor and council due to extenuating circumstances. 
(7)	For the establishment of a mechanism such as formal and on-the-job training to attract and utilize persons with minimal qualifications but with potential for development. This will provide career development opportunities for members of disadvantaged groups, handicapped persons, and returning veterans. 
(8)	For keeping records of performance of all employees in the personnel system, which performance records shall be considered in determining salary increments or increases for meritorious services; as a factor in promotions; as a factor in determining the order of layoffs because of lack of funds or work, and of reinstatement; and as a factor in demotions, discharges and transfers. 
(9)	For layoffs by reason of lack of funds or work, or abolition of a position, or material change in duties or organization, and for reemployment of employees so laid off. 
(10)	For establishment of a plan for resolving employee grievances and complaints. 
(11)	For the establishment of disciplinary measures such as suspension, demotion in rank or grade, or discharge. Such measures shall provide for presentation of charges, hearing rights and appeals for all permanent employees in the personnel system. 
(12)	For establishing hours of work, holidays, and attendance regulations in various classes of positions in the personnel system. 
(13)	For establishing and publicizing fringe benefits such as insurance programs, retirement and leave policies. 
(14)	For development and operation of programs to improve work effectiveness, to better working conditions and to improve the morale of all employees. Such programs may include training, safety, health, job-related counseling and employee relations. 
(15)	For such other policies and administrative regulations, not inconsistent with this law as may be proper and necessary for its enforcement. 
(c)	The personnel officer shall periodically certify the payroll vouchers assuring that the persons named have been employed and are in pay status in accordance with the provisions of this article and the policies thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 382, Art. III, 3-13-80) 
Sec. 13-4. - Grievance procedure. 
(a)	A grievance is any dispute concerning the interpretation or application of this article, or the personnel policies governing personnel practices or working conditions, or a decision relative to any disciplinary action, dismissal, demotion or a charge of discrimination. 
(b)	Grievances shall be processed in accordance with procedures established by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 382, Art. IV, 3-13-80) 
Sec. 13-5. - Agreement authorized. 
(a)	The city is authorized and empowered to enter into reciprocal agreements, upon such terms as may be agreed upon, for the use of equipment, materials, facilities, and services with any public agency or body for purposes deemed of benefit to the public personnel system. 
(b)	The personnel officer, acting in behalf of the mayor and council, may cooperate with other governmental agencies charged with public personnel administration in conducting personnel tests, recruiting personnel, training personnel, establishing lists from which eligibles shall be certified for appointment and for the interchange of personnel and their benefits. 
(Ord. No. 382, Art. V, 3-13-80) 
Sec. 13-6. - Political activities. 
(a)	No city employee shall be appointed, promoted, demoted, favored or discriminated against with respect to employment in the personnel system because of his political opinions or affiliations. 
(b)	No person shall use or promise to use, directly or indirectly, an official authority or influence, whether possessed or anticipated, to secure or attempt to secure for any person an appointment or advantage in appointment to a position in the personnel system or a pay increase or other advantage in employment in any such position for the purpose of influencing the vote or political action of any person. 
(c)	No city employee in the personnel system shall hold an elective office in the government, nor shall he solicit any contributions or assessments, or services, nor publicly endorse any candidate for any elective office. 
(d)	Nothing contained in this section shall affect the right of an employee to contribute to, hold membership in, serve as an officer of, or support a political party, to vote as he chooses, to support or campaign for city, county, state or national political candidates, to express privately his opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to maintain political neutrality or to attend political meetings. 
(e)	Any employee who, as a normal and foreseeable incident to his principle job or position, performs duties in connection with an activity financed in whole or in part by federal loans or grants, or comes under the federal Hatch Act which prohibits the following: 
(1)	Use of official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with an election or nomination for office of affecting the result thereof. 
(2)	Directly or indirectly coercing, attempting to coerce, commanding or advising any other such officer or employee to pay, lend or contribute any part of his salary or compensation or anything else of value to any party, committee, organization, agency, or person for political purposes. 
(3)	Active participation in political party management or in political campaigns. 
(Ord. No. 382, Art. VI, 3-13-80) 
Sec. 13-7. - Nepotism. 
No hiring authority shall appoint or employ any person who is a member of his immediate family to a position under his supervision nor within his department. Immediate family in this case shall include parents, children, grandchildren, brothers, sisters, spouse and immediate family of spouse. Exceptions to this rule must be approved by a majority vote of the mayor and council in public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 382, Art. VII, 3-13-80) 
Sec. 13-8. - Equal employment opportunity guaranteed. 
(a)	All applicants for positions and employees of the city shall be assured of fair and equitable treatment in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political or religious affiliations, race, color, national origin, sex, age, or handicap and with proper regard for their privacy and constitutional rights as citizens. 
(b)	Any applicant or employee who alleges discrimination in any personnel transaction shall have the right to counsel with the equal employment office. If the claim is not satisfactorily resolved, the applicant or employee may exercise the right of appeal to the mayor and council as the final authority. 
(Ord. No. 382, Art. VIII, 3-13-80) 
Sec. 13-9. - Unlawful acts prohibited. 
(a)	No persons shall make any false statements, ratings or reports with regard to any test or appointment made under provision of this law or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of this article. 
(b)	No person shall, directly or indirectly, give, render, pay, offer, solicit, or accept any money, service or other valuable consideration for any appointment, proposed appointment, promotion, or proposed promotion to, or any advantage in, a position in the city personnel system. 
(c)	No employee of the personnel department, examiner, or other person shall defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in his right to examination, eligibility, or appointment under this law, or furnish to any person any special or secret information for the purpose of affecting the rights of prospects of any person with respect to employment in the personnel system. 
(Ord. No. 382, Art. IX, 3-13-80) 
Sec. 13-10. - Penalties. 
Any person who willfully violates any provision of this article or of the personnel policies established thereunder may, upon hearing by the mayor and council, have one of the following judgments rendered: 
(1)	Dismissal from the city service and forfeiture of annual and sick leave or other employee benefits as approved by the mayor and council. 
(2)	Ineligibility for appointment to employment in a position in the city service for the period of time stipulated in the personnel policies. 
(3)	Suspension for a period of time as stipulated by the personnel policies. 
(Ord. No. 382, Art. X, 3-13-80) 
Sec. 13-11. - Status of present employees. 
Employees holding positions in the personnel system for six months or more immediately prior to the adoption of this law shall be continued in their respective positions without further examination, until separated from their positions as provided by law. Those holding their positions less than six months immediately prior to the adoption of this law shall serve a probationary period as prescribed by the personnel policies. Nothing as established in this article shall preclude the reclassification or reallocation as provided by this law of any position held by any such incumbent. 
(Ord. No. 382, Art. XI, 3-13-80) 
Chapter 15 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 545 , adopted June 10, 2010, amended Ch. 15 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15, §§ 15-1—15-126, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; solid waste management, ch. 16; stormwater management, ch. 17; subdivisions, ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 15-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as the City of Thomson, Georgia, Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 545, § I, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 15-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the McDuffie County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 15-4(c) of this chapter. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 15-3(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: (1) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (2) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the McDuffie County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., and section 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia . 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. No. 545, § II, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 15-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 15-4(c), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1)—(7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. No. 545, § III, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 15-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the chapter and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)	Minimum requirements/BMPS. 
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)	A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to Code section 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)	The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection (c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)	The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in this section; 
(15)	Except as provided in subsection (16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)	Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)	The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of, a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 545, § IV, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 15-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)	General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)	Application requirements. 
(1)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of City of Thomson without first obtaining a permit from the McDuffie County Planning Commission to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the McDuffie County Planning Commission and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 15-4(b) and (c) of this section will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by a minimum of five copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 15-4(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)	Plan requirements. 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 15-4(b) and (c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)	Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)	Permits . 
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chatper, any variances required by section 15-4(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)	The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
( Ord. No. 545, § V, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 15-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)	The assigned agent will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)	The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)	The assigned agent shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)	The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)	The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
( Ord. No. 545, § VI, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 15-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)	Stop-work orders. 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)	All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection (b)(6) of this section. The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. No. 545, § VII, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 15-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)	Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)	For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)	Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)	If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. No. 545, § VIII, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 15-9. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Magistrate Judge of McDuffie County within 15 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of McDuffie County. 
( Ord. No. 545, § IX, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 15-10. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)	Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the June 10, 2010. 
(b)	Validity . If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)	Liability . 
(1)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)	No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
( Ord. No. 545, § X, 6-10-10 ) 
Chapter 16 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse, § 1.02(j). 
Cross reference— Soil and sedimentation control, ch. 15; utilities, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; wrecker driver required to remove glass and parts of vehicle being towed, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-277. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building materials shall mean any material such as lumber, brick, plaster, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to additions to existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing structures. 
Bulk containers shall mean a metal container of not less than two cubic yards capacity nor larger than eight cubic yards, made of watertight construction with doors opening on top and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by a specially equipped truck. 
Chief executive officer shall mean the mayor or the city administrator and his duly authorized representative and agents. 
Commercial establishment shall mean any retail, manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, religious, governmental or other nonresidential establishment at which garbage and/or trash may be generated. 
Garbage shall mean domestic wastes composed of meat, vegetable and fruit scraps, cans, glass, paper, cardboard, rags, ashes and other such waste matter normally to be disposed of from residences, eating establishments and other businesses. 
Garbage receptacle shall mean a metal or plastic container for garbage and small items of trash made of substantial construction with tight fitting lids and provided with handles and/or wheels sufficient for safe and convenient handling. Such receptacles shall have a capacity of not less than ten gallons nor more than 32 gallons and shall be kept in serviceable condition. In the event that the city should standardize containers by using a semiautomated garbage system with plastic carts of 80—90 gallons capacity, the above specifications would apply to any supplemental containers. 
Hazardous refuse shall mean materials such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, radioactive materials, fecal matter, offal, explosives and similar items. 
Industrial waste shall mean all waste, including sludges, solids, semi-solids and liquids created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Landfill shall mean an area, location, tract of land or a facility used or intended to be used for the disposal of solid waste, putrescible waste, hazardous waste or other waste as designed and operated as such by the county or by any person subject to the approval of the chief executive officer. 
Large dead animals shall mean cattle, horses and other animals of similar size. 
Litter shall mean and include garbage, trash, commercial wastes and other wastes which is scattered about or accumulated in an untidy manner. 
Litter container shall mean a container with a capacity of not less than 20 gallons nor more than 60 gallons of durable construction to be located along the sidewalks of the city. The location and type of containers are subject to approval of the chief executive officer. 
Loading and unloading area shall mean space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting of goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Multiple residential unit shall mean any duplex, apartment, group of apartments, boarding- house, motel or condominium used for dwelling places of more than one family. 
Refuse shall mean garbage, trash, commercial waste and other wastes. 
Scavenger shall mean any person who salvages or collects for resale or use, any garbage, paper, cardboard, boxes, crates or other wastes which are being or are to be disposed of from any residence or establishment where people reside, congregate or are employed. 
Single residential unit shall mean any dwelling place occupied by one family. 
Small dead animals shall mean cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size. 
Trash shall mean leaves, limbs, lumber or wood refuse, boxes, crates, weeds, grass and hedge trimming and similar items. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 2, 1-8-81; Ord. No. 403, § 1(K), 1-13-83) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-2. - Superintendent of the sanitation department—Appointment. 
The city council hereby provides for the appointment of a superintendent of the sanitation department of the city. The superintendent shall be appointed by the chief executive officer and such appointment shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 3, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-3. - Same—Duties. 
The duties of the sanitation superintendent shall be to: 
(1)	Supervise the collection of garbage and trash; supervise garbage and trash collection personnel. 
(2)	Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)	Monitor the operation of any private landfill sites inside the city limits to the satisfaction of the chief executive officer or his duly authorized representative. 
(4)	Promulgate rules and regulations which are conducive to the health of the citizens and the cleanliness of the city as to collection days, collection routes and picking up trash and garbage to the satisfaction of the chief executive officer or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 3.1, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-4. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the chief executive officer to enforce this chapter. He may designate the following agencies or individuals to actively engage in gaining compliance with this chapter: the sanitation department, the police department, the fire department, the streets department and the building inspector, and any other agency or individual he authorizes. All notices issued to violators must be coordinated through the chief executive officer or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 4, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-5. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person convicted of not complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 5, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-6. - Inspection division. 
(a)	The clean community commission, the chief executive officer or inspectors designated by him shall substantiate complaints of violations of any provisions of this chapter. They shall determine if there has been a violation and initiate requests for a compliance with this chapter, by the person violating this chapter. 
(b)	The chief executive officer or his designated inspectors shall be authorized to sign a complaint against said violator with the police department. The alleged violator shall be prosecuted in the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 39, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-7. - General protection of property rights. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass on the rights of another through the neglect of property by causing or allowing unsightly litter, foul odor or potentially dangerous devices to remain on or emanate from the property, or to discard, abandon or cause such on public property or other's private property. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 1, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-8. - Dead animals. 
(a)	The city shall collect small dead animals during operating hours provided the body is in a location easily accessible to the collector. 
(b)	Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 28, 1-8-81) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4. 
Sec. 16-9. - Handbills and advertising matter. 
(a)	On vehicles. It shall be unlawful to place in or on any vehicle in the city any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard or other literature except with express permission of the owner or occupant of such vehicle. 
(b)	On private or public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to place on private or public property any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard or other literature, except with the express permission of the owner of the property of the intended recipient. 
(c)	Exceptions. Any exception to this section must be approved by the chief executive officer. 
(Ord. No. 389, §§ 29—31, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-10. - Scavenging. 
(a)	No person other than the owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the city, shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing refuse pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any such container from the location where the same shall have been placed by the owner thereof. 
(b)	No person shall be permitted to scavenge or reclaim any refuse which has been delivered to a disposal site for disposal without having first received permission to reclaim items from the chief executive officer. 
(Ord. No. 389, §§ 36, 37, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-11. - Air curtain destructor. 
(a)	The city administrator is authorized to establish guidelines and regulations to manage and control the disposal of waste in the air curtain destructor, and to maintain its efficient use in compliance with state environmental protection regulations. 
(b)	The director of the city sanitation and street department, assisted as necessary by the county road superintendent, is in charge of daily operations and maintenance of the air curtain destructor to correctly operate and preserve its use along with related site maintenance and equipment used on site. 
(c)	The priority use of the air curtain destructor shall be to dispose of all environmentally sanctioned waste collected by city-county work crews in the performance of their daily assigned tasks within the city-county area, and environmentally sanctioned waste transported to the destructor site by private city-county citizens. 
(d)	The secondary use of the air curtain destructor shall be to dispose of all environmentally sanctioned waste transported to the air curtain destructor site by private contractors working in support of city-county citizens and local city-county industrial and commercial companies. 
(e)	The city administrator is authorized to charge and collect fees for the secondary use of the air curtain destructor. The charge or fee shall be based on the size of the vehicle bed used in disposal. The fee schedule shall be set from time to time by the city council and county commissioners and a schedule of such fees is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(f)	The fees for the disposal of environmentally sanctioned waste shall be billed monthly, received, accounted for and placed in the general fund of the city by the city clerk. These funds are to be expended only for maintenance on the air curtain destructor and related equipment, and for the purchase of new equipment related to the disposal process as authorized by the city council and county commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 449, 8-10-89) 
Charter reference— Authority to impose charges or fees to cover the cost of solid waste collection, § 1.02(j). 
Sec. 16-12. - Unauthorized use of solid waste containers. 
Solid waste containers provided by the City of Thomson for residential use within the City of Thomson shall be utilized only by those persons to whom the container is issued to include members of the immediate family. However, the commercial containers provided by the City of Thomson to commercial entities shall be utilized only by the commercial entity issued the solid waste container. Disposal of solid waste or any other matter in a city-issued container by persons not authorized for disposal of solid waste in such container shall constitute a violation of this ordinance and such violation shall be punishable as provided under Section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Thomson. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 1, 10-13-94) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 479, § 1, adopted Oct. 13, 1994, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as § 16-12. 
Secs. 16-13—16-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARBAGE 

Sec. 16-36. - Roll cart system. 
(a)	Applicability. The provisions of this section apply only to the "roll cart system." Except as provided in this section, the "roll cart system" shall be the only approved system for the use by residential customers in the city. 
(b)	Ownership of carts. The carts shall remain the property of the city and will be assigned to residents for the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the occupant. 
(c)	Placement; contents. The person having authority to control the disposal of garbage in any household shall cause all garbage collected therein to be placed in a receptacle by the city and placed at the curb on scheduled collection days. Only garbage may be placed in approved containers. 
(d)	Weight. The combined weight of a container and its contents shall not exceed 200 pounds and container shall not be filled to overflowing. 
(e)	Identification. Where more than one family occupies a dwelling or apartment, the garbage receptacles shall be marked by the city so as to indicate the family using the particular garbage receptacle. The receptacle may be identified by putting the apartment number thereon or the name of the household. When receptacles are so identified, such receptacle may be used only by the person whose name or other identification is shown thereon. 
(f)	Lost, stolen or damaged containers. Any residential container provided by the city which becomes lost, stolen, or damaged shall be replaced by the city and cost for such replacement shall be borne by the city or property owner depending upon the circumstances of damages or disappearance. The city shall be sole determiner as to responsibility. Containers which are damaged through normal usage shall be repaired or replaced by the city. 
(g)	Commercial containers used. The owner of apartment houses, including public housing, condominiums, and townhouses, consisting of six or more attached living units, may be furnished commercial containers in sufficient number to adequately contain the garbage and refuse disposal at such location. The decision to use commercial containers will be at the discretion of the city. The type, size, number and location of such commercial containers required shall be subject to the approval of the public works department, but in no instance shall the size of said commercial container be less than four cubic yards. 
(h)	Maintenance of container. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant to maintain all garbage containers serving his property in a clean and sanitary manner, free of obnoxious odors, maggots, insects and rodents, or any other conditions which may render them unhealthy to the occupants of the apartment or the neighborhood, in compliance with state and county health code requirements. 
(i)	Location of container. Receptacles provided to residences by the city as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be placed in the area between the sidewalk and curb or in an accessible place approved by the public works department. Containers shall not be placed at the curbside before 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the collection day and shall be removed from the curbside when collected on collection day. Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the public works department for persons with physical limitations which prevent placement of the garbage receptacles at the curb, provided such person submits a written request for the exception. 
(j)	Time of collection. The public works department shall provide a schedule to each residence receiving garbage collection service from the city which shall indicate the days on which such collection will be made. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 1, 1-13-83) 
Sec. 16-37. - Collection by city. 
(a)	The City of Thomson shall be and hereby is the only entity authorized to collect garbage inside the City of Thomson and no other entity, party, person, or corporation shall be permitted or authorized to collect and/or dispose of garbage from residential household and commercial sites inside the City of Thompson. 
(b)	A violation of this section shall be punishable as provided for in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 492, §§ 1, 2, 7-11-96) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 492, adopted July 11, 1996, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as § 16-37. 
Secs. 16-38—16-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRASH AND LITTER 

Sec. 16-61. - Littering forbidden. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any litter on any street, alley, public property or private property in the city. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 9, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-62. - Collection. 
The city shall provide weekly collection of trash. Such trash shall be placed either at the curb or at the alley on the person's property on collection day. Under no circumstances shall any person place or cause to be placed any trash or litter upon any alley, street or drain of the city. No trash shall be placed on any sidewalk unless there is no other place at the curb for the placement of such trash, and such a placement will be allowed only on collection day. 
(1)	Precollection practices. All tree and shrubbery trimmings must be no larger than four inches in diameter nor longer than four feet or they will not be collected by the city. Tree and shrubbery limbs shall have protruding branches trimmed and must be neatly stacked and placed in an orderly manner at curbside or alley. Christmas trees are exempt from these provisions. 
(2)	Exception. Tree and shrubbery branches, limbs and trimmings cut by landscape or tree service contractors or other commercial workmen or resulting from land being cleared shall not be collected by the city, but shall be collected and removed by those who have cut it. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 10, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-63. - Trash control. 
Any accumulation of trash or other waste items on any lot, property, premises, public street, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this article, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. The owner or occupant of the premises shall remove such debris within two weeks of the date of notification. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of trash or litter shall be deemed a violation of this article. The chief executive officer is authorized and empowered to provide for the removal of such debris with any costs being assessed against the property owner upon whose premises the work is done, and, in the event the bill for such charges remains unpaid for 30 days after it has been rendered, such unpaid bill shall become a lien upon the premises enforceable in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
(1)	Areas surrounding businesses. The proprietor or person in charge of every business and commercial establishment is hereby required to keep the sidewalks abutting such business, driveways, yards, loading docks, parking lots and area clean at all times with sweepings placed in a container as specified in sections 16-36 through 16-38. 
(2)	Parking lots. Every owner or operator of a private or commercial parking lot in conjunction with every owner or operator of any store fronting on that parking lot shall provide litter containers at a location as specified in section 16-1 and of a type as specified by the chief executive officer or his representative. 
(3)	Trapped litter. The owner, occupant or lessee of all property is required to remove all trapped litter and place the same in a proper container for collection. Vacant lots, borders, parking lots, embankments, fences, walls and sidewalks are to be kept free of litter. Parking lots, shopping centers, convenience stores, drive-in restaurants and all commercial and industrial enterprises will insure that no litter remains on their property. 
(4)	Trucks and automobiles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon any public street, lane, alley, park or reserve within the city unless the cargo is in containers or covered by a tarpaulin in such a manner as to prevent any part of its contents from falling or being scattered upon any such public street, lane, alley, park or reserve in the city. 
(5)	Construction sites. The property owners and the prime contractor in charge of a construction site are required to furnish litter containers for construction and workmen litter. All litter from construction activities or any related activities shall be containerized and all litter will be picked up and placed in containers at the end of each work day. All litter must be collected and deposited prior to the completion of the construction project. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 11, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-64. - Special collections. 
Upon request, the city shall collect normal household discarded furniture and appliances, including sofas, chairs, beds, refrigerators, washers, dryers, hotwater heaters and similar items. Persons requesting this service shall be notified by the sanitation superintendent as to the date collection will occur. This service shall be available for residential areas only. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 12, 1-8-81) 
Secs. 16-65—16-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OUTSIDE STORAGE 

Sec. 16-86. - Junked materials. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place of leave outside any building or dwelling except as specified in section 16-64 any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material, junked motor vehicle, or other item which is either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition, and which is not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. Any such item or items which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of two weeks after notice of violations of this section shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the city without further notice. This shall not apply to authorized junk dealers or currently licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning or salvaging of equipment or furniture. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 13, 1-8-81) 
Charter reference— Authority to prescribe standards of health and sanitation, § 1.02(i). 
Sec. 16-87. - Fencing required. 
All authorized junk dealers or licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning or salvaging of equipment or furniture are hereby required to erect a fence such that the junk materials cannot be seen from the street. The erection of such fence must be of a kind, size and location agreeable to the chief executive officer. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 14, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-88. - Appliances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator or other container of any kind which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing the lock or door from such appliance, refrigerator or container. This shall not apply to any appliances, refrigerators or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 15, 1-8-81) 
Secs. 16-89—16-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 11; streets and sidewalks, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 16-111. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to authorized automobile dealers or to authorized junk dealers in the operation of their businesses. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 23, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-112. - Abandonment unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful to abandon any motor vehicle on any public street or public grounds or upon any private property, and it shall be unlawful for any person owning private property to abandon or to knowingly permit the abandonment thereupon of any motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 16, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-113. - Determination of abandonment. 
For the purposes of this article, a motor vehicle shall be determined to have been abandoned in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)	If it is partially dismantled or wrecked and it is left on a street, alley or sidewalk for a period of five day or longer. 
(2)	If it is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof for 48 hours or longer. 
(3)	If it is left on any public street, alley or sidewalk of the city for seven days or longer. 
(4)	If it is partially dismantled, wrecked or incapable of self-propulsion and is left by the owner on his own property for seven days or longer. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 17, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-114. - Removal. 
Any abandoned vehicle may be removed to a storage area for safekeeping by or under the direction of the police department or other person so designated by the city. Written notice by mail of such removal shall be promptly given to the registered owner of the vehicle. 
(1)	Exception. No abandoned vehicle shall be removed from private property without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises unless such vehicle has been found by the chief executive officer to be a health or safety hazard. 
(2)	Fencing required. If an abandoned vehicle remains on private property and is not judged to be a health or safety hazard, but is judged by the chief executive officer to be an eyesore then fencing is required as specified in section 16-87. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 18, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-115. - Disposition of vehicles. 
(a)	The owner of any removed abandoned vehicle, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the chief executive officer all reasonable costs incidental to the removal, storage and locating of the owner. 
(b)	Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the costs, or should his identity or whereabouts be unknown and unascertainable after a search by the chief executive officer or his designated agent and after notice as prescribed in this section the stored vehicle may be sold after 20 days notice has been given to the department of motor vehicles before the date of the sale, and after the vehicle has been held for not less than 30 days and notice has been published once a week for two weeks in the official organ of the city. 
(c)	The vehicle may be sold at public sale to the highest bidder for cash. 
(d)	A vehicle of an appraised value of less than $100.00 may be disposed of by any means in the discretion of the chief executive officer. 
(e)	The funds derived from the sale of such motor vehicle shall be paid into the general fund of the city, from which expenses of such sale shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 19, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-116. - Junk motor vehicles. 
(a)	Any abandoned vehicle which is inoperable, dismantled, or damaged, five years old or older, and worth less than $100.00 shall be deemed a junk vehicle. A junk vehicle shall be held at least 15 days, during which time the owner may reclaim it by exhibiting proof of ownership and paying all reasonable costs incident to removal and storage and administrative expenses. 
(b)	An unclaimed junk vehicle may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of after 15 days. Notice shall be given within 15 days after final disposition to the department of motor vehicles that it was deemed a junk vehicle and disposed of as such. This notice shall fully and accurately describe such vehicle. 
(c)	Any proceeds derived from the disposition of junk vehicles shall be deposited in a general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 20, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-117. - Disposition with owner's consent. 
With the owner's consent, the city may remove and dispose of any vehicle as a junk motor vehicle regardless of value or condition of such vehicle and without waiting the 15-day period. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 21, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-118. - Immunity. 
No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner, lien holder or other person legally entitled to the possession of any abandoned, lost or stolen motor vehicle for disposing of it as contemplated in this article. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 22, 1-8-81) 
Secs. 16-119—16-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HAZARDOUS REFUSE AND BUILDING MATERIALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 

Sec. 16-141. - Generally. 
No hazardous refuse or building materials shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection by the city, nor shall the same be collected by the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any soiled lint, cotton or bandages, or waste or refuse of any character whatsoever from any hospital, sanitarium, infirmary, clinic or undertakers' shops, whether public or private, in any manner except by incineration. Kitchen wastes from such establishments are expressly except from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 26, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-142. - Industrial wastes. 
No industrial wastes shall be placed in any receptacle used by the city for collection, nor shall the same be collected by the city. The producer of such waste must dispose of it in a manner to be approved by the chief executive officer or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 26.1, 1-8-81) 
Secs. 16-143—16-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PRIVATE LANDFILLS 

Sec. 16-166. - Private sites. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited on land under his ownership and control any refuse without first having obtained a disposal area permit as required by the regulations of the state department of public health and acceptance of the site for such use and purpose by the chief executive officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 35, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-167. - General maintenance. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 35.1, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 16-168. - Right to enter to inspect. 
The chief executive officer or his representative, or an authorized representative of the department of public health, shall be permitted to enter private disposal sites at any time during normal business hours for free and unhindered inspections to determine compliance with this article and all other pertinent laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 35.2, 1-8-81) 
Secs. 16-169—16-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - COLLECTION FEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Provisions enacted by §§ 1, 2 of Ord. No. 478, adopted July 8, 1994, have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. VIII, §§ 16-201, 16-202. 

Sec. 16-201. - Residential collection fees. 
(a)	The mayor and council shall levy and assess a monthly solid waste fee as designated by mayor and council against each residential dwelling unit, for the collection and disposal of solid waste from such residential dwelling unit. This base fee shall provide for the collection of at least one authorized container not less than one time per week. Where any building, apartment house, complex or housing project is comprised of more than one residential dwelling unit or apartment, then the charge shall be levied separately against each such residential unit or apartment, within the corporate limits of the city. Exemptions from the monthly fee for residential units shall be made only in instances where the residential unit is not occupied and where city water services have been disconnected at the request of the occupant. 
(b)	The administrative department or any other entity designated by council shall act as billing and collection agency for the garbage collection charge. All monies so collected shall pass directly to the city treasurer for deposit to the city. The charges for all city provided utility services; to include solid waste disposal, shall be billed collectively and failure to pay the total sum due shall cause the recipient of services to have all utility services terminated after ten (10) days written notice to the service recipient. 
(Ord. No. 478, § 1, 7-8-94) 
Sec. 16-202. - Commercial service. 
(a)	For commercial and professional establishments, the city service will provide for the collection of at least one authorized container not less than one time per week during regular city business hours. Any persons or firms receiving such services shall at any time abide by the rules and regulations established by the city with respect to the type of containers used for the storage of waste, the locations of such containers, the sharing of containers by mutual recipients of the services, the measuring of such waste, the charges imposed therefor, or otherwise. Such facilities shall clean or provide for cleaning of their containers and areas surrounding containers to maintain them in a sanitary manner. 
(b)	The mayor and council shall assess and levy a monthly solid waste fee as designated by mayor and council against each commercial and professional establishment for solid waste services. 
(c)	The administrative department or any other entity designated by council shall act as billing and collection agency for the garbage collection charge. All monies so collected shall pass directly to the city treasurer for deposit to the city. The charges for all city provided utility services, to include solid waste disposal, shall be billed collectively and failure to pay the total sum due shall cause the recipient of services to have all utility services terminated after ten (10) days written notice to the service recipient. 
(Ord. No. 478, § 2, 7-8-94) 
Chapter 17 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; soil and sedimentation control, ch. 15; streets and sidewalks, ch. 18; zoning, ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Applicability. 
Any person proposing to construct buildings or develop land within the city shall apply to the city planning commission for approval of a stormwater management plan and issuance of a drainage permit as specified in these regulations. No land shall be developed except upon issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-2. - Excluded activities. 
The following shall be excluded from the operations of this chapter: 
(1)	Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work and other related activities which result in soil erosion. 
(2)	The construction of single-family residences when they are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy. 
(3)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both by city and/or county. 
(4)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the soil conservation service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(5)	Any activity for which bids have been let or a construction contract signed prior to June 8, 1989. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-3. - Purpose. 
In order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, these stormwater management regulations are hereby enacted for the general purpose of assuring the proper balance between man's use of land and the preservation of a safe and beneficial environment. More specifically, the provisions of these regulations, as amended from time to time, are intended to reduce property damage and human suffering and to minimize the hazards of personal injury and loss of life due to flooding, to be accomplished through the approval of stormwater management plans pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, which: 
(1)	Establish the primary and secondary stormwater management systems; 
(2)	Define and establish stormwater management practices and use restrictions; and 
(3)	Establish guidelines for handling increases in volume and peak discharges of runoff. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Base flood shall mean the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year, i.e., the 100-year flood. 
Bond shall mean any form of security for the completion or performance of a stormwater management plan or the maintenance of drainage improvements, including surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit or escrow deposit in an amount and form satisfactory to the mayor and council. 
Building shall mean any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or moveable property of any kind. 
Channel shall mean a watercourse of perceptible extent which periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link between two bodies of water, and which has a definite bed and banks. 
Detention basins shall mean any manmade area which serves as a means of controlling and temporarily storing stormwater runoff. 
Detention storage shall mean the temporary detaining or storage of stormwater in reservoirs, on rooftops, on parking lots and other areas under predetermined and controlled conditions. 
Development shall mean any change of land use or improvement on any parcel of land. 
Differential runoff shall mean the volume and rate of flow of stormwater runoff discharged from a parcel of land or drainage area which is or will be greater than that volume and rate which pertained prior to proposed development or redevelopment. 
Drainage permit shall mean a permit issued by the city planning commission upon approval of a final stormwater management plan. 
Dry bottom basin shall mean a facility designed for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff. 
Easement shall mean authorization by a property owner for use by another party or parties of all or any portion of his land for a specified purpose. 
50-year flood shall mean a flood having a two percent chance of occurrence in a given year. 
50-year peak flow shall mean the peak rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel, watercourse, or conduit resulting from the 50-year flood. 
50-year storm shall mean rainstorms of a specific duration having a two percent chance of occurrence in any given year. 
Floodplain shall mean a land area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse or lake which is likely to be flooded. 
Floodway shall mean the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard shall mean a factor of safety expressed as the difference in elevation between the top of the detention basin dam and the design surface water flow elevation. 
Habitable dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit intended for and suitable for human habitation. 
100-year peak flow shall mean the peak rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel, watercourse or conduit resulting from the base flood. 
100-year storm shall mean rainstorms of a specific duration having a one percent chance of occurrence in any given year. 
Permittee shall mean a person to whom a permit is granted under this chapter. 
Plat shall mean a legally recorded plan of a parcel of land subdivided into lots with streets, alleys and other land lines drawn to scale. 
Project shall mean any development involving the construction, reconstruction or improvement of structures and/or grounds. 
Rational method shall mean an empirical formula for calculating peak rates of runoff resulting from rainfall. 
Stormwater runoff shall mean water that results from precipitation which is not absorbed by the soil, evaporated into the atmosphere or entrapped by ground surface depressions and vegetation, and which flows over the ground surface. 
Structure shall mean any object constructed above or below the ground. 
Tributary area shall mean all of the area that contributes stormwater runoff to a given point. 
Watercourse shall mean any surface stream, creek, brook, branch, depression, reservoir, lake, pond or drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff flows. 
Wet bottom basin shall mean a detention basin intended to have a permanent pool. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 17-5. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-6. - Conflict of laws. 
(a)	Public provisions. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. Where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of this chapter or any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control. 
(b)	Private provisions. This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of this chapter, and such private provisions are inconsistent with this chapter or determinations hereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to this chapter and determinations made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-7. - Amendments. 
For this purpose of providing for the public health, safety and general welfare, the mayor and council may, from time to time, amend the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-8. - Enforcement generally. 
It shall be the duty of the city planning commission to bring to the attention of the city attorney and city engineer any violation or lack of compliance herewith. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-9. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person who fails to comply with or violates any of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-10. - Inspection. 
The city planning commission shall be responsible for determining whether the stormwater management plan is in conformance with requirements, and whether development is proceeding in accordance with the approved drainage permit. Periodic inspection of the development site shall be made by the city planning commission or its designated agent. Through such periodic inspections the city management plan is properly implemented and the improvements are maintained. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-11. - Remedial work. 
If it is determined through inspection that development is not proceeding in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and drainage permit, the city planning commission or its designated agent shall immediately issue written notice to the permittee and the surety of the nature and location of the alleged noncompliance, accompanied by documentary evidence demonstrating noncompliance and specifying what remedial work is necessary to bring the project into compliance. The permittee so notified shall immediately, unless weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the permittee prevent immediate remedial action, commence the recommended remedial action and shall complete the remedial work within a reasonable time after receipt of such notice. Upon satisfactory completion of the remedial work the city planning commission or its designated agent shall issue a notice of compliance and the development may proceed. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-12. - Revocation of permits. 
The city planning commission or its designated agent, after giving three days written notice, may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for any project which is found, upon inspection, to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and for which the permittee has not agreed to undertake remedial work as provided above. Drainage permits may also be revoked if remedial work is not completed within the time allowed. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-13. - Stop work order. 
Upon revocation of a drainage permit the city planning commission or its designated agent shall issue a stop work order. Such stop work order shall be directed to the permittee and he shall immediately notify persons owning the land, the developer, and those persons actually performing the physical work of clearing, grading and developing the land. The stop work order shall direct the parties involved to cease and desist all or any portion of the work on the development or a portion thereof which is not in compliance, except such remedial work necessary to bring the project into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-14. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The performance standards and design criteria set forth in this chapter establish minimum requirements which must be implemented with good engineering practice and workmanship. Use of the requirements contained in this chapter shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the city, or its officers and employees, of the adequacy or safety of any stormwater management structure or use of land. Nor shall the approval of a stormwater management plan and the issuance of a drainage permit imply that land uses permitted will be free from damages caused by stormwater runoff. The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on historical records, engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger storms may occur or stormwater runoff heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter, therefore, shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer with respect to any legislative or administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-15. - Appeals. 
The city planning commission shall have the authority to hear and decide appeals, and authorize variances in the terms of this chapter and in the decisions and order of the city building director in the administration of this chapter. 
(1)	Duties and power. The city planning commission shall have the power and exercise of duty to hear applications and to such end shall have the necessary authority to ensure continuing compliance with its decision. 
a.	Interpretation. To render an interpretation of this chapter and the manner of its application where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, or determination made by the building director in the administration of such provisions. In reaching its decision, the city planning commission shall establish firm guidelines for future administrative actions on similar or like matters. 
b.	Variance. To authorize upon an appeal in specific cases such variance from this chapter as will not be contrary to the intent of this chapter, nor detrimental to the public interest and welfare. Variances from the terms of this chapter may be granted by the city planning commission if it finds: 
1.	That the literal enforcement of this chapter will create an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty in the development of the affected property; except 
2.	That mere loss in property value shall not justify a variance—there must be a deprivation of reasonable, beneficial use of land; and 
3.	That the situation causing the hardship or difficulty is neither self-imposed nor generally affecting all or most properties within the general vicinity; and 
4.	That the relief sought will not injure the permitted use of adjacent conforming property; and 
5.	That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of this chapter. 
In reviewing an appeal for variance, the burden of showing that the variance should be granted shall be the responsibility of the party applying for the variance. Any variance granted by the city planning commission shall terminate automatically when the use ceases to be in full compliance with any conditions imposed by the city planning commission, when the use has been abandoned, or when the building permit shall have expired. 
(2)	Application for appeal proceedings. A request for an interpretation of this chapter or an appeal for variance from its terms may be taken by any person aggrieved, by any officer, department or board of the city affected by a decision or order of the city building director. Such appeal shall be taken within 15 days time after the decision has been rendered by filing with the city building director a notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor. The city building director shall forthwith transmit to the city planning commission all papers constituting the record regarding the action appealed. Any appeal or application may be withdrawn upon written notice to the building director. 
(3)	Public hearing. Upon receipt of a request for appeal proceedings, the building director shall post a sign on the property for at least 15 days giving notice of the scheduled date of the hearing. The current fee shall be paid by the requesting party. Such notice shall contain the time, date, place of the hearing and a general statement as to the nature of the appeal request. 
(4)	Decision of board. The city planning commission shall decide upon an appeal request within 30 days after the date of the public hearing. 
a.	Findings of fact. Every decision of the city planning commission shall be based upon findings of fact and every finding of fact shall be supported in a record of the proceedings. 
The enumerated conditions required to exist on any matter upon which the city planning commission is authorized to pass under this section shall be construed as limitations on the power of the city planning commission to act. 
b.	Approval of request. In approving any request the city planning commission may designate such conditions in connection therewith in order to secure substantially the objectives of the regulation or provision to which such variance is granted and to provide adequately for the maintenance of the integrity and character of the area in which such permit is granted. 
c.	Denial of request. No appeal or application for appeal that has been denied shall be further considered by the city planning commission until a subsequent request is obtained by the filing of new plans and a decision rendered thereon by the building director. 
(5)	Appeals from decision of the city planning commission. Any person, jointly or separately aggrieved by a decision of the city planning commission, may present to the superior court a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of such illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the rendering of the decision by the city planning commission and not thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Secs. 17-16—17-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-36. - Scope. 
This article establishes the stormwater runoff management system of the city, which shall be composed of a primary system, a secondary system, management controls and management practices. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-37. - Primary system. 
The primary system shall be composed of either the regulatory floodplain as shown on the National Flood Insurance Program maps, or as designated by a city as a primary system where such city is not under the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-38. - Secondary system. 
The secondary system shall be composed of all watercourses and drainage structures, both public and private, that are not mapped as a part of the primary system. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-39. - Management controls. 
Management controls are regulations applicable to the secondary system under the provisions of this article. Such controls shall limit any activity which will adversely affect hydraulic function of detention facilities, open channels, drainage swales or enclosed stormwater conveyance systems. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-40. - Management practices. 
The following practices may be utilized upon approval of the city planning commission: 
(1)	Storage. Runoff may be stored in temporary or permanent detention basins, or through rooftop or parking lot ponding, or percolation storage, or by other means in accordance with the design criteria and performance standards set forth in this article. 
(2)	Open channels. Maximum feasible use shall be made of existing drainageways, open channels and drainage swales that are designed and coordinated with the design of building lots and streets in accordance with the design criteria and performance standards set forth in this article. 
(3)	Streets and curbs. Streets, curbs and gutters shall be an integral part of the stormwater runoff management system. To the maximum extent possible, drainage systems, street layout and grades, lotting patterns and the location of curbs, inlets and site drainage and overflow swales shall be concurrently designed in accordance with the design criteria and performance standards set forth in this article. 
(4)	Enclosed conveyance systems. Enclosed conveyance systems consisting of inlets, conduits and manholes may be used to convey stormwater runoff. Where used, such systems must be designed in accordance with design criteria and performance standards set forth in this article. 
(5)	Other. The stormwater runoff management practices enumerated in this article shall not constitute an exclusive listing of available management practices. Other generally accepted practices and methods may be utilized if the purposes, design criteria and minimum performance standards of this article are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-41. - Public and private responsibilities. 
(a)	The administration of these regulations shall be the responsibility of the city planning commission, who shall review and approve stormwater management plans as provided in this article. 
(b)	The city sanitation and streets department shall be responsible, during and after construction, for the operation and maintenance of all drainage structures and improved courses which are part of the stormwater runoff management system under public ownership and which are not constructed and maintained by or under the jurisdiction of any state or federal agency. 
(c)	Each developer of land within the city has the responsibility to provide on the developer's property all approved stormwater runoff management facilities to ensure the adequate drainage and control of stormwater on the developer's property both during and after construction of such facilities. 
(d)	Each developer or owner has the responsibility and duty before and after construction to properly operate and maintain any onsite stormwater runoff control facility which has not been accepted for maintenance by the public. Such responsibility is to be transmitted to subsequent owners through appropriate covenants. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-42. - Performance bonds. 
Upon approval of the final stormwater management plan, but before the issuance of a drainage permit, the city planning commission shall require the applicant to post a performance bond, cash escrow, certified check or other acceptable form of performance security for the amount of the work to be done pursuant to the approved stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-43. - Maintenance agreement. 
A maintenance agreement, approved by the mayor and council assuring perpetual maintenance of stormwater management improvements shall be agreed upon by the city and the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-44. - Maintenance bond. 
A two-year maintenance bond against defects in workmanship may be required by the city for any portion of the stormwater management improvements dedicated to the public. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-45. - Drainage permits. 
Upon approval of the final stormwater management plan and acceptance of the applicant's assurances of performance and maintenance as provided in these regulations, the city planning commission shall issue a drainage permit. The drainage permit shall be issued to the applicant who shall then be known and thereafter be referred to as the permittee. The permit shall set forth the terms and conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-46. - Fees. 
The current fee shall accompany each application for a drainage permit. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Secs. 17-47—17-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MANAGEMENT PLANS 

Sec. 17-56. - General. 
No development shall increase the quantity and rate of stormwater emanating from such land areas except in accordance with an approved stormwater management plan as provided in these regulations. The stormwater management plan shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in the state. No building permits shall be issued until and unless the stormwater management plan has been approved by the city planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-57. - Preliminary plan—Submission. 
The preliminary stormwater management plan for any proposed development shall contain but not be limited to the following information and data: 
(1)	Topographic map outlining the limits of the contributing area. Topographic maps should be the best available, with a 10-inch contour interval accepted as the minimal requirement. 
(2)	Site plan of suitable scale and contour interval, showing the land to be developed and such adjoining land whose topography may affect the layout or drainage patterns for the development. 
(3)	The location of streams and other floodwater runoff channels, the extent of floodplains at the established high-water elevations, the limits of the floodway, if pertinent, and any additional information, all of which shall be properly identified. 
(4)	The normal shoreline of ponds, swamps, and detention basins including their floodplains and inflow and outflow structures if such structures exist. 
(5)	The location and calculated flow rates of other existing storm drains, inlets and outfalls. 
(6)	The location and calculated flow rates of any existing storm, sanitary and combined sewers which occur within the proposed project site or adjacent thereto within a distance of approximately 500 feet from the perimeter of such site. 
(7)	The location and observed flow rates of any flowing springs, existing wells or any existing seepage areas as determined by means of a field inspection of the property. 
(8)	General information regarding the type and characteristics of soils which will be encountered within the project. 
(9)	Concepts which will be considered within the development to handle safely all stormwater runoff, including the methods for detention or control of increased stormwater runoff generated by the project development. 
(10)	A general plan showing the extent and nature of the storm drainage facilities which will be planned to serve the proposed project including preliminary calculations indicating the runoff which must be handled by such facilities, the methods and criteria which have been utilized in calculating such runoff, and basic information regarding the receiving stream channel into which such drainage facilities will discharge. 
(11)	Calculations supporting the method and capacity needed for the safe and temporary storage of increased runoff resulting from the proposed development, if temporary storage is needed. 
(12)	Basic information regarding the receiving stream or channel into which proposed storm drainage facilities will discharge including the channel location, general cross section, existing downstream culverts and bridges and other waterway openings, any existing detention basins or ponds and other information required to determine, in preliminary form, the effect which the proposed development will have on downstream drainage conditions. 
Note: The information required above shall be submitted in accordance with existing subdivision plat approval procedures. If there is no requirement under existing subdivision regu-lations for the filing of a preliminary development plan, submission of a preliminary stormwater management plan and the accompanying information shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-58. - Same—Review. 
Following receipt of the preliminary stormwater management plan, and information to be included with such plan, the general drainage concepts and planning proposals will be referred to the city planning commission for its review and recommendations. A review meeting then will be scheduled by the city planning commission with representatives of the developer, including the developer's engineer to review the overall concepts included in the preliminary stormwater management plan. The purpose of this review shall be to jointly agree upon an overall stormwater management concept for the proposed development and to review criteria and design parameters which shall apply to final design of the project. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-59. - Final plan—Submission. 
Following review of the preliminary stormwater management plan and after the concept review meeting and general approval of the preliminary plan by the city planning commission, a final stormwater management plan shall be prepared for each phase of the proposed project as each phase is developed. The final plan shall constitute a refinement of the concepts approved in the preliminary stormwater management plan with preparation and submittal of the following additional detailed information unless specifically excluded during the preliminary concept review meeting: 
(1)	A topographic map of the project site and adjacent areas, of suitable scale and contour interval, which shall define the location of streams, the extent of floodplains and calculated high-water elevations, the shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps and detention basins including their inflow and outflow structures, if any. 
(2)	The location and flowline elevation of all existing sanitary, storm or combined sewers, and the location of any existing sewage treatment facilities, which fall within the project limits and within a distance of 25 feet beyond the exterior boundaries of the project. 
(3)	Detailed determination of runoff anticipated for the entire project site following development indicating design volumes and rates of proposed runoff for each portion of the watershed tributary to the storm drainage system, the calculations used to determine such runoff volumes and rates and restatement of the criteria which have been used by the project engineer throughout his calculations. 
(4)	A refined layout of the proposed stormwater management system including the location and size of all drainage structures, storm sewers, channels and channel sections, detention basins, and analyses regarding the effect such improvements will have upon the receiving channel and its high-water elevation. 
(5)	The slope, type, size and flow calculations for all existing and proposed storm sewers and other waterways. 
(6)	For all detention basins, if any, a plot or tabulation of storage volumes with corresponding water surface elevations and of the basin outflow rates for those water surface elevations. 
(7)	For all detention basins, if any, design hydrographs of inflow and outflow for the 50-year differential runoff from the site under proposed development conditions. 
(8)	A refined grading plan for the entire project site drawn at a suitable scale and contour interval, or the terrain within the proposed project site including contours of the existing terrain along with contours indicating final grades which will be established during completion of the project. The grading plan shall also include a plotting of the line defining the high-water elevation to be expected under 100-year peak flow conditions produced by the projected development of the contributing watershed based on the best available land use information. 
(9)	A profile and one or more cross sections of all existing and proposed channels or other open drainage facilities, showing existing conditions and the proposed changes thereto, together with the high-water elevations expected from stormwater runoff under the controlled conditions called for by these regulations and the relationship of structures, streets and other utilities to such channels. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-60. - Same—Review and approval. 
(a)	The city planning commission shall refer the final stormwater management plans to the city engineer for review and recommendations. If it is determined according to present engineering practice that the proposed development will provide control of stormwater runoff in accordance with the purposes, design criteria and performance standards of these regulations and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare, the city planning commission shall approve the plan or conditionally approve the plan, setting forth the conditions thereof. If approved, a drainage permit for the development shall be granted. 
(b)	If it is determined that the proposed development will not control stormwater runoff in accordance with these regulations the city planning commission shall disapprove the final stormwater management plan. If disapproved, the application and data shall be returned to the applicant for resubmittal. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Secs. 17-61—17-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN CRITERIA AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 17-71. - Methods of determining stormwater runoff. 
Developments where the area contributing runoff is 25 acres or less shall be designed using the rational method of calculating runoff. Developments where the area is 50 acres or less shall be designed using either the rational method of calculating runoff or other methods as approved by the city planning commission in concert with the city engineer. For developments where the area contributing runoff is 50 acres or more, the applicant shall submit a proposed method of evaluation for the calculation of runoff to the city planning commission for review and approval. All such development proposals shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-72. - Development design. 
Streets, blocks, depth of lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to minimize the velocity of overland flow and allow maximum opportunity for infiltration of stormwater into the ground, and to preserve and utilize existing and planned streams, channels and detention basins, and include, whenever possible, streams and floodplains within parks and other public grounds. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-73. - Enclosed systems and open channels. 
Unless otherwise provided by the city planning commission, the Design Criteria for Storm Sewers and Appurtenances, Revised, 1973, prepared by the Kansas City Metropolitan Chapter of the American Public Works Association shall govern the design of enclosed systems and open channels within the city. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-74. - Methods of controlling downstream flooding. 
The city planning commission shall determine whether the proposed plan will cause or increase downstream flooding conditions. This determination shall be made on the basis of existing downstream development and an analysis of stormwater runoff with and without the proposed development as set forth in this chapter. When the city planning commission determines that the proposed development will cause or increase downstream flooding conditions during the 100-year storm, provisions to minimize such flooding conditions shall be included in the design of storm drainage improvements. Such provision may include downstream improvements and/or the temporary controlled detention of stormwater runoff and its regulated discharge to the downstream storm drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-75. - Downstream improvements. 
Improvements to minimize downstream flooding conditions may include, but not be limited to, the construction of dams, dikes, levees and floodwalls; culvert enlargements; and channel clearance and modification projects. Such downstream improvements should be discussed between the city planning commission, the city engineer and the developer's engineer so that appropriate provisions with respect to planning and implementing such improvements can be made at the earliest possible date. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-76. - Detention. 
Developments also may include temporary detention of stormwater runoff in order to minimize downstream flooding conditions. The following design criteria shall govern the design of temporary detention facilities: 
(1)	Storage volume. The volume of storage provided in detention basins shall be sufficient to control the differential runoff from the 50-year storm frequency of six-hour duration. The differential runoff is that volume and rate of flow of stormwater runoff discharged from a parcel of land or drainage area which is or will be greater than that volume and rate which pertained prior to proposed development or redevelopment. 
(2)	Freeboard. Detention storage areas shall have adequate capacity to contain the storage volume of tributary stormwater runoff with at least two feet of freeboard above the water surface of flow in the emergency spillway in a 100-year storm or as required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-77. - Outlet control works. 
(a)	Outlet works shall be designed to limit peak overflow rates from detention storage areas to or below peak flow rates that would have occurred prior to the proposed development. 
(b)	Outlet works shall not include any mechanical components or devices and shall function without requiring attendance or control during operation. 
(c)	Size and hydraulic characteristics shall be such that all water in detention storage is released to the downstream storm sewer systems within 24 hours after the end of the design rainfall. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-78. - Spillway. 
Emergency spillways shall be provided to permit the safe passage of runoff generated by a 100-year storm or greater, if required by law, or if appropriate because of downstream high hazard, such as loss of life or damage to high value property. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-79. - Design data submittal. 
In addition to complete plans, the following design data shall be submitted to the city planning commission for all projects including temporary detention facilities: 
(1)	Rainfall hydrograph plotted in units of inches per hour as ordinates, and time from beginning of the storm as abscissas. 
(2)	Runoff hydrograph plotted in units of cubic feet per second runoff rate of the tributary area as ordinates, and time from the start of runoff as abscissas. 
(3)	Capacity curve for proposed detention facility plotted in units of datum elevation as ordinates, and cumulative volume of storage as abscissas. 
(4)	Discharge characteristics curve or outlet works plotted in units of detention facility water surface elevation as ordinates, and discharge rate for cubic feet per second (CFS) as abscissas. 
(5)	Inflow and outflow curves in units of accumulated volume as ordinates, and time from the start of runoff as abscissas. Curves shall be so arranged that the vertical distance between the accumulated storage and accumulated discharge will indicate the net volume in storage and accumulated discharge will indicate the net volume in storage at any point in time. Curves shall be extended to the time required for complete discharge of all runoff stored in the detention facility. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-80. - Detention methods. 
In addition to the above criteria, the following shall be applicable, depending on the detention alternative(s) selected by the city engineer and the developer's engineer: 
(1)	Wet bottom basins. For basins designed with permanent pools: 
a.	Minimum depths. The minimum normal depth of water before the introduction of excess stormwater shall be four feet. 
b.	Depth for fish. If fish are to be used to keep the basin clean, at least one-quarter of the area of the permanent pool must have a minimum depth of ten feet. 
c.	Facilities for emptying. For emptying purposes, cleaning or shoreline maintenance, facilities shall be provided or plans prepared for the use of auxiliary equipment to permit emptying and drainage. 
(2)	Dry bottom basins. For basins designed to be normally dry: 
a.	Interior drainage. Provisions must be incorporated to facilitate interior drainage to outlet structures. 
b.	Multipurpose features. There shall be designed to serve secondary purposes for recreation open space or other types of use which will not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent flooding. 
(3)	Rooftop storage. Detention storage may be met in total or in part by detention on roofs. Details of such designs, which shall be included in the drainage permit applications, shall include the depth and volume of storage, details of outlet devices and downdrains, elevations of overflow scuppers, design loadings for the roof structure and emergency overflow provisions. Direct connection of roof drains to sanitary sewers is prohibited. 
(4)	Parking lot storage. Paved parking lots may be designed to provide temporary detention storage of stormwater on all or a portion of their surfaces. Outlets will be designed so as to slowly empty the stored waters and depths of storage must be limited so as to prevent damage to parked vehicles. 
(5)	Other storage. All or a portion of the detention storage may also be provided in underground or surface detention facilities, to include basins, tanks, swales, etc. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-81. - Stormwater channel location. 
Generally acceptable locations of stormwater runoff channels in the design of a subdivision may include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)	In a depressed median of a double roadway, street or parkway provided the median is wide enough to permit maximum three to one side slopes. 
(2)	Centered on lot lines or entirely within the rear yards of a single row of lots or parcels. 
(3)	In each of the foregoing cases, a drainage easement to facilitate maintenance and design flow shall be provided and shown on the plat. No structures shall be constructed within or across stormwater channels. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-82. - Storm sewer outfall. 
The storm sewer outfall shall be designed so as to provide adequate protection against downstream erosion and scouring. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-83. - Lot lines. 
Whenever the plans call for the passage and/or storage of floodwater, surface runoff or stormwater along lot lines, the grading of all such lots shall be prescribed and established for the passage and/or storage of waters, and no structure may be erected which will obstruct the flow of stormwater, no fences, shrubbery, or trees planted, or changes made to the prescribed grades and contours of the specified floodwater or stormwater runoff channels. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-84. - Manholes. 
All sanitary sewer manholes constructed in a floodplain or in an area designed for the storage or passage of floodwater or stormwater, shall be provided with either a watertight manhole cover or be constructed with a rim elevation of a minimum of one foot above the high-water elevation of the design storm, whichever is applicable to the specific area. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-85. - Easements. 
Permanent easements for the detention and conveyance of stormwater, including easements of access to structures and facilities, shall be dedicated to the city. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-86. - Maintenance. 
Provisions acceptable to the city for perpetual maintenance of detention facilities, outlet works and appurtenances shall be made, as provided, in these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Sec. 17-87. - Drainage permits. 
A drainage permit for projects including detention facilities may be granted by the city planning commission only after the stormwater management plan has been approved and all easements have been dedicated, accepted, and recorded, and all required maintenance assurances and required bonds have been executed. 
(Ord. No. 448, 6-8-89) 
Chapter 18 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, the title of ch. 18 has been changed to Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places. See editor's note for art. IV. 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate and control public streets, alleys and ways, § 1.02(u). 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(13); any ordinance establishing prescribing the grades of any street in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(14); buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 11; planning and development, ch. 14; abandoned motor vehicles, § 16-111 et seq.; stormwater management, ch. 17; subdivision of land, ch. 19; utilities, ch. 21; zoning, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and maintain streets and roads, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Protection of trees. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or cause to be cut, or to saw or cause to be sawed, any tree or trees located on any city property, or along city rights-of-way next to any street or road within the city limits of the city without first having obtained written permission from the city council. 
(b)	The terms of this section do not apply to local utility companies, such as Georgia Power, with regard to cut back of limbs and the general pruning of trees to protect electric and communication lines that stretch along the city rights-of-way. 
(c)	The terms of this section do not apply to trees located on private property, or to trees which have been blown down, or partially blown down by windstorm or other act of God. 
(d)	Trees cut or sawed down on private property at the sole discretion of the landowner shall be totally disposed of by the landowner or contractor hired to do the job. The city will not be responsible for disposal in these cases. However, branches pruned from trees on private property to enhance beautification or health of trees, or as a result of tree blow-down will be disposed of by the city. These branches shall be no larger than four inches in diameter nor longer than four feet. 
(e)	The city shall provide for a weekly collection of trash. Such trash shall be placed at the curb or streetside on the person's property for the city to dispose of on collection day. In the interest of public safety, it shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any tree limbs, grass, leaves, straw, and other debris in such a manner that will obstruct passage along any sidewalk, street, alley, or drainage ditch of the city. 
(Ord. No. 447, 5-11-89) 
Sec. 18-2. - Skating on sidewalks. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to skate, using roller skates or skateboards, on the paved sidewalks in the city. 
(b)	Any person convicted of the violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 98, §§ 1, 2, 2-10-20) 
Sec. 18-3. - Obstructions of streets, sidewalks. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction between the sidewalks and streets of the town, which will prevent the free passage of persons from the street to the sidewalk and from sidewalk to the street, except by the permission of the city police. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to blow, rake, or place any leaves, or yard debris onto the streets or roadways of the City of Thomson. Every citizen and property owner of the City of Thomson shall have the right and obligation to place leaves and yard debris as close to the roadway as practical without interfering with sidewalk and road traffic, or the natural flow of stormwater. 
(c)	Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 58, §§ 1, 2, 2-6-1900; Ord. No. 497, 3-12-98) 
Secs. 18-4—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 11. 

Sec. 18-31. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the public streets of the city for the purpose of staging any demonstrations or parades, or any other event which will interfere with the free flow of traffic through the city without first obtaining a permit from the mayor and council for the doing of same. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 1, 6-14-62) 
Sec. 18-32. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person convicted of staging a parade or demonstration such as is contemplated by this article without first having secured the permit hereinbefore mentioned shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 4, 6-14-62) 
Sec. 18-33. - Permit applications. 
Applications for permits required by this article shall be made in writing, and shall state therein the names of all persons who will take part therein, as well as the nature of the parade or demonstration, and the purpose for which same is staged. Such applications shall be filed at least seven days prior to the date on which it is desired that such event shall be staged, at the city hall, and upon the filing thereof the clerk of council shall at once transmit same to the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 2, 6-14-62) 
Sec. 18-34. - Issuance or denial, appeal from denial. 
The mayor shall, upon receiving an application under this article, grant or refuse such permit within 48 hours after receiving same. If such permit shall be refused by the mayor the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the council but no appeal will be considered unless two councilmembers shall initial such appeal, the same being in writing. Upon appeal being filed, a meeting of the mayor and council shall be held immediately, within 24 hours, and the matter shall then be disposed of by vote of the mayor and council as in all other matters which come before the body. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 3, 6-14-62) 
Sec. 18-35. - Fees. 
Permits, when issued by the mayor, shall be without cost to the applicant, with the exception that it is not intended that this article shall conflict with or apply to any portion of article II of chapter 10, in which circus parades are licensed for a fee, and such provisions of such shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 5, 6-14-62) 
Secs. 18-36—18-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUMBERING BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 

Sec. 18-56. - System established. 
A uniform system of numbering buildings and property in the city is hereby established, as set out in detail with an explanatory map, to be kept on file at city hall, by reference adopted and made a part of this section for reference purposes. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 1, 6-13-68) 
Sec. 18-57. - Maintenance, administration of system. 
The city clerk shall be responsible for maintaining the numbering system, by use of the reference map, and also by written record which indicates the present number, if any, on any building or property, if any, as well as the new number to be assigned under this article. 
(1)	In the performance of the foregoing duties and responsibilities the city clerk shall be guided by the numbering system established by this article. 
(2)	The city clerk shall assign to any property owner, upon request, the designated number for any building or any property, and shall furnish such information to any person upon inquiry, but the cost and securing of the numerals to be used shall rest upon the applicant. 
(3)	The city clerk may assign additional numbers under the official numbering system whenever a property has been subdivided, a new front entrance opened, or undue hardship and confusion has been worked on any property owner. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 3, 6-13-68) 
Sec. 18-58. - Assignment of numbers. 
Assignment of numbers under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)	All properties or parcels of land within the corporate limits of the city shall be identified by reference to the uniform numbering system adopted by this article, provided all existing numbers of property and buildings not now in conformity with the provisions of this article shall be changed to conform to the system herein adopted within six months from the date of passage of this article. 
(2)	A separate number shall be assigned for 20 feet of frontage in congested business areas, and each 50 feet in other areas. 
(3)	The city clerk shall issue even numbers to the south side of streets which run east and west, and to the east side of streets which run north and south; and shall issue odd numbers to the north side of streets which run east and west, and to the west side of streets which run north and south. 
(Ord. No. 291, §§ 2, 9, 6-13-68) 
Sec. 18-59. - Location of numbers. 
(a)	Each principal building shall bear the number assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is located, but nothing in this section shall prevent any building which fronts on two streets from having numbers assigned on each of such streets. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance of such principal building shall bear and have a separate number. 
(b)	Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal building or each front entrance to such building shall, if possible, be posted in a manner as to be visible from the street on which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 2, 6-13-68) 
Sec. 18-60. - Layout of system. 
The street numbering system shall be as follows, with the reference map hereinbefore referred to being charted exactly as set out below: 
(1)	Base lines, as a point of reference, to divide the city into four sections, northeast, southeast, southwest and northwest, are established as follows: 
a.	The north-south base line running down the centerline of Main Street from the north city limits to the main line of the Georgia Railroad tracks, and thence south down the centerline of Jackson Street to the city limits on the south. 
b.	The east-west base line beginning at the city limits on the west where the main line of Georgia Railroad touches the west city limits, and following such main line easterly to the Georgia Railroad Depot; thence northerly to the centerline of Railroad Street; thence along the centerline of Railroad Street to the intersection of Railroad Street with Whiteoak Street; thence along the centerline of Whiteoak Street easterly to the city limits. 
The intersection of such two base lines at Main Street and Georgia Railroad forms the four sections of the city above referred to. 
(2)	Grid lines, to indicate the division block number changes where property numbers change from any 100 to the next higher 100, are established as hereinafter set out in detail, as per each section of the city: 
a.	Numbers, in each of the four sections of the city, run as follows: From the base line to the first or 100 grid line from 100 through 199, with odd numbers on one side of the street and even numbers on the opposite side of the street; and from the first or 100 grid line to the second or 200 grid line such numbers run from 200 through 299, etc. 
b.	Lines which follow a street run down the centerline of the street unless otherwise designated. Intersections of streets mean the points where the two centerlines cross. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 4, 6-13-68) 
Sec. 18-61. - Suffix of street names. 
All streets shall have added to the name thereof the directional suffix of NE, NW, SE, or SW, according to the section of the city wherein such street is located. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 10, 6-13-68) 
Sec. 18-62. - Notice of assigned number. 
The city clerk shall immediately begin the assignment of numbers, to the property and buildings in accordance with the terms of this article, and shall notify in writing the owners of the buildings and property which notice shall contain the following: 
(1)	The number or numbers which have been assigned to such buildings or property, with specific details as to the location of such numbers. 
(2)	The name of the section of the city in which the property or buildings are located. 
(3)	Detailed information as to where such numbers may be secured and the cost thereof. 
(4)	The deadline or expiration date for securing and posting such numbers on buildings, after which such property owners might be charged with violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 11, 6-13-68) 
Sec. 18-63. - Penalty for violation. 
The penalty for violation of this article or any of the terms thereof shall be, upon conviction, in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 13, 6-13-68) 
Sec. 18-64. - Compliance deadline. 
The deadline for complying with the terms of this article shall be six months after the issuance of the written notice to the property owner by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 291, § 12, 6-13-68) 
Secs. 18-65—18-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 542, § 1, adopted Oct. 8, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as Ch. 18A. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion with the concurrence of the city, these provisions have been included as Art. IV. 

Sec. 18-86. - Declaration of findings and purpose, scope, definitions. 
(a)	Intent and purpose. The City of Thomson (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city, and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to, Article 9, Section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. 36-35-3 and O.C.G.A. 32-4-92(10), has adopted this ordinance [Ordinance No. 542] for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(b)	Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(c)	Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this article. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Thomson, Georgia; 
Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Thomson, Georgia; 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way; 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way; 
Director means the city manager of the City of Thomson, Georgia, or his or her designee; 
Emergency means a sudden or unforeseen occurrence involving a clear and immediate danger to life, health, property or interruption of utility services that requires immediate attention; 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives [is] available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations; 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city; 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances; 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities; 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public; 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city; 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof; 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert; 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months, and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities; 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1(1.1—1.3), 10-8-09) 
Sec. 18-87. - Utility registration. 
(a)	Registration required. Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date [October 8, 2009] of this article. 
(b)	Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)	A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)	A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)	Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)	Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(e)	Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one year after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1(2.1—2.5), 10-8-09) 
Sec. 18-88. - Construction permits. 
(a)	Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the City of Thomson in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)	Permit procedure. Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the City of Thomson. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the utility; 
(2)	The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)	The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)	The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)	An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)	A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)	A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(c)	Permit fees. Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(d)	Issuance of permit. If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)	Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; and 
(2)	Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)	The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(e)	Emergency situations. 
(1)	Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)	In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(f)	Effective period of permit. 
(1)	Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)	The permit shall remain in place [until] construction is completed or until its expiration date, unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.	Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.	Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; 
c.	Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
d.	Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(g)	Cancellation for cause. If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)	City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)	If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(h)	Expiration of permit. If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1(3.1—3.8), 10-8-09) 
Sec. 18-89. - Required minimum standards. 
(a)	Utility accommodation manual adopted. The "Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards, 2009," including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except appendix A ("Permit Forms and Supporting Documents"), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Thomson municipal equivalents. 
(b)	Protection of traffic and roadway. Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(c)	Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit, and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(d)	Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(e)	[Blasting or excavating.] As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless, and until, the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1(4.1—4.5), 10-8-09) 
Sec. 18-90. - Restoration of property. 
(a)	Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)	A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1(5.1, 5.2), 10-8-09) 
Sec. 18-91. - Inspection. 
(a)	The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)	At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this article or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)	When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1(6.1—6.3), 10-8-09) 
Sec. 18-92. - Other approvals, permits and agreements. 
Additional permits required. The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1(7.1), 10-8-09) 
Sec. 18-93. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1(8.1), 10-8-09) 
Sec. 18-94. - Other provisions. 
(a)	Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(b)	Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city, by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the city Charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility, by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(c)	Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(d)	Appeal of administrative decisions. All appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director as specified in this article. 
(e)	Article headings. Article headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this article. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1(9.1—9.5), 10-8-09) 
Chapter 19 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 546 , adopted June 10, 2010, amended Ch. 19 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 19, §§ 19-1—19-136, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; planning and development, ch. 14; soil and sedimentation control, ch. 15; streets and sidewalks, ch. 18; utilities, ch. 21; zoning, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Georgia Land Sales Act of 1982, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall govern all division and subdivision of land considered in whole or in part (phased construction) within the legal boundaries of the City of Thomson. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions, including subdivision of land for multi-family, commercial, and industrial uses which incorporate new interior streets, or extensions of existing subdivision streets within the City of Thomson. The division or subdivision of lots which do not involve the construction of new interior streets and whose frontage abuts solely upon an existing city maintained streets may, upon review and approval by the planning commission, be exempt from those provisions of this chapter as designated by the planning commission. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-3. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)	Promote the public health, safety and general welfare; 
(2)	Promote the orderly and beneficial development and expansion of communities within the city; 
(3)	Provide adequate light and air; 
(4)	Provide adequate water, sewerage and surface drainage; 
(5)	Prevent undesirable overcrowding of population; 
(6)	Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
(7)	Promote the orderly and desirable subdivision of land; 
(8)	Ensure the orderly and desirable development of streets; 
(9)	Promote the orderly and desirable development of public utilities and services; 
(10)	Provide adequate and sufficient land for schools, parks, playgrounds and other public uses; and 
(11)	Ensure proper legal description and documentation of all subdivided land. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-4. - Interpretation of provisions. 
The interpretation of any words, phrases, or any information contained herein shall first be made by planning commission, thereafter, by written request in a form or on forms supplied by the planning commission office. Such request for formal interpretation shall subsequently be submitted to the city planning commission board. The opportunity for conclusive interpretation is afforded by submittal thereafter to the Thomson City Council. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-5. - Minimum standards. 
The subdivision standards contained herein shall constitute the minimum standards for the development of subdivision within the City of Thomson. Due to the varied conditions that may exist with each proposed subdivision, for the protection of the health and safety of the general public, and to protect property and property values, the planning commission, planning commission board, and city council may impose standards in additional to those contained herein. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-6. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular number shall include the plural, and words in the plural number shall include the singular; the terms "shall" and "must" are always mandatory; the words "should" and "may" are permissive by determination of the planning commission and/or city council. Words not defined below shall have their common dictionary meaning as found in The American Heritage Dictionary, Second College Edition, Copyright 1991, Houghton Mifflin Company. Doubt as to the precise meaning of any word, text, or phrase used in these regulations shall first be clarified by the zoning administrator, then by the planning commission board. 
As built plat means a complete and exacting plat of a completed subdivision, which shall include all subdivision improvements including, but not limited to, all applicable design, improvements, and infrastructure required by this chapter which is prepared for submission to the planning commission for approval. 
Artery (street/street) means an existing or proposed street within the street system of the city typically characterized by engineered design to accommodate a high traffic volume and increased speed limits. Being the highest magnitude of street within the system they convey and receive traffic from all lower classification of street. 
Centerline means the line determined as the centerline by the official authority having jurisdiction over the street or street; otherwise, it shall be the succession of midpoints between the identifiable limits of any improvements on the ground or of any easement. 
City attorney means the attorney or attorney firm representing the City of Thomson. 
City council means the City Council of the City of Thomson. 
Collector (street/street) means the classification of street/street characterized by design to convey local vehicular traffic from land service streets/streets to arterial streets or to serve as principal entrance streets or primary circulation routes within a neighborhood or other limited area. 
County health officer means the McDuffie County Health Officer. 
Cul-de-sac means a land service street that terminates in circular turnaround at the end of a dead-end street, and is not intended for future extension. 
Dedicated or dedicated to public use means land or improvements that has or has been deeded to and accepted by the city for public use and maintenance. 
Deflection angle means the angle between a deviation in the direction of the centerline of a street and the extension of the centerline along a straight course from the point from which the centerline changed direction. 
Dual frontage lot means a lot, whether residential or otherwise, having front and "rear" frontage on opposing streets. 
Easement means a strip of land on which the property owner has granted a person the right to use such land for specific purposes, or the grant of such a right. 
Final plat . See As built plat . 
Hearing means a public review of a subdivision plat during an open meeting of the planning commission board or city council taking into consideration the subdivision design, improvements, variances, or other matter relating to the subdivision development. 
Improvements means the physical additions and changes to land that may be necessary to produce usable, desirable and acceptable lots. 
Intersection means the point at which the centerline of a street intersects the centerline of another street or railway. 
Land service street means a minor street used for traffic of relatively low speeds and volumes for primary access to abutting properties. Land service streets are not to be designed to carry through traffic from one area to another. 
Loop street/street means a land service street of short length and of such design as to originate and terminate in a "T" intersection with another street. 
Multiple frontages (lot) means a lot, tract, or parcel of land abutting the right-of-way of more than one public street. 
On-site disposal means the disposal of sewage into the ground through the incorporation of a state approved septic tank system. 
Planning commission means the office and/or staff of the Planning Commission of McDuffie County. 
Planning commission board means the standing commission board members of the city planning commission, or, those individuals appointed by the city council as members on the commission. 
Preliminary plat means a plat of a proposed subdivision of land which is prepared and submitted in accordance with this regulation. 
Private street means an access not owned or maintained by the city, from a tract or parcel of land to a public street. 
Registered engineer means a professional engineer licensed and registered in the State of Georgia to perform the duties of an engineer. 
Registered surveyor means a land surveyor licensed and registered in the State of Georgia to perform the duties of a land surveyor. 
Reserve strip means a strip or tract of land reserved for the purpose of controlling or limiting access from properties to abutting streets or streets. 
Reverse frontage (lot) means a lot or tract of land that abuts two or more streets, but has access to only one of the streets. 
Service drive means a land service street that provides vehicular access to interior, back, or side of properties otherwise abutting a public street (commonly referred to as an "alley"). 
Setback line means the allowable distance from the centerline of a street and side and rear property line at which a structure may be built. 
Sewerage, private means a sanitary sewerage system for the collection of water born wastes, complete with a sewage treatment plant or stabilization pond which is owned and operated by a corporation or persons other than a public agency or authority. 
Sewerage, public means a sanitary sewerage system for the collection of waterborne wastes, complete with a sewage treatment plant or stabilization pond which is owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
Sketch plan means a general illustration, usually drawn freehand, of the proposed subdivision of land. 
Street jog means the separation between two opposing streets which enter upon a common street. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, whether permanent or temporary, the use of which requires a location on the ground, attached to something having a location on the ground, and which extends greater than 12 inches above common grade. 
Subdivision (verb) means the act of dividing a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development. 
Subdivision (noun) means the division and development (including re-subdivision) of land for residential, commercial, or industrial uses which involve the construction of a new street(s), or a change in existing streets. 
Subdivider means any entity having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under these regulations, or the authorized agent of such entity for the purpose of proceeding under these regulations. 
Tangent means the straight line distance between the ending of one curve and the beginning of another. 
Variance means an alteration, relaxation, or exception made to the terms of these regulations where such alteration will not be contrary to the public interest, convenience and welfare, and where, owning to conditions peculiar to the property over which the applicant for a variance has no control, and where a literal enforcement of this chapter would create unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant in the use of the property. 
Zoning/zoning regulations means the zoning regulations of the City of Thomson. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Secs. 19-7—19-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES FOR PLAT APPROVAL 

Sec. 19-21. - Prior considerations. 
Prior to initial application for development of a proposed subdivision within the City of Thomson, consideration should be given to the major issues and requirements which will impact the design and development of the subdivision and the resulting cost of construction. Such issues include, but are not limited to: 
(1)	Suitability of land. Land which is deemed by the planning commission to be unsuitable for development will be denied for development, or, the developer will be required to initiate or incorporate mitigating measures to render the land suitable for development. Land considered as unsuitable for development includes, but is not limited to: 
a.	Flooding . Land subject to flooding, deemed by observation to be located in floodplains, and land designated as floodprone. 
b.	Wetlands . Land which is designated as wetlands by existing map resources or identified on-site by a qualified consultant. 
c.	Poor drainage . Land which is considered unsuitable due to poor drainage. 
d.	Geologic/topographic conditions . Land which posses rock formations or outcroppings, and land having steep slopes, or land which may endanger health, life, or property. Land development which may aggravate erosion, increase flood hazard, or necessitate excessive expenditures of public funds for supply and maintenance of services. 
e.	Predetermined unsuitable . Land which other public agencies have investigated and found, in the best interest of the public, not suitable for the type of platting and development proposed. Such lands shall not be approved for subdivision unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer for meeting the problems created by subdivision of such land. 
f.	General . Land which is considered unsuitable due to scattered or premature subdivision of land which would endanger health, safety or property because of lack of, or adverse effect on the water supply, schools, proper drainage, transportation, other public services, or public funds for the supply or maintenance of such services. 
(2)	Design costs . Developers with little or no prior experience in subdivision development will encounter significant engineering and surveying cost and time relating to the design, submittal, and applicable resubmittal of subdivision design plans. 
(3)	Land/improvements. Developers will encounter significant costs in acquiring the land for the subdivision, designing the subdivision to city design requirements, the purchase and installation of the subdivision infrastructure and improvements including paved streets, drainage facilities such as drop inlets, stormwater piping and detention basins; sidewalks, municipal water and sewer, underground electric service, street lights, green spaces/greenways, recreation areas, landscaping, etc. 
(4)	Compliance fees. Developers will experience associated cost and time in complying with pertinent federal, state, and local regulations such as wetland mitigation, city design review and fees, state erosion and sediment control (E&S) review and fees, state/federal NPDES fees. 
(5)	Responsibility of costs. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer to underwrite the total cost of the construction of the subdivision development. The furnishing of performance bonding to gain early release of lots for sale, or other transfer of title, is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-22. - Preliminary consultation. 
Prior to the submittal of any preliminary development plat, all subdividers or developers are required to meet with the director of the planning commission, city director of public works, and other applicable representatives to review the city's requirements for development. The subdivider/developer should submit a draft scaled sketch of the proposed subdivision along with data showing existing conditions within the site and its vicinity. It is not necessary or recommended that developers produce engineered plans at this time. No fee shall be charged for this informal consultation, and no formal application is anticipated. The informal consultation will cover the development and design requirements and issues applicable to their development. After consultation and upon approval by the planning commission, the owner/developer may draft and submit a preliminary plat as described below. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-23. - Submittal of preliminary plat. 
(a)	Plat requirements and improvements. Prior to the submittal of a preliminary plat the subdivider/developer should first reference and become familiar with the zoning requirements for development which is found in the City of Thomson zoning ordinance for the zoning district in which the property is to be developed. The subdivider/developer is required to comply with those plat requirements noted herein which must be incorporated into the subdivision plans. 
(b)	Plan submittal. The subdivider/developer shall submit to the planning commission preliminary plat sets, the number of which shall be determined by the planning commission, along with a subdivision review fee in an amount as approved by the city council. The submittal of a preliminary plat to the planning commission for review neither constitutes an application for board review, nor conveys developmental rights to the subdivider/developer which are conveyed only upon approval of the preliminary plat by the city council. 
(c)	Plan review. At such time as the owner or developer submits to the planning commission a preliminary plat and any additional documentation as is required by the planning commission, and upon receipt of all applicable fees, the staff shall review the preliminary plat for conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The planning commission shall not accept a preliminary subdivision plan application for board review unless, in their judgment, it is found to comply with all applicable required plan elements and required subdivision improvements. The developer should note that the review of the preliminary plat by the planning commission does not include or cover the state's review undertaken by the local NRCS office for erosion and sedimentation control. Upon completion of the planning commission and city review, staff shall inform the developer of the results of the review and any subsequent actions necessary to bring the plat into conformity with the requirements of this chapter. Only at such time as the preliminary plat is reviewed and approved by the planning commission staff will the plat be eligible for presentation to the planning commission board, and city council thereafter. 
(d)	Application to planning commission board. 
(1)	Application without variance request(s). After review by the planning commission, should the preliminary plat be found to be in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter, without the necessity or intent of application by the developer for the granting of a variance from the provisions of this chapter, the review of the preliminary plat by the planning commission board shall neither be necessary nor required. The preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the planning commission directly to the city council for review. 
(2)	Application with variance request(s). After review by the planning commission, should the preliminary plat fail to be in full compliance with the provisions with this chapter, and it is the intent of the developer to apply for variances from the provisions of this chapter, the developer shall submit a "variance plat" which shall clearly indicate any variances or deviations which are being sought by the developer. After staff review of the variance plat the subdivider/developer will be directed to submit an application for preliminary plat review before the planning commission board, and thereafter to the city council. Such application shall be made by such date as is designated as the application cut-off date for such board review. 
[Advertising] Applications for variances from the subdivision regulations shall require a public notice which shall be advertised in the local newspaper of general circulation not less than 15 days prior to such review. Unless otherwise determined by the planning commission, notice by on-site signage shall not be required. Developers should contact the planning commission for guidance on the characteristics, design, and makeup of the "variance plat" sheet(s) which indicate the variances applied for. 
(e)	Planning commission board action (variance plat). The board shall review the application and thereafter recommend approval of the preliminary plat, with or without conditions, or denial of the preliminary plat. The board shall, in addition, have the opportunity of postponing their decision for a period not greater than 62 days. If action on a preliminary or variance plat(s) is not taken by the planning commission board within 62 days from the date of the first hearing, the planning commission shall be considered as having taken "no action" whereupon the preliminary plat shall thereafter be forwarded to the city council for review. In addition to the 62 days, additional time may be granted for review of the plats if agreed upon by the applicant. The final action or recommendation of the planning commission board shall be conveyed to the city clerk who shall then place the subdivision plat on the agenda for review by the city council. 
(f)	City council action. The city council upon review of the preliminary or variance plat shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission board and any additional comments or information regarding the application, and shall render a final declaration as to the approval, with or without conditions, or denial of the plat. The city council shall, in addition, have the opportunity to postpone their decision for a period not to exceed 93 days. If, however, final action is not taken by the council within 93 days of the date of the first hearing before the city council, the preliminary plat shall be considered as approved. In addition to the 93 days, additional time for review may be granted if agreed upon by the applicant. Approval of the preliminary plat by the city council shall constitute authorization for the subdivider to begin construction of the subdivision in accordance with the approved preliminary plat. Any deviation from the approved plan which is found during construction, or prior to the approval of the final or as built plat shall immediately be addressed by appropriate corrective action and approved by the planning commission or city council. The subdivider, subdivision owner, or agent shall not transfer, sell, or negotiate to sell any lots, areas, or phases of the subdivision, by reference or exhibition, except upon approval of the final or as built plat. Should the subdivision plat not be approved, the planning commission staff shall notify the applicant setting forth the reasons for such denial. 
(g)	Post approval actions. 
(1)	Preliminary plat status change. It shall be understood by the owner/developer that, upon approval of a preliminary plat, time is of the essence. Upon approval it is incumbent upon the subdivider/developer to begin development and construction of the subdivision in an expeditious manner. If it is determined by the planning commission that continuous development activity on or within the subdivision, or of a subdivision phase, has ceased, or is otherwise in a state of inactivity for a period of six months, the planning commission is hereby authorized to declare the status of the construction of the subdivision, and therefore the subdivision plat, as "inactive." Should a subdivision receive the status of "inactive," the developer shall be notified by standard post at his/her last known address of record that the preliminary plat approval and all development permits and approvals shall be considered as suspended until such time as the developer or subdivider shall apply for a "reactivated" status. The criteria and procedure for reactivation shall be determined by the planning commission. 
(2)	Reactivation and conformity. Prior to such time as the owner or developer shall apply for the status of "active" or "reactivated," the preliminary plat, and therefore the project addressed by said plat may be subject to being brought into conformity with any current standards of planning, construction, or engineered design at such time as the project and plat is considered for reactivation. 
(3)	Exemption (grandfathered plats) . Subdivision preliminary plats which have received approval from the city council prior to the adoption of this chapter and have been substationally (i.e., ≥90 percent) built out or have remained "active" as set forth in subsection (g)(1) above shall be considered as "grandfathered" and shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-24. - Preliminary plat design elements. 
No preliminary plat shall be accepted by the planning commission unless the plat contains all of the following plat elements: 
[ ] 1.)  A scale not greater than 1″ = 100′. 
[ ] 2.)  A sheet size not greater than 17″ X 24″. 
[ ] 3.)  One complete copy of the development plan formatted to 11″ X 17″. 
[ ] 4.)  Title: "Preliminary Development Plan." 
[ ] 5.)  Site map, north arrow, date, total project acreage. 
[ ] 6.)  Vicinity map. 
[ ] 7.)  Name and address of property owners. 
[ ] 8.)  Name and address of development designer, drafter, or engineer (including engineer's stamp). 
[ ] 9.)  Current and proposed zoning of the development site and surrounding properties. 
[ ] 10.)  Name(s) of adjoining property owners. 
[ ] 11.)  Boundary line bearings and distances of perimeter boundary. 
[ ] 12.)  Layout of all lots including approx. lot line dimensions (headings not necessary), the area of each lot, and front/side/rear building setback lines. 
[ ] 13.)  Existing and proposed easements including width and type. 
[ ] 14.)  Existing and proposed engineered water, sewer, and gas utilities. 
[ ] 15.)  Existing and proposed streets/streets to include, but not limited to, street names, profiles, and length of curve radius. 
[ ] 16.)  Layout of streets showing street names, street cross section diagram, right-of-ways and widths, street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents. 
[ ] 17.)  Proposed stormwater facilities including, but not limited to, drop inlets, pipes, basins and profiles. 
[ ] 18.)  Contour elevations not greater than two feet. 
[ ] 19.)  Boundaries of any areas suspected to be prone to flooding. If none, same shall be stated on the plat. 
[ ] 20.)  Any areas designated as FEMA floodplains. If none, same shall be stated on the plat. 
[ ] 21.)  Any areas designated as wetlands. If none, same shall be stated on the plat. 
[ ] 22.)  Location and size of all parks and recreations areas, or other areas not used for residential use. 
[ ] 23.)  Any areas previously designated as, or currently used as, landfills, C&D landfills, refuse or borrow pits. If none, same shall be stated on the plat. 
[ ] 24.)  Name of the subdivision. (See section 19-31.) 
[ ] 25.)  Layout design of all proposed development improvements including structures, fencing, landscaping, common/recreation areas, parking areas, drains, or cross-drains, utilities, etc. 
[ ] 26.)  Any additional notation or information as may be required by the planning commission, planning commission board, city council, or other. 
[ ] 27.)  Applicable and/or required subdivision improvements as referenced in article IV herein. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Secs. 19-25—19-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL STANDARDS OF DESIGN 

Sec. 19-31. - Name designations. 
(a)	Name of subdivision. The name of each subdivision must have the approval of the planning commission. The subdivision name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
(b)	Street names. Street names shall not duplicate existing street names irrespective of the use of the suffixes such as street, avenue, boulevard, street, pike, drive, way, trail, place, court, or other derivatives which shall be approved by the planning commission. The planning commission can assist the subdivider in avoiding duplication and in coordinating the names of streets. Approved street signs shall be placed at all intersections. Proposed streets which are continuations of, or are in alignment with, existing streets shall bear the names of existing streets. Streets whose intersection or "curves" approximate a right angle (90 o ) may, as directed by the planning commission, be required to be assigned a different name. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-32. - Street classification. 
Streets are classified in relation to the transportation function which they are to serve including the type, speed, and volume of traffic they will carry, and the required standards of design. The classifications of streets as used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
Classification by traffic volume: 
•  Primary Arteries (Arterial)—State and federal highways and those city streets which by design, traffic volume, and speed (55+ mph), or are specifically designated as a primary artery by the planning commission. 
•  Secondary Artery—City streets which are by traffic volume and speed (45-55 mph) are designated as such by the planning commission. 
•  Collector Streets—Streets as designated by the planning commission as having a lower traffic volume than arterial streets, and having a lower required speed (25-45 mph) and serve to facilitate the movement of traffic between land service streets and arterial streets. 
•  Land Service Streets—Streets which facilitate the movement of traffic directly from land lots to collector streets, and which require the lowest traffic speed (15-25 mph). 
Classification by use: (See section 19-34.) 
(1)	Residential: 
a.	Large lot subdivisions (Zone TR-1) (Lots ≥ 15,000 sq. ft., with min. frontage of 100′) 
b.	Medium lot subdivisions (Zone TR-2) (Lots ≥ 10,000 sq. ft., with min. frontage of 75′) 
c.	Small lot subdivisions (Zone: TR-3) (Lots ≥7,500 sq. ft., with min. frontage of <75′) 
(2)	Industrial. 
(3)	Commercial. 
(4)	Service drive. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-33. - Street system. 
(a)	Connection to existing streets. Existing streets that terminate at adjoin, or traverse a proposed subdivision shall meet or exceed all requirements of this article prior to, or as a result of, approval of the preliminary plat. Public streets providing access to the subdivision shall be paved from the nearest paved street of the public street system to each subdivision entrance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, developer, or subdivider to pave such streets. 
(b)	Layout of new streets. The proposed street system within a subdivision shall be determined by the planning commission to adequately balance the privacy of the future occupants with the free flow of traffic within the city, and to adequately provide for access for public safety by fire, police, and emergency medical vehicles, and for school buses. In making such determination, satisfaction of the following requirements shall be considered by the planning commission: 
(1)	In the opinion of the planning commission, where it is necessary to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication and improvement of right-of-way to the boundary of such property. 
(2)	Unless approved otherwise by the planning commission, a subdivision shall provide a street connection to each public street that it adjoins, and shall provide direct or indirect continuity through the subdivision between each connection. 
(3)	The proposed street layout should be designed to minimize cut and fill within the right-of-way to provide better access to the subdivision lots. The design should also minimize the area of tree removal required for installation of streets, utilities and drainage features in order to reduce the number of large trees removed during construction. 
(c)	Interval of intersection with arteries . Subdivision streets which intersect a city arterial street shall do so at intervals not less than the following: 
(1)	Primary artery, 1,000 feet; 
(2)	Secondary artery, 600 feet. 
(d)	Large parcels. When land is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels should be arranged so as to allow for the opening of streets in the future. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-34. - Design of streets. 
(a)	Width of street right-of-way . The minimum width of right-of-way measured from lot line to lot line shall be as follows: 

 
  1  A wider width may be required by the planning commission. 
  2  Requires prior approval of the planning commission. 
  3  Cul-de-sac: R/W radius—50′. 
  4  Cul-de-sac: R/W radius—60′. 
[For Clarification: Generally, those roadways of the state highway system are considered as primary arteries. Secondary arteries are those city streets having significant vehicular traffic which continue into the county, and possibly out of the county (e.g. Mt. Pleasant Road, Lumpkin Street/Mesena Road, etc.] 
(b)	Minimum width of pavement. The width of pavement, or path of travel, as measured from the front side of the gutters, shall be as follows: 

 
  1  A wider width may be required by the planning commission. 
  2  Requires prior approval of the planning commission. 
  3  Cul-de-sac: 40′ radius. 
  4  Cul-de-sac: 50′ radius. 
(c)	Vertical alignment of streets. 
(1)	Grades on arteries, collectors, and industrial land service streets shall not exceed seven percent; grades on commercial land service streets shall not exceed ten percent; grades on residential land service streets shall not exceed ten percent; all curbed and paved raised edge streets shall have a minimum grade of one percent. 
(2)	All changes in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve constructed so as to afford a minimum sight distance, which shall be measured from the driver's eyes, which are assumed to be three and three-fourths feet above the pavement surface, to an object six inches high on the pavement. The minimum sight distance shall be the minimum stopping sight distance for the rated speed of the street as follows: 

 
(d)	Horizontal alignment of streets. 
(1)	A tangent of at least 100 feet in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(2)	Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than the minimum stopping sight distance set forth in this section of the street intersected shall not be allowed. 
(3)	All streets shall intersect at right angles. Such intersecting streets shall continue as perpendicular from the center point of the intersection for not less than the minimum stopping sight distance for their respective rated speeds in accordance with this section. 
(4)	Right-of-way lines at street intersections shall have a radius of curvature of not less than 20 feet. Wherever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the street right-of-way line at such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. 
(5)	Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, the radius of curvature of the centerline of such street shall be not less than the following: 

 
  1  The planning commission may approve a 50-foot curvature to make more efficient use of land. 
(e)	Service drives. Service drives or alleys shall be provided to the rear of all lots used for business purposes, and shall not be provided in residential blocks, except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys or service drives, such as subdividing adjacent to an artery, or where specifically required by the planning commission. 
(f)	Cul-de-sacs. 
(1)	Cul-de-sacs will not be permitted as a design substitute for a connected or looped street, block street or grid pattern. 
(2)	Cul-de-sacs shall be redesigned and connected into a continuous or looped street should the straight linear distance separation be less than 600 feet between cul-de-sacs, or a cul-de-sac and an existing or proposed street, as measured from the closest right-of-way of each. 
(3)	Cul-de-sacs shall not be more than 1,000 feet long, or less than 300 feet long, unless necessitated by topographic or other conditions and are approved by the planning commission. 
(g)	Courts . Where street pavement and right-of-ways deviate from a straight right-of-way into a semi-circle set off to the side of the street, often named as a "court," the design of such court shall approximate the one half of the dimensional requirements of a cul-de-sac as referenced in this section. Excessive paved areas within courts will not be permitted. The entry and exit curb radii shall be of suitable length to afford ease of entry and exit. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-35. - Street construction. 
The construction of all public streets within the City of Thomson to include all subdivision streets, including the design and materials of construction shall come under the authority of the City of Thomson. To assist the developer in acquiring information regarding street design in the City of Thomson, please contact the planning commission. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-36. - Blocks. 
(a)	Length . Subdivisions employing a street block design shall not have blocks which shall not be less than 400 feet, nor more than 1,200 feet in length, except as the planning commission considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street patterns. In blocks greater than 800 feet in length, the planning commission may require one or more pedestrian easements of not less than ten feet in width which are paved, or are of suitable material, and which extend entirely through the block. [Also see section 19-38(b)(2).] 
(b)	Width . Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two rows of lots, except where a lot backs up to an arterial street/street, in which case, the planning commission may approve a single row of lots. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-37. - Lots. 
(a)	Adequate building sites. The owner, developer, or contractor shall be responsible for assuring that each lot shall contain a suitable building site not subject to flood or periodic inundation. Wherever fill is proposed to raise land at the building site, the developer or contractor shall assure that such fill shall be compacted to the degree of suitability for it use. At the discretion of the planning commission, a compaction test by a certified testing company may be required to verify suitable compaction. Such tests shall be at the expense of the contractor or developer, or other party. 
(b)	Arrangement . Each lot must abut a public street or street for a distance as prescribed by the City of Thomson Zoning Code. Side lot lines shall be at or near right angles to right-of-ways. Lot lines protruding excessively into adjacent lots will not be approved. With the exception of lot lines approximating the center line of waterways or shorelines of water bodies, excessive irregular lot lines or angles may not be approved. 
(c)	Minimum lot dimensions and areas. 
(1)	The size and shape of lots shall meet the minimum standards set forth in the city's zoning regulations. Orientation of lots shall be such as the planning commission deems appropriate for the use contemplated, type of water supply and sewage disposal, soil characteristics, improvements, and relation to the street system. 
(2)	The minimum depths of building setback lines for lots platted for all purposes shall be subject to the provisions of the city zoning regulations. To prevent obstruction of vehicular sight lines at intersections, unless otherwise approved by the zoning code, the building setback distances for corner lots shall be the minimum building setbacks from the centerline of both streets/streets. 
(3)	Properties reserved or platted for alternate or dissimilar use (commercial, industrial, multi-family, townhouse, etc.) or purposes shall be adequate in size to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. Platting of individual lots should be avoided in favor of an overall design of the land to be used for such purposes. Land shall not be platted for such uses unless the subdivider can demonstrate to the planning commission: 
a.	A site arrangement that prevents undue interference with through traffic. Alternate uses shall utilize a single collector for all heavy traffic between the area and the general system of streets and streets. Parcels for such uses shall be oriented at right angles with the collector and with adjacent railroads; 
b.	An on-site parking area for each use; 
c.	A mitigating buffer (vegetative buffer, berm, fencing, etc.) against any adverse effects on any present or future adjacent residences; and 
d.	A parcel size sufficient in area to allow future expansion if applicable. 
(d)	Lot division prohibited . Effective with the adoption of this chapter, the division of any lot, tract, or parcel within any existing subdivision is prohibited. Upon the recording of the final or as built plat for a newly constructed subdivision, such division is prohibited. 
(e)	Dual frontage lots. 
(1)	Dual frontage lots in the interior blocks of a subdivision should be avoided except where specifically required by the planning commission to provide separation of residential development from arterial and collector streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation of property. 
(2)	Dual frontage lots shall be permitted where such rear yards abut an existing public street, but where access from the rear yard to the public street is prohibited. 
(3)	An easement to the city may be required which extends along the entire right-of-way of the public street (see (2) above), across which there shall be no right of access, and screening shall be provided along the right-of-way abutting such public street, as follows: 
(f)	Easements . 
(1)	In the R-1, residential-agricultural zoning district, an easement of 30 feet in width in which the existing vegetation shall be left undisturbed, but may be supplemented with additional plantings. 
(2)	In all other residential zoning districts, the easement shall constitute a vegetative buffer the width of which shall not be less than the minimum front building setback from the centerline of the public road/street as is required by the zoning district in which it is located, or not less than 25 feet in width if it creates an opaque soil berm screen to a height of not less than six feet. 
(3)	The continued maintenance of such easements shall be the responsibility of the property owner, owner or developer of the subdivision, approved homeowner's association, or other party as approve by the planning commission or county. 
(4)	Except where alleys or rear service drives are permitted for such purpose, easements shall be required along rear and/or side lot lines, or elsewhere, if necessary, not less than ten feet nor exceeding 20 feet in width, for the extension of existing or planned utilities. 
(g)	Buffer/landscape. All buffer and landscaped areas are subject to the review and approval of the planning commission. Existing trees with ten inches diameter (dch—diameter at chest height) or greater shall not be removed unless removal is approved by the planning commission to prevent danger due to injury or disease to the tree. Modifications may be approved by the planning commission to achieve equivalent screening results depending on the topography, orientation or other physical factors of the site. 
(h)	Lot entrances/exits. 
(1)	All lots within subdivisions shall have one entrance (driveway) accessing each lot unless such lots are of sufficient width to accommodate a second access. Corner lots may have a second access providing each access is a minimum of 200 feet from the front corner juncture of the lot's right-of-way, or otherwise approved by the planning commission. 
(2)	All subdivision lot access shall be from interior subdivision streets. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-38. - Public use and service areas. 
(a)	Public open spaces . Where a school or recreation area, which is shown on an official map or in a plan made and adopted by the local board of education, is located in whole or in part in the applicant's subdivision, the planning commission may require the dedication or reservation of such open space within the subdivision, up to a total of ten percent of the gross subdivision area, including any water frontage for park, school, or recreational purposes. 
(b)	Community assets . In all subdivisions, due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees and watercourses and for historical areas and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-39. - Drainage. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in section 19-51(b), any plan for subdividing property shall include the incorporation of and compliance with the provision of the city's stormwater runoff management ordinance with additional emphasis on the review of adjacent properties and public infrastructure for the prevention of adjacent and downstream flooding. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-40. - Disposal. 
(a)	Refuse (burn). The disposal of refuse including tree stumps, limbs, leaves, or other items which are approved by the city and state as inert material may be disposed of by burning between October 1 and April 30 of each year, and only upon receipt of an applicable burn permit issued by the Georgia forestry service. From May 1 through September 30 such refuse shall be disposed of only in a manner, and at such location, as may be approved by the planning commission. 
(b)	On-site waste facilities. If required by the planning commission, the developer, contractor or subcontractor(s) shall be required to provide on-site portable waste disposal facilities for the use of his/her workers. The adequate number of such units, their placement, and the timely disposal of collected wastes shall be the responsibility of the developer or contractor(s). 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Secs. 19-41—19-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR IMPROVEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— In addition to the other requirements imposed by this chapter, and unless otherwise noted, all of the subdivision required improvements referenced below shall be incorporated into all subdivisions. However, only those improvements indicated below by an "(R)" are required to be shown on the preliminary and final plat before such plat shall be considered for staff review, application for board review, or recorded. 

Sec. 19-51. - Required improvements. 
(a)	Lot markers. In addition to the development's outer perimeter, all lot boundaries shall be marked with iron pipes, pins, or rebar not less than one-half inch in diameter and not less than 24 inches long, and shall be driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. Prior to submittal of a final or as built plat all lot lines at their juncture with the right-of-way shall be indicated with a one-inch by two-inch or greater wooden posts or three-inch diameter or greater white PVC pipe, or other markers as approved by the planning commission, which shall clearly indicate the lot number. Such marker shall extend a minimum of 24 inches above common grade. Lot markers located in the center of the front property line are not acceptable. 
(b)	Storm drainage (R). An adequate drainage system, including, but not limited to pipes, culverts, drains, inlets, headwalls, bridges, and detention/retention facilities, shall be provided as engineered for the proper drainage and detention/retention of all surface water. All engineered storm drainage systems shall be approved before such systems may be installed and before preliminary and final plat approval will be issued by the planning commission. 
(c)	Street development. Every subdivision lot or parcel shall have access to a street system which shall be designated and engineered according to the design criteria contained in article III herein, and such criteria referenced below. 
(1)	Preparation of right-of-way. The full width of all streets shall be prepared so that pavement, sidewalks, and other required improvements may be constructed in such a manner that future extension of additional utilities or street improvements will not damage yards of abutting property. Abutting property shall be suitably sloped to the right-of-way line. Due regard shall be shown for desirable trees not impairing visibility. 
(2)	Preparation of subgrade. Before grading is started, the entire area to be paved shall first be cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials. In all areas to be graded or filled, the subdivider shall stockpile the topsoil to be spread later in all disturbed areas not paved. 
(3)	Protection of banks. Immediately after grading, filling, and re-spreading of topsoil, all areas of disturbed soil shall be fertilized, seeded, sodded, or otherwise appropriately treated with suitable vegetative cover to retard erosion. The stabilization as evidenced by an adequate stand of grass on all right-of-ways shall be obtained to the satisfaction of the City of Thomson Streets Department before approval of the final plat. 
(4)	Street base. Street base material and compaction shall conform to the city's specifications for such, and shall be approved by the City of Thomson. 
(5)	Curb-and-gutter and paving (R). All new streets shall be surfaced by the developer with paving materials as required by city specifications regarding street paving and surface materials. Concrete curbs and gutters shall be required on all new streets and shall be constructed by the subdivision developer in accordance with the city's specifications for curbs and gutters. Where a subdivision abuts an existing state highway or city street, the developer shall be required extend the subdivision's street improvements (paved streets, curb/gutter, etc.) out to, and to improve such public street in compliance with the minimum requirements of this chapter. 
(6)	New streets (R). The preparation and development of all new streets shall comply with the city's specifications herein, and shall be approved by the city before such streets may be developed and accepted by the city council. 
(7)	Turn lanes (R) < (if required) . Center turn lanes may be required at entrances into residential, industrial, and commercial developments which front on arterial streets. Turn lanes shall be 12 feet in width for a minimum distance of 200 feet which distance shall be measured from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. Contact the planning commission for analysis of city streets at proposed subdivision entrances and the requirements for turn lanes. 
(8)	Acel/decel lanes (R). Acel/decal lanes shall be required for all subdivision entrances fronting a primary or secondary arterial roadway, or a major collector road or street of increased speed and traffic flow as determined by the planning commission. Acel/decel lanes shall be constructed to the design criteria as provided. 
(9)	Number of entrances (R) . To facilitate ease of traffic, subdivisions having frontage greater than 2,000 feet on an existing public street shall provide more than one entrance to such subdivision. 
(d)	Sidewalks (R). Concrete sidewalks shall be required for all residential subdivisions, multi-family and PUD developments. Sidewalks may be required in industrial and commercial developments depending on the characteristics and density of the development. Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of the streets and shall be four feet in width and four inches in depth. For standard (upright) curb and gutter, the sidewalk may join or abut the back side of the curb. For roll-top curbing, the front (street) edge of the sidewalk shall be placed not closer than five feet from the back side of the curb. Sidewalks shall not be located less than one foot from all front property lines to prevent interference or encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges or other plantings or structures placed on the property line at a later date. At street corners and other required locations, sidewalk handicap ramps shall be installed. In addition to interior subdivision sidewalks, sidewalks along exterior roadways or other public right-of-ways shall also be required where deemed by the planning commission as an integral part of a pedestrian traffic system within a one-mile radius of existing or planned schools, neighborhood recreation, or commercial areas, or other public places, and for continuation of existing sidewalks. 
(e)	Site improvements. Earthen banks which infringe on sight lines at street intersections shall be appropriately graded to correct the deficiency. Wherever grading or filling occurs on lots within the subdivision, the subdivider shall first stockpile the topsoil from the affected areas and shall immediately, upon conclusion of such grading, re-distribute the topsoil to support growth of lawn grass and other vegetation, and shall immediately seed such areas with appropriate vegetative cover to prevent erosion, silting of streams and other damages. Due regard should be shown for such desirable trees which are already on the site, and grading and filling should be planned to preserve as many of such trees as possible; however, no retained planting shall infringe on sight lines at intersections. If trees are planted by the subdivider, they shall be located five feet inside or behind property lines where they are less subject to injury, decrease the chances of motor accidents and enjoy more favorable conditions for growth. If trees are to be planted within a planting strip in the right-of-way, the proposed locations and species of such trees to be used must be submitted for the planning commission's approval since the public inherits the care and maintenance of such trees. Where land is platted or reserved for commercial or industrial use bordering or across from residential lots, a suitable buffer of trees and shrubs which are approved by the planning commission shall be required, such trees and shrubs shall not infringe on sight lines at intersections where planted. 
(f)	Sanitary sewerage (R) . 
(1)	Sewerage systems. All subdivisions (including any/all phases) shall be connected to an existing public sewerage system. 
(2)	Every habitable lot shall be provided with its own on-site sewerage system connection (tap). 
(3)	Proposed (future) sewerage lines. When it has been confirmed that the city will be installing sewerage lines within certain areas of the city, any new subdivisions developed within those areas or along proposed lines will be required to install capped "dry lines" within the development to provide service to all lots therein. Dry lines may be required to tap into the new city sewerage line upon installation and activation. 
(4)	Septic systems. The installation and use of septic tanks is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the city, and installation is approved by the appropriate health official. 
(5)	Community sewerage systems. Private community or group sewerage systems are prohibited. 
(g)	Public water systems (R). 
(1)	Water system. All subdivisions (including all phases) shall be connected to a public water system. 
(2)	Every habitable lot shall be provided with its own on-site water system connection (tap). 
(3)	Future water lines. When it has been confirmed that the city will be installing water lines within certain areas of the city, any new subdivisions developed within those areas may be required to install capped "dry lines" within the development. Dry lines shall be required to tap into the new city water line upon installation and activation. 
(4)	Community water systems. Private community or group water systems are prohibited. 
(5)	Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be provided as engineered with a separation as required by the city. Final grading around fire hydrants shall not be less than 36 inches below the center of the largest horizontal supply hub of the hydrant with the uniform grade extending outward from the hydrant for a radius of not less than six feet. Hydrant grading requirement shall also include hub clearance from such subdivision improvements as the top side of any curbing, sidewalks, etc. 
(h)	Entrance landscaping (R). All entrances into subdivisions shall be decoratively landscaped according to a landscaping plan submitted by the owner or developer which shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission. Such plan shall incorporate the use of ornamental trees, shrubs, and low growth ground cover in an acceptable ratio or coverage to prevent the coverage from appearing sparse. The planting of annual flowers is recommended. The planting of shade trees is optional and shall be approved by the planning commission based upon consideration of root growth interference with underground utilities, possible damage to curb and gutter and streets, annual leaf cleanup, and future maintenance. The size and location of the landscaped area shall not be less than 189 square feet in area on each side of the subdivision entrance, and shall be located at the immediate entrance to the subdivision in an area configuration as approved by the planning commission. 
(i)	Entrance sign (R). Every subdivision shall have an entrance sign which shall be prominently displayed giving the name of the subdivision in lettering the type and size and easily readable from a distance of 100 feet at the posted speed. Such sign shall be of monument type only, shall have a masonry base a minimum of 24 inches high and constructed of brick or stone. All materials shall be approved by the planning commission. Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, such sign shall not exceed six feet in height, 12 feet in width, or 72 square feet in area. If illuminated, such illumination shall be external only. Unless otherwise approved, such sign shall be positioned perpendicular to the existing city street. Upon prior review and approval of the planning commission the identification of the subdivision may be placed on a decorative element located at the entrance to the subdivision such as a masonry wall or fence. 
(j)	Underground electrical supply . All subdivisions with interior streets shall provide electrical service by means of buried services. Such services shall be accessed from street right-of-ways except where topographical conditions prohibit such direct access in which case ten-foot utility easements shall be provided along rear or side property lines. 
(k)	Street lights (R) . All subdivisions shall install, for the benefit of its residents, a street lighting system consisting of single standards (poles) with one or more lighting fixtures permitted. Lighting standards shall be of metallic composition, fiberglass, or other material and color as approved by the planning commission. Standards shall not exceed 25 feet in height or be separated by a distance greater than 300 feet. Upon approval of the planning commission, standards may be placed within sidewalks and within the right-of-way area, but no closer than three feet from any property lines. Developers shall install street light lines which shall be fuse protected and shall provide cutoff switching to allow for periodic or emergency maintenance or shutoff by city staff. 
(l)	Open space or recreation areas (R). Every subdivision shall provide an open space or recreation area set aside for the benefit of its residents which shall be of a minimum area size as indicated below, and should be equipped with such amenities and/or equipment as is suitable for light exercise and recreation such as park benches, picnic tables, and walking path(s). Land exhibiting characteristics unsuitable for such use as noted in section 19-21(a) shall not be approved. The owner or developer shall be responsible for all signage related to the open space and the safety of its use as required and approved by the city. The continued maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer, approved homeowner's association, or other party as approved by the planning commission and/or city. 

 
Open space and recreation areas may, upon approval of the planning commission, qualify toward green space requirements depending on size, location, design, characteristics of its natural vegetation, and any open space or park amenities. 
(m)	Green space/greenways (R). All subdivisions shall provide for an area or areas of undisturbed green space which shall be maintained in their natural state unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. The total areas of such green space(s) shall be not less than five percent of the total area of the subdivision and shall be readily accessible to all subdivision residents by way of adequate street frontage. The area or areas which are designated as "green space(s)" shall have an area configuration suitable for such designation as approved by the planning commission. Those areas not eligible for green space designation or use shall include, but not be limited to, those areas allotted for stormwater detention, right-of-ways, and areas of unsuitable terrain or possessing other negative characteristics. The location, size, design, placement, number, frontages, and other elements of green spaces shall come under the review and approval of the planning commission. 
(n)	Final grading. The developer or contractor shall be responsible for the proper final grading of the right-of-ways and other graded areas within the subdivision as referenced in subsection (e) above. Top soil shall be provided to sufficiently cover all infrastructures, and of such thickness to prevent the exposure of buried infrastructure during periods of rainfall until the graded areas are stabilized. Final top grading shall be of a smooth consistency having suitable grades and slopes to allow for the safely and ease of operation of maintenance equipment. 
(o)	Traffic signs/signals. Prior to the approval of a final plat, the subdivision owner or developer shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of all traffic signs and signals within the subdivision, to include the subdivision entrance(s). Signs and signals and their method of installation and placement shall first be approved by the city. 
(p)	Residential driveways. Paved driveways shall be required for each lot from the street pavement, shall traverse the right-of-way, and shall terminate in alignment with the rear of the residential structure or such other point of termination as approved by the planning commission such as a garage or carport. Such driveway shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and four inches in depth. 
(q)	Subdivision covenants. Subdivision owners or developers shall establish protective covenants to maintain the aesthetic appearance of the subdivision, to prevent the degradation of properties and property values, to provide additional safeguards for the health and safety of its residents, and to maintain the overall quality of life within the subdivision. Covenants should include applicable issues appropriate to their particular subdivision. Owners/developers should contact the planning commission for relevant issues to include as covenants. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Secs. 19-52—19-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POST APPROVAL 

Sec. 19-61. - Post approval development. 
(a)	Development rights. Upon approval by the city council of the preliminary plat, development rights shall be approved for the developer to begin construction of the subdivision. As referenced in section 19-23(g,) the developer should construct the subdivision in a timely manner. 
(b)	Improvement responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer to underwrite all construction costs of the subdivision development. The furnishing of performance bonding may be required by the planning commission, however, the submitting of a performance bond to gain early release of lots for sale or other transfer of title is prohibited. [Re: section 19-21(5)] 
(c)	Construction inspections. During construction, it shall be the responsibility of the developer or contractor(s) to periodically call for inspections by the appropriate city authorities or agents. Requests for inspections shall be made 24 hours in advance of the requested date and time of the inspection. Developers and contractors are prohibited from continuing with construction or installation of infrastructure until they have received inspection approval for the phase of construction and installation for which the inspection was requested. Inspections include, but are not limited to: 
(1)	Stream, drainage, and stormwater facilities . Inspection by the city to confirm the placement and size of all piping, catch basins, detention/retention outfall structures, and approved outfall of stormwater lines originating from streets. 
(2)	Water/sewer lines, and hydrants. Inspection by the City of Thomson Utilities Department and any other applicable city department of the installation of all water and sewer lines, and fire hydrants. Inspections shall be made by city personnel or other authorized agent. Inspection approval shall be received by the developer or contractor prior to the covering of any utilities which include, but not limited to; water lines, sewer lines, manholes, fire hydrants, lift stations, and taps made to such utility lines. 
(3)	Streets . The street contractor shall have each sub-base and base tested by an approved testing firm and lab to confirm compaction and moisture content. The results of such test shall be reviewed and must receive approval from the city. In addition, sub-bases and bases shall be inspected upon completion by the city. The inspection by the city of the asphalt layering of the roadway shall take place at the time that the asphalt is applied. Should the contractor elect or fail to call for asphalt inspections, the city reserves the right to implement core sampling of the roadway at contractor's expense. Upon completion of the installation of the right-of-way improvements the contractor shall establish a "stand of grass" to the satisfaction of the city to include the placement of turf grass as referenced in section 19-51(d). 
(4)	Right-of-ways and improvements . Right-of-ways shall have a finish grade as referenced in section 19-51. 
(5)	Safety . The installation of guard rails or other safety facilities may be required. The inspection of the installation of sidewalks and curb and gutter shall take place prior to the pouring of concrete. If required, the inspection of the installation of buried electrical cable for the street lighting system to confirm the location and depth of burial of the cable prior to covering same. 
(6)	Inspection of all green space(s), open spaces and associated facilities and improvements. 
(7)	Any other inspections, as may be required by the planning commission or other appropriate party for verification of proper construction and installation. 
To ensure the inspection of the proper installation of infrastructure and other subdivision improvements within the subdivision, the city may initiate any measures to enforce such requirements including, but not limited to, the issuance of "stop work" orders until such inspections are made and approved, or such corrections have been remedied to the satisfaction of the city or applicable party(s). 
Post construction inspection. At such time as the owner/developer considers the subdivision and all improvements therein to be substantially complete the owner/developer shall notify the planning commission at which time the staff of the planning commission and any applicable city department shall conduct a post-construction inspection of the subdivision to determine if the construction and infrastructure elements of the subdivision are in conformity with the previously approved preliminary plat. Should the subdivision construction not be in conformity with the approved preliminary plat (engineered plans) and other required improvements, the developer shall be notified by the planning commission or other agency. The developer shall remedy any and all nonconformities in a manner and method as is prescribed by the planning commission and/or city department. Should the post construction inspection indicate conformity with the preliminary plat, or at such time as all nonconformities are corrected and approved by the planning commission, city department(s), or other agency, the developer will be directed to proceed with the drafting and subsequent submittal of the final or as built plat. The planning commission may, at its discretion, require written verification from any inspecting party, department, or individual providing confirmation that the subdivision has been constructed according to the plans and specification as shown on the previously approved preliminary plat. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-62. - Final plat (as built plat). 
After the subdivision and all improvements have been completed, installed, and approved, at its discretion, the planning commission may approve the subdivision for building permits. In lieu of approving the entire subdivision, the planning commission, at its discretion, may elect not to approve the subdivision plat as a "final" plat for the entire subdivision but instead, elect to approve the plat of individual subdivision lots, or a plat of a "phase" of the subdivision. 
Final plats of real estate in the city shall be prepared in accordance with the standards set forth in O.C.G.A. tit. 15, ch. 6, art. 2, and shall comply with the following: 
(1)	Conformity . Plats shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and any remedy of nonconformities as approved by the planning commission and/or city council. 
(2)	Number of copies. Prior to the submittal of a hardcopy final or as built subdivision plat the party responsible for the submittal of the plat should first contact the planning commission for instructions as to the number of copies to submit and any additional elements, other than those elements indicated immediately below, that must be added to the plat. 
(3)	Digital copy. In addition to the number of hardcopies required, a digital (CD, or email) copy shall be submitted in .pdf or other suitable format. 
(4)	Plat elements. The final or "as built" plat shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
[ ] a.  Plats shall be produced on sheets which are not larger than 17" X 24". - (Max. recordable plat size.) 
[ ] b.  Plats shall be drawn to a scale of not more than 1" = 100'. 
[ ] c.  Subdivision name and vicinity map. If the plat represents a phase of the subdivision, show a reduced representation of the entire subdivision with the particular phase outlined or boxed. 
[ ] d.  Name/address of developer, subdivider, surveyor, and engineering firm. 
[ ] e.  Name/address of drafting or engineering firm to include engineer's signature and professional stamp. 
[ ] f.  North point and date. 
[ ] g.  Total number of lots, and total acreage of subdivision or subdivision phase. 
[ ] h.  Lot lines with dimensions and bearings; minimum front building setback lines; lots numbered in numerical order, and the area of each lot. 
[ ] i.  All dimensions shall be to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot, and all bearings and angles shall be to the nearest minute. 
[ ] j.  Exact boundary lines of the subdivision tract; names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets; and the location and ownership of adjoining property. 
[ ] k.  Layout of streets showing street names, right-of-ways, pavement widths, and street centerlines. 
[ ] l.  Locations, dimensions, and purposes of any parks or recreational areas, land to be dedicated for public use, land to be used for purposes other than residential, and land for future development. 
[ ] m.  Location, dimension, and purpose of easements as prescribed in section 19-38(b) herein. 
[ ] n.  Location, material and description of any monument and markers (excluding lot number markers). 
[ ] o.  Sufficient data to readily determine and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street, lot line, boundary line, front building setback line and block line, whether curved or straight. 
[ ] p.  FEMA designated floodplains, and other areas prone to flooding. If none, state same on plat. 
[ ] q.  All areas designated as wetlands. If none, state same on plat. 
[ ] r.  All waters considered as state waters to include stream bank buffers. If none, state same on plat. 
[ ] s.  All other subdivision as-built and in-place improvements including sidewalks, street lights, etc. 
[ ] t.  Such other information as may be required by the planning commission, city health officer, city council, or other designated official or office of same. 
[ ] u.  Each plat, if required, shall contain in such language as prescribed by the planning commission, a certificate by the surveyor as to survey and platting requirements; a certificate by the engineer as to engineering requirements; a certificate by the owner as to ownership and proposed dedication of streets, easements, utilities; a certificate as to floor elevation as related to the sanitary sewer system; and a certificate or stamp of final plat approval by the planning commission. 
[ ] v.  At the time of requesting final plat approval, a signed copy of any legal instruments, with all exhibits attached, as required by the planning commission or this chapter which may be furnished to the city for review by the city attorney. 
[ ] w.  Any other notation or information as may be required. 
(5)	Review and approval. Upon receipt by the planning commission of a final plat the planning commission shall review the final plat for conformity with the provisions of subsection (4) immediately above. If approved, the planning commission shall indicate same by stamp of approval on the final plat copy(s). Upon approval, the owner or developer shall record the final plat which authorizes the sale of lots within the subdivision. No building permits shall be issued until such time as the subdivision and all improvements therein have been completed and approved, and the final plat has been recorded. 
(6)	Taxes paid . All property taxes and other jurisdictional obligations associated with the subdivision shall be fully satisfied prior to approval of the final plat. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Secs. 19-63—19-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEVELOPMENT ASSURANCES, DEDICATION, VARIANCES 

Sec. 19-71. - Assurance of continued maintenance. 
To assure the proper installation and maintenance of all subdivision improvements prior to the City of Thomson accepting same, the following requirements shall be met: 
(1)	Developer maintenance period. The City of Thomson shall not accept any subdivision streetways, right-of-ways, or other subdivision improvements for a period of not less than 12 months from the date that all subdivision improvements have been initially completed, inspected, and approved as evidenced by approval of the final plat. If approved, the City of Thomson shall notify the owner or developer of same in writing at which time the developer maintenance period shall commence. In addition to the minimum one-year period developer maintenance period requirement, the city may require that 60 percent of the lots within the subdivision, or subdivision phase, have fully constructed residential structures in place prior to consideration of the acceptance or dedication of any subdivision improvements. The developer maintenance period and the 60 percent "built-out" requirement will allow for sufficient time to detect any hidden defects in the subdivision improvements which are not readily identifiable at the time of initial inspection of the improvements, and will assure that all subdivision improvements will be properly maintained. The initial 12-month developer maintenance period may be extended at the option of the city council. 
[Bond] The planning commission may require the developer/owner to maintain in force a performance bond securing the installation and approval of such subdivision improvements. 
(2)	Maintenance assurance. The subdivision developer or owner shall be required to keep all subdivision streets, right-of-ways, required traffic signs and signals, and all other subdivision improvements in good repair during the developer maintenance period, and any extensions thereof. As an assurance of such continued maintenance the city and/or planning commission may designate a lot or lots which shall be held in abeyance (not eligible for sale or issuance of building permits) until the owner or developer is in full compliance with the intent and conditions of the developer maintenance period. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-72. - Dedication of subdivision improvements. 
After the developer maintenance period and any applicable required extensions have expired, or terminated upon approval by the city, the subdivision developer or owner shall request the planning commission and applicable city departments to make a final inspection of all subdivision improvements. Should any defects exist, they shall be immediately remedied after which a final inspection shall again be requested. Upon inspection approval the subdivision owner or developer shall request in writing that all subdivision improvements be dedicated to, and accepted by, the City of Thomson. Upon acceptance by the city all approved lots being held shall be released for construction whereupon the subdivision owner or developer shall be relieved of future maintenance and assurances related to all subdivision improvements. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-73. - Variances. 
(a)	Board variances. Upon review of an initial verbal request for the granting of a variance(s), the planning commission shall investigate the circumstances surrounding the variance request to ascertain the validity and legitimacy of such request. Only if the causes prompting the request are beyond the control of the developer will the planning commission allow an application to be submitted for planning commission board review. Mere inconvenience, financial or otherwise, shall not constitute authorization for an application for a variance. Should a variance application be approved for submittal, the applicant shall submit to the planning commission a specific request for such which shall include specific and detailed justifications why such variance(s) should be granted. The recommending of any variances by the planning commission board, and the granting as any variance by the city council shall be stated in the minutes of the of the respective board meeting with the reasons for which the departure was justified and the conditions under which such variance was granted. 
(b)	Administrative variances. The planning commission is hereby authorized to grant variances to requirements of this chapter provided the intent of this chapter is maintained. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Secs. 19-74—19-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LEGAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 19-81. - Severability. 
Each phase, sentence, paragraph, section or other provision of this chapter may be severed from all other such phrases, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and provisions. Should any phrase, sentence, paragraph, section, or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect any other portion or provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-82. - Interpretation of conflicting requirements. 
Whenever the requirements of this chapter conflict or are in any way inconsistent with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing higher standards, shall govern. No plat approval shall be issued or considered valid for any use or activity which, if known, would be otherwise illegal under the terms of any applicable local, state, or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-83. - Repeal of former subdivision ordinance. 
This chapter is the official subdivision for the City of Thomson, Georgia. All other conflicting local ordinances and resolutions adopted prior to the adoption of this chapter are hereby repealed; provided that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying those land use approvals, permits, plats, or variances issued in good faith which were, at the time, in compliance with any previous local ordinance or resolution hereinafter repealed by this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-84. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect and be in full force from and after the date of its adoption by the City Council of the City of Thomson, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-85. - Penalties for violation. 
Penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions of grants of variance shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, pursuant to the General Provisions, section 1-13 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Thomson, upon conviction, be fined not more than $1,000.00, or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both. Each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Thomson from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-86. - Legal remedies. 
In the event any provision of this chapter has been violated or is being violated, in addition to other remedies, the city may institute an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate such violation. The governing authority of the City of Thomson may enforce this chapter by means of withholding plat approval, development rights, and building permits from those persons who are in violation of the chapter. In addition, the city may issue a "stop work" order to halt construction of any project authorized by permit issued by the city until such time as the construction complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Sec. 19-87. - Enforcement. 
The City of Thomson zoning administrator or authorized agent, city attorney, or other appropriate official authorized by the city council may institute such actions as may be necessary to remedy or prosecute violations of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 546, 6-10-10 ) 
Chapter 20 - TAXATION AND REVENUE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for the collection of taxes, § 1.02(a). 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes, or providing for the levying or collecting thereof safe from repeal, § 1-7(16); administration, ch. 2; excise tax on malt beverages, § 3-91 et seq.; excise tax on wine, § 3-116 et seq.; licenses and business regulations, ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal governments, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; limitation on taxing power of municipalities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 8; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-2; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 483, adopted Dec. 19, 1994, enacted provisions which have been codified herein as superseding former Art. II, Divs. 1 and 2, relative to insurers, which derived from Ord. No. 410, adopted Oct. 13, 1983 and Ord. No. 415, adopted July 12, 1984. 
State Law reference— Municipal license fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 

Sec. 20-26. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Thomson, Georgia in the amount of $50.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 20-27, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the City of Thomson, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $50.00. For the purpose of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 1, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-27. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $17.50 per location for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 2, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-28. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc. not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 20-26 hereof in the amount of $50.00 for each such location within the City of Thomson. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 3, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-29. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 20-26. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 4, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-30. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 20-26. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 5, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-31. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 20-26 and 20-27 shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 6, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-32. - Administrative provisions. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of the ordinance from which this article derives to the Insurance Commissioner of the State of Georgia within 45 days of its enactment. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 7, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-33. - Effective date. 
This article [Ordinance No. 483] shall become effective January 1, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 8, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-34. - Severability. 
In the event any portion of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, it is the intention of the City Council of the City of Thomson, Georgia, that such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause or phrase were not originally a part of the article. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 9, 12-19-94) 
Sec. 20-35. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 10, 12-19-94) 
Secs. 20-36—20-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Business license tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 20-66. - Business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 1, 11-10-83) 
Sec. 20-67. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)	Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(b)	The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1, 1984 and April 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 411, § 2, 11-10-83) 
Secs. 20-68—20-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. IV, §§ 20-101—20-117, relative to business and professional occupational fees, has been deleted at the discretion of the editor as superseded by the provisions enacted by Ord. No. 482, enacted Dec. 19, 1994, which is currently codified within Ch. 10 of this Code. The provisions of former Art. IV derived from nonamendatory Ord. No. 470, §§ 1—17, adopted Jan. 14, 1993. 

Secs. 20-101—20-117. - Reserved. 
Chapter 21 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to acquire, construct, operate, etc., public utilities, § 1.02(f). 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; planning and development, ch. 14; solid waste management, ch. 16; streets and sidewalks, ch. 18; subdivision of land, ch. 19; zoning, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Power of city to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; city's authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Damage to, tampering with apparatus. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to a company, or to the city, engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone or other public services, or intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of such company or the city intentionally to divert any services of such company or the city or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of such company or the city, any service manufactured, sold, or distributed by such company or the city. 
(b)	Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts referred to in subsection (a) of this section and/or the person who with knowledge of such violation receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of such improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. 
(c)	Violators of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 12 months, or by any one or more of these punishments, subject to all limitation contained in the charter of the city. 
(Ord. No. 348, §§ 1, 2, 5-13-76; Ord. No. 564 , 7-6-16) 
Sec. 21-2. - Exemption from state law regarding self-inspection of certain water and sewer lines. 
Pursuant to Section 3 of Act No. 1046 enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia during the 1996 Session of the legislature and signed by the Governor on April 25, 1996, does hereby exempt the City of Thompson, Georgia from the provisions of said Act codified as O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). 
(Ord. No. 491, 7-11-96) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 491, adopted July 11, 1996, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as § 21-2. 
Sec. 21-3. - Rate policy for a schedule of water and sewerage use and taps. 
(a)	Rates for all water, sewer, sprinklers, penalties, deposits and tapping fees for water and sewer shall be recommended by the Thomson-McDuffie County Water-Sewer Commission and approved by city and county commissioners by resolution. Rate adjustments shall be made on an as needed basis. 
(b)	Persons desiring to move or demolish any building which has water or sewerage connections shall be required to have said lines stubbed or plugged at the property line, and such person shall give 24 hours' notice to the city clerk of his intention to move or demolish said buildings; and shall pay the current inspection fee then and there to cover the cost of an inspection by an authorized employee of the city to see that said lines are stubbed. Where any property owner has a building destroyed by fire or other cause, said owner shall have ten days in which to stub and open sewer or water pipes. 
(c)	Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this section shall be punished as provided by existing ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 495, § 2, 11-13-97) 
Secs. 21-4—21-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to acquire, construct, etc., water systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 21-26—21-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSERVATION 

Sec. 21-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial shall mean any type of building other than residential. 
Construction shall mean the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential shall mean any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 1, 5-9-91) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-37. - Enforcement. 
This division shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 6(a), 5-9-91) 
Sec. 21-38. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating this division shall be tried before the municipal court and subject to a penalty in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 6, 5-9-91) 
Sec. 21-39. - Exemptions. 
(a)	New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of this division when: 
(1)	The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)	When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this division were installed; 
(3)	Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)	Units to be installed are: 
a.	Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.	Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.	Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)	The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector. A fee shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 5, 5-9-91) 
Sec. 21-40. - Certain fixtures—Prohibited. 
No construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)	Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this paragraph shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)	Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.2 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)	Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush; 
(4)	Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)	Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.2 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 2, 5-9-91; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 11-9-00) 
Sec. 21-41. - Same—Application. 
The requirements of section 21-40 shall apply to any construction which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 4, 5-9-91) 
Sec. 21-42. - Construction of commercial buildings to meet requirements. 
On or after July 1, 1992 there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections (1) through (5) of section 21-40. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 5-9-91) 
Secs. 21-43—21-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 548, §§ 1—4, adopted Nov. 11, 2010, eff. Jan. 1, 2011, was not specifically amendatory. These provisions have been included as §§ 21-51—21-54 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 21-51. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the city may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, diary, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)	Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)	Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)	Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)	Hand watering with a hose with an automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)	Use of water withdrawn from an existing private water well or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)	Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)	Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)	Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 21-52. - Enforcement. 
(a)	No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained herein. 
(b)	The code enforcement office of the city shall be the enforcement authority for this division. 
(c)	Any violation of the provisions of this division may be enforced by citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 2, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 21-53. - Penalty. 
Unless otherwise expressly provided, any violation of the provisions of this division shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or 60 days' imprisonment, or both. Each act of violation, and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 3, eff. 1-1-11) 
Sec. 21-54. - Appeals. 
Appeals of the provisions of this division may be appealed to the Mayor and Council of the City of Thomson. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 4, eff. 1-1-11) 
Secs. 21-55—21-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, sec. II, par. III(a)(6); acquisition, construction, etc., of municipal water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent shall mean the superintendent of water and gas of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. I, §§ 1—22, 11-18-71) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-67. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)	Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 21-71 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)	Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(c)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. VIII, §§ 1—3, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-68. - Right of entry for inspection, enforcement. 
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. VII, § 1, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-69. - Observation of safety rules; liability. 
(a)	While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 21-68, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to such city employees. 
(b)	The city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 21-148. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. VII, § 2, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-70. - Right of entry on easements. 
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. VII, § 3, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-71. - Malicious mischief. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. VI, § 1, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-72. - Objectionable wastes prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. II, § 1, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-73. - Discharge of untreated wastes. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. II, § 2, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-74. - Construction of disposal facilities restricted. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. II, § 3, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-75. - Connection to public sewers. 
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that such public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. All connections to the public sewer system shall be made conforming to the following requirements: 
(1)	Building sewer. The sewer pipe material shall be of either cast iron, soil pipe, service weight or heavier; ABS or PVC DWV Schedule 40 or heavier plastic pipe. Joints shall be watertight and root resistant. 
(2)	Depth of house sewers. No sewer, except cast iron, shall be laid with less than 18 inches of cover. All sewers laid beneath driveways must be of sufficient depth to prevent injury from reasonably anticipated driveway loads but in no case shall there be less than three feet of cover if the sewer is of other than cast iron. Sewers that must be installed above-ground to cross a stream or ravine or other terrain features shall be of a substantial material and supported on piers not subject to deterioration and shall be of such quality as to resist damage by refuse washing past. 
(3)	Sewer or drain in filled ground. When a building sewer or building drain is installed in filled or unstable ground it shall be of service weight or heavier cast iron bell and spigot or hubless cast iron with cast iron couplings. 
(4)	Existing building sewers and drains. Existing building sewers and drains may be used in connection with new building sewer and drainage systems only when found by examination and test to conform to the new system in quality of material prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. II, § 4, 11-18-71; Ord. No. 402, § 4, 11-11-82) 
Sec. 21-76. - Requirements for the disposal of septic tank waste by private haulers. 
(a)	General provisions. It is the intent of this section that service be provided for the disposal of septage in the Thomson Waste Water Treatment Plant to the extent that the disposal of the septage does not interfere with the proper operation and maintenance or the ability of the treatment plant to meet its permit. Waste haulers will bear the responsibility to prove the origin of the waste being hauled for disposal. This can be done by producing a manifest, work order, invoice or other form with customer's phone number and signed by the customer which indicates the type of waste and the location from which it was removed. Loads will not be accepted for disposal unless the desired information is indicated on the form. 
(b)	Hours of service. Waste will be received for disposal at the waste water treatment plant Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. If there is a requirement to dispose of waste outside these normal hours, a request shall be made in advance and with the understanding that an additional surcharge (overtime fee) will be added as shown in section 21-76(c) below for each truck of septage emptied after normal hours. Every effort will be made to comply with reasonable requests made by septage haulers. 
(c)	Billing. For billing purposes, waste hauled by septic tank haulers shall be divided into three classes: 
Class A: Any load which contains domestic septage from single and multifamily residences, portable toilets and commercial sources only. 
Class B: Any load which contains commercial septage from grease traps in whole or in part. 
Class C: Any load which contains industrial septage from waste generated as a result of an industrial process in whole or in part. 
Disposal fees for the above indicated classes of waste shall be at such rates as adopted by the City of Thomson, including surcharge and penalties, as adopted and billed in such manner as determined by the City of Thomson. 
Industrial waste as defined above must be pre-approved for disposal. Analyses must be performed which indicate the contents of the waste before delivery to the waste water treatment plant. Approval will be granted or denied on a case by case basis. These analyses may be performed by any qualified laboratory and the cost will be the responsibility of the waste generator or the waste hauler and not the City of Thomson. 
Note 1: A $15.00 surcharge shall be added to either of the above classes for each truck of septage emptied after normal hours. 
Note 2: A $10.00 surcharge shall be added to either of the above classes for each truck of septage which originated in whole or in part from outside McDuffie County sources. 
Billing Example: Septage truck for Class A only waste disposal from outside McDuffie County after normal hours. 

 
Fees for septic truck haulers shall be billed on a monthly basis and are due no later than ten days from the billing date indicated on billing invoice. Late payment shall result in a 20 percent penalty added to the total billing. 
(Ord. No. 472, §§ I—III, 4-8-93; Ord. No. 518, § 1, 5-8-03) 
Editor's note— Provisions enacted by §§ I—III of Ord. No. 472 adopted April 8, 1993, have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as § 21-76. 
Secs. 21-77—21-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 21-96. - When permitted. 
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 21-84, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. III, § 1, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-97. - Permit required, application, fee. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as set by the mayor and council from time to time shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. III, § 2, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-98. - Inspection. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. III, § 3, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-99. - Specifications. 
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of public health of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 40,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. III, § 4, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-100. - Sanitary maintenance. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. III, § 6, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-101. - Additional requirements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. III, § 7, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-102. - Abandonment, connection to public sewer. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 21-99, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. III, § 5, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-103. - Connection public sewer; closure of private system. 
When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to such sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bankrun gravel or dirt. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. III, § 8, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-104. - Toilets. 
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain a surface toilet in the city. It shall be unlawful to maintain or keep an unsanitary or offensive toilet in the city. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 34, 1-8-81) 
Secs. 21-105—21-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 

Sec. 21-116. - Permit required. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. IV, § 1, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-117. - Classification of permits; application, fee. 
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as set by the mayor and council from time to time shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. IV, § 2, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-118. - Cost of installation. 
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. IV, § 3, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-119. - Separate, independent connections. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. IV, § 4, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-120. - Use of old sewers. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. IV, § 5, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-121. - Technical requirements. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. IV, § 6, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-122. - Point of connection; means to assist discharge. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. IV, § 7, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-123. - Discharge of surface runoff, groundwater prohibited. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. IV, § 8, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-124. - Connection to public sewer. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. IV, § 9, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-125. - Notice for inspection, supervision of connection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. IV, § 10, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-126. - Excavations. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. IV, § 11, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-127. - Clean-out tees. 
(a)	All new homes, or buildings of every description which have connections with the city sewage system shall be required to have a clean-out tee five feet or less from the building in the sewer line brought up to the ground level, or extended to the back of the house or building where it must be easily accessible to anyone desiring to clean out such line. 
(b)	All existing sewer lines or outlets in homes or businesses or other buildings must have clean-out tees installed five feet or less from the building or extended to any easy accessible place for anyone desiring to clean out a sewer line. Such clean-out tees must be installed in order to clean out any line, and no line may be cleaned out by breaking such line. 
(c)	Any lateral line found to be leaking or with an opening which allows surface water or leaking water or liquid from any source to enter the sewage system must be repaired by the property owner or other person responsible for such property within 30 days after notice from the city. If property owner fails to comply with this section, the city shall discontinue sewage and water service to such property until such repairs are made. 
(d)	This section shall apply to all owners and all plumbers and contractors and builders, in addition to the requirements of present plumbing codes under which they may be working. 
(e)	Upon conviction for violation of the terms of this section any owner or plumber or contractor or builder shall be subject to punishment in accordance with section 1-14 and any owner shall be subject to having his sewer service disconnected; and any plumber or contractor or builder shall be subject to having his license revoked. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. IV, § 12, 11-18-71; Ord. No. 315, § 1, 3-9-72; Ord. No. 435, 6-11-87) 
Secs. 21-128—21-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 21-141. - Unpolluted drainage—Prohibited into sanitary sewers. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. V, § 1, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-142. - Same—Use of storm, combined sewers, natural outlets. 
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. V, § 2, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-143. - Prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)	Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)	Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. V, § 3, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-144. - Restricted wastes. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances coming under this section are: 
(1)	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)	Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(4)	Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5)	Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials. 
(6)	Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)	Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)	Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)	Materials which exert or cause: 
a.	Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.	Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to; dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.	Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.	Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs. 
(10)	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. V, § 4, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-145. - Options available to superintendent. 
(a)	If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 21-144, and which in the judgment of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)	Reject the wastes; 
(2)	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)	Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 21-150. 
(b)	If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. V, § 5, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-146. - Interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. V, § 6, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-147. - Maintenance of pretreatment facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. V, § 7, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-148. - Control manhole. 
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. V, § 8, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-149. - Measurements, tests, analyses. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of the premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. V, § 9, 11-18-71) 
Sec. 21-150. - Special agreements, arrangements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. 
(Ord. No. 313, Art. V, § 10, 11-18-71) 
Secs. 21-151—21-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NATURAL GAS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 481, adopted Dec. 8, 1994, repealed the provisions of former Art. IV, §§ 21-171—21-179, relative to natural gas systems, which derived from Ord. No. 452, §§ I—VII, adopted Jan. 11, 1990. Said Ord. No. 481 enacted new provisions relative to similar subject matter which has been included herein at the discretion of the editor as a new Art. IV, §§ 21-171—21-177. 

Sec. 21-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appliances shall mean all stoves, heaters, hot water tanks, conversion units and any other devices in which natural gas is used. 
Customer shall mean any person, firm or corporation buying gas from the city. 
Customer's inlet shall mean the location of the pipe at the customer's premises where gas is delivered to the customer. 
Gas system shall mean the transmission line from the Southern Natural Line or other supply lines to the city border stations and the distribution mains, together with all service lines, valves, meters, cocks, regulating equipment and other appurtenances necessary to distribute gas to the customers. 
House piping shall mean the piping in or around the house or building of the customer. 
Licensee shall mean any person, firm or corporation holding an appropriate license to install house piping and other appliances. 
Main shall mean a line, part of the distribution system, that transports gas. 
Service line shall mean the line from the main to the customer's inlet. 
Specifications shall mean the standard specifications for the construction of natural gas systems shall be complied with unless other procedures, methods or specifications are specified in a city ordinance or the operating instructions. 
(Ord. No. 481, 12-8-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-172. - Scope of service. 
(a)	Every person, firm or corporation who can be served by the city at a profit will be served natural gas under the city's rules, regulations and tariffs. The size of the service and appurtenances used to serve each customer shall be such that they will render efficient service to the customer. 
(b)	Prospective customers desiring gas service where the city has an existing main will be furnished free of charge 100 feet of service line and the necessary fittings, valves, meter and regulator. In the event the customer's inlet is over 100 feet from the city's main, a charge for the cost of the additional pipe will be made by the city for that amount of the service line exceeding 100 feet. 
(c)	Each prospective customer must sign up with the city for the service the customer desires. Each prospective customer must obtain for the city an easement over the property where the service will be installed, permitting the city to use this property to lay the gas line service and permitting the city ingress and egress to the property for purposes necessary for the operation thereof. 
(d)	Each prospective customer must make a deposit in an amount set by the mayor and council from time to time with the city at the time of signing an application for service. Any deposit made by the customer shall be refunded to the customer at the time service to said customer is discontinued, provided the customer has paid all amounts due the city. 
(Ord. No. 481, § I, 12-8-94) 
Sec. 21-173. - Rates and billing. 
(a)	The city has two primary categories for rates and billing. These are: 
(1)	Residential. 
(2)	Interruptable. 
(b)	The mayor and council shall establish the rates and subsequent billing for the above categories based on fluctuations (up or down) in gas operating costs without the requirement to change this article. 
(c)	Meters shall be read and bills to customers for gas service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable and the amount due as shown by said bill shall be payable ten days from date thereof, and if not paid within said ten-day period a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto and collected. If the amount of the bill, including the penalty, is not then paid within the next ten days the gas service shall, without any further grace period, be disconnected. The deposit so made shall be used and applied against the amount owed by the customer and any balance shall be returned to the customer. The full amount of any deposit held by the city will be returned to the customer only in the event gas service is disconnected and the customer's bill, including the disconnect charge, has been paid in full. Should such customer thereafter wish to be reconnected to the gas system the deposit herein above provided for will be required before reconnection. 
(d)	Any customer who desires to have his service temporarily disconnected for any reason must pay the current disconnect fee before services are restored. 
(Ord. No. 481, § II, 12-8-94) 
Sec. 21-174. - Inspections, tests, etc. 
(a)	The city is authorized and empowered to inspect the installation, construction or reconstruction of all house piping and fittings that will transport natural gas. All installation, construction or reconstruction shall comply with the Southern Building Code Congress International Standard Gas Code which has been adopted by the city. 
(b)	Every licensee shall test every installation by air with a mercury gauge in a manner satisfactory to the gas department. This test shall include all house piping and appurtenances up to and including the shutoff cock of the appliance. The gas department may witness such test and when test is satisfactory, sign a certificate that such test has been made at a certain time and for a certain person at a certain location and for a certain number of outlets. Such certificate shall be filed in the office of the city before any gas is turned into this house pipe. 
(c)	An inspection fee may be charged by the city to the licensee for each house pipe inspection made and certificate issued. In the event the gas department finds the work done by the licensee unsatisfactory he shall so advise the licensee. The licensee shall then correct any improper work. Another inspection shall then be made for which the current fee will be charged. If the work is not satisfactory on the second inspection, the work will be condemned and the license of the licensee may be revoked. 
(d)	In the event any test indicates a leak, soapsuds at each fitting or connection shall be used to find the leak at which time the leakage shall be corrected. 
(e)	No gas shall be turned into a service or house piping until such service or house piping is tested and proved to be gas tight. 
(f)	As gas is turned into a service or house piping the property owner or occupant shall be responsible for carefully bleeding all air in the line through the appliance burners or through the dead end of a pipe run. No air shall remain in any part of the piping, however small, at the time the piping starts serving gas. 
(Ord. No. 481, § III, 12-8-94) 
Sec. 21-175. - License for installation. 
No piping or appliance which uses natural gas from the mains and service of the gas system shall be installed by any person unless such person shall be licensed by the State of Georgia to do such work. 
(Ord. No. 481, § IV, 12-8-94) 
Sec. 21-176. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14 of the City of Thomson Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 481, § V, 12-8-94) 
Sec. 21-177. - Repealer. 
Ordinances 242, 385, 452 and Article IV, Natural Gas, Sections 21-171 through 21-179 of Chapter 21, Utilities, of Ordinance 471 are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 481, § VI, 12-8-94) 
Sec. 21-178. - Gas appliance rebates. 
Customers who install certain gas appliances for connection to the city's natural gas line shall be entitled to rebates in an amount to be determined by the mayor and council. The rebates may be issued for but not limited to: 
(a)	Water heater; 
(b)	Gas clothes dryer; 
(c)	Gas range; 
(d)	Gas logs; 
(e)	Gas lights; 
(f)	Gas cooling; 
(g)	Combination gas furnace/space heater with water heater; 
(h)	Such other appliances or combinations as determined by mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 1, 12-14-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 488, § 1, adopted Dec. 14, 1995, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as § 21-178. 
Sec. 21-179. - Tap fee surcharge for dual fuel heat pumps. 
There shall be a tap fee surcharge and ready to service fee for a customer who installs a dual fuel heat pump. The amount of these fees shall be determined from time to time by the mayor and council. A dual fuel heat pump is an electric heat pump which uses a natural gas fired furnace to provide backup heat. A customer who has installed a dual fuel heat pump shall pay a $6.00 per month ready to service fee in addition to all other applicable charges. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 2, 12-14-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 488, § 2, adopted Dec. 14, 1995, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as § 21-179. 
Secs. 21-180—21-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS 

Sec. 21-201. - Notice of violations. 
No person shall be convicted of violation of this article until he has been notified in writing by the city administrator of such violation at least five days prior to making a case for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 5, 3-8-90) 
Sec. 21-202. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person convicted of violation of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 7, 3-8-90) 
Sec. 21-203. - Separate offenses. 
After five days notice has been given to any person by the city administrator that each day thereafter that extensions to the water and wastewater system are not installed in accordance with this article, shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this article and punishment may be imposed accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 6, 3-8-90) 
Sec. 21-204. - Design, construction standards. 
All water and sanitary sewer extensions shall be designed and constructed to meet or exceed the minimum requirements of the Standard Technical Specifications and Detailed Drawings for Sanitary Sewer Extension and Water System Extensions dated January 1990 prepared by M. R. Chasman & Associates, P.C., Athens, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 1, 3-8-90) 
Sec. 21-205. - Specifications for materials. 
The following type materials shall be included in the standard specifications for the city water and wastewater systems: 
(1)	Water system: 
a.	Pipes three inches through 48 inches may be ductile iron, class 50 or greater, cement lined, and shall be in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4, latest revision. 
b.	Pipes four inches through 12 inches may be PVC, working pressure of 100 psi or greater, cast iron OD sized, and shall be in accordance with AWWA C900, latest revision. 
c.	Service lines may be copper as per ASDTM B88, type K or L; or galvanized steel pipe conforming to ASTM B36-10. 
(2)	Wastewater system: 
a.	Pipes six inches through 48 inches may be ductile iron class 50 or greater, cement lined, and shall be in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4, latest revision. 
b.	Pipes six inches through 15 inches may be ABS or PVC truss pipe as per ASTM D2680. 
c.	Pipes four inches through 12 inches may be single wall PVC as per ASTM 3034, S DR 35 or greater. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 2, 3-8-90) 
Sec. 21-206. - Inspections. 
The water and sewerage superintendent for the city, or his authorized representatives, shall inspect and approve the installation of water and sewer extensions before backfill, observe the hydrostatic pressure and leakage tests to ensure that the findings are in accordance with the requirements of the specifications aforementioned and to perform additional testing as needed to ensure that the water and sewer extensions are constructed in accordance with good practices. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 3, 3-8-90) 
Sec. 21-207. - Nonconforming system. 
There is no requirement that present lines not meeting the specifications prescribed by this article be replaced immediately, but it is intended that any further extensions of the water and wastewater systems shall conform to this article and the requirements hereof. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 4, 3-8-90) 
Secs. 21-208—21-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 21-231. - Short title. 
This article may be cited as the Underground Utility Damage Prevention Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 2-10-83) 
Sec. 21-232. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Damage shall mean the substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility, penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective device of an underground utility, and the partial or complete severance of an underground utility. 
Demolish or demolition shall mean any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, rendered, moved or removed by means of any tools, equipment or discharge of explosives. 
Excavate or excavation shall mean an operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock or other materials in or on the ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, and including auguring, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but not including the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes. 
Mechanized equipment shall mean equipment operated by means of mechanical power including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augers, backhoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows and other equipment used for plowing-in or pulling-in cable or pipe. 
Operator shall mean any person who owns or operates a utility. 
Utility shall mean any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting or distributing communication, electricity, gas, petroleum, petroleum products, hazardous liquids, water, steam or sewerage. 
Working day shall mean every day, except Saturday, Sunday and national and legal state holidays. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 2, 2-10-83) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-233. - Civil penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty of not to exceed $1,000.00 for each such violation. Actions to recover the penalty provided for in this section shall be brought by the city's attorney at the request of any person in the city in which the cause, or some part thereof, arose or in which the defendant has its principal place of business or resides. All penalties recovered in any such actions shall be paid into the general fund of the city. This article does not affect any civil remedies for personal injury or property damage except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 11, 2-10-83) 
Sec. 21-234. - Compliance with article. 
A permit issued pursuant to law authorizing excavation or demolition operations shall not be deemed to relieve a person from the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 3, 2-10-83) 
Sec. 21-235. - Duty to identify underground utilities. 
Except as provided in section 21-239, no person may excavate in a street, highway, public space, a private easement of an operator or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer served by such utility, or demolish a building, without having first ascertained in the manner prescribed in this article the location of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 4, 2-10-83) 
Sec. 21-236. - Filing requirements of utility operators. 
(a)	No later than January 10, 1983, each operator having underground utilities in this city or in areas served by utilities of this city shall file with the city clerk a list containing the name of every city, village, township, and section within the township in the county in which it has underground utilities (including those utilities that have been abandoned in place by the operator but not yet physically removed), the name of the operator and the name, title, address and telephone number of its representative designated to receive the written or telephonic notice of intent required by section 21-237. 
(b)	Changes in any of the information contained in the list filed under subsection (a) of this section shall be filed by the operator with the city clerk within five working days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 5, 2-10-83) 
Sec. 21-237. - Notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)	Except as provided in section 21-239, before commencing any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 21-235, each person responsible for such excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephonic notice of intent to excavate or demolish at least three, but not more than ten, full working days on each operator which has filed a list required by section 21-236 indicating that it has underground utilities located in the proposed area of excavation or demolition. 
(b)	The written or telephonic notice required by subsection (a) of this section must contain the name, address and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent, and, if different, the person responsible for the excavation or demolition, the starting date, anticipated duration, and type of excavation or demolition operation to be conducted, the location of the proposed excavation or demolition, and whether or not explosives are to be used. 
(c)	If the notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of such notification shall be maintained by the operators notified to document compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 6, 2-10-83) 
Sec. 21-238. - Response to notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)	Each operator or designated representative notified in accordance with section 21-237 shall, not less than two working days in advance of the proposed excavation or demolition (unless a shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or designated representative), supply, by use of maps when appropriate, the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition: 
(1)	The approximate location and description of all of its underground utilities which may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition. 
(2)	The location and description of all utility markers indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities. 
(3)	Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities including providing adequate temporary markings indicating the approximate location of the underground utility in locations where permanent utility markers do not exist. 
(b)	For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utilities is defined as a strip of land at least three feet wide but not wider than the width of the utility plus 1½ feet on either side of the utility. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 7, 2-10-83) 
Sec. 21-239. - Emergency excavation or demolition. 
Compliance with the notice requirements of section 21-237 is not required of persons responsible for emergency excavation or demolition to ameliorate an imminent danger to life, health or property, provided however, that such persons give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to each operator having underground utilities located in the area where such excavation or demolition is to be performed and requests emergency assistance from each operator so identified in locating and providing immediate protection to its underground utilities. An imminent danger to life, health or property exists whenever there is a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health, or property will result before the procedures under sections 21-237 and 21-238 can be fully complied with. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 8, 2-10-83) 
Sec. 21-240. - Precautions to avoid damage. 
In addition to the notification requirements of section 21-236, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 21-235 shall: 
(1)	Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground utilities in and near the construction area. 
(2)	Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such utility. 
(3)	Provide such support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such utilities. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 9, 2-10-83) 
Sec. 21-241. - Excavation or demolition damage. 
(a)	Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 21-235 that results in any damage to an underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator of such utility of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of such utility. 
(b)	Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operations designated in section 21-235 that results in damage to an underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator, police and fire departments, and take any other action as may be reasonably necessary, to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until arrival of the operator's personnel or police and fire departments. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 10, 2-10-83) 
Secs. 21-242—21-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SOLAR LAND USE 
DIVISION 1. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 21-261. - Rules of construction. 
Standard rules related to the structure and use of these regulations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	The interpretation and application of the provisions of this article shall be held to serve as the minimum requirements necessary to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Thomson. 
(2)	Where there is a conflict between any of the provisions of this article, the more restrictive provision shall prevail unless the specific language of the regulations requires a different interpretation. 
(3)	Where an amendment to the provisions of this article has been adopted by the city council of the City of Thomson and the adopted amendment conflicts with a preexisting provision found in this article, the provision which is more restrictive shall prevail. 
(4)	Purpose statements are not regulatory standards but rather descriptions of intent that guide the application, interpretation, and administration of this article. 
(5)	Figures, graphics, and illustrations, and supporting captions related to such items, are not regulatory standards, but are included to assist in the interpretation of the provisions of this article. Where there is an inconsistency between a figure, graphic, and illustration, and supporting captions related to such items, and the written text of a provision herein, the written text shall control unless the specific language of the regulations requires a different interpretation. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Secs. 21-262—21-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS 

Sec. 21-271. - Terms and definitions—Solar land uses. 
For purposes of this article, certain terms and words related to solar land uses, and associated legal, scientific, technical, and general terms, are hereby defined, and shall have those meanings ascribed to them as provided herein. All other words and phrases shall assume their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, or a specific definition has been ascribed to them as provided within a separate section of this article. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-272. - Categories of solar land uses. 
The terms and definitions provided in this subsection refer to the types of principal and accessory solar land uses that are regulated by the provisions of this article. For purposes of categorizing and defining solar land uses, the terms herein may be considered "umbrella" in nature, meaning that they encompass a wide variety of utility scale solar collection, conversion and transmission systems for off-site power consumption as well as small-scale individual systems intended for on-site power consumption for uses such as a residence or business. Some of the terms provided in this subsection are augmented by supporting figures, and/or representative illustrations. 
(1)	Solar energy system. A system capable of collecting and converting solar radiant energy (through direct, diffuse, and/or reflective collection) into heat, mechanical, or electrical energy and transfers the produced electricity in to a separate apparatus to store or to a point of use which include, but are not limited to, water heaters, interior space heaters or coolers, or electrical energy generation. Solar energy systems primarily consist of solar collection devices and mechanical equipment related to solar energy (transformers, inverters, etc.). 
(2)	Solar energy system, principal (PSES). A solar energy system which is the principal or primary use on a single lot or parcel which is used to collect and convert solar energy into usable electricity using on-site equipment for the primary purpose of transmitting electricity off-site to be used by an electric utility. There systems include all uses defined by the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) under code 221114 which includes solar farms. (See Figures B.1 and B.2). 

Figure B.1: A principal solar energy system may occupy an entire lot. 

Figure B.2: A property owner may choose to subdivide their property and place a solar farm on one of the newly created lots thus creating a principal use for that lot. 
(3)	Solar energy system, accessory (ASES). A solar energy system that is an accessory use to the principal use of a property, meaning it is incidental to the principal use and is subordinate in area or purpose. Accessory systems may be roof-mounted, ground-mounted or parking-mounted. (See Figures C.1 and C.2.) 

Figure C.1: Accessory solar energy systems may include building-mounted and/or ground-mounted systems, as shown in this illustration. They may be allowed in front, side or rear yards, although some restrictions may apply. 

Figure C.2: Accessory solar energy systems can also include parking-mounted systems, as illustrated above. An accessory system can include any combination of building-mounted, ground-mounted or parking-mounted systems, subject to additional conditions. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-273. - Methods of collection. 
Solar collection systems come in a variety of configurations, utilize variable technologies and materials, and incorporate interrelated structures and components, in order to actively collect, convert, and transmit solar radiant energy in a safe and efficient manner. The terms and definitions provided in this subsection represent some, but not all, of the solar collection structures and components related to the solar land uses regulated by the provisions of this article. 
(1)	Solar photovoltaic (PV) systems. A solar collection system which produces electricity by the use of photovoltaic cells which generate electricity when exposed to sunlight. A PV system may be roof-mounted or ground-mounted. Photovoltaic systems are generally comprised of the following components: 

(2)	Solar thermal systems. A solar collection system which produces electricity by the use of photovoltaic cells which generate electricity when exposed to sunlight. A PV system may be roof-mounted or ground-mounted. Photovoltaic systems are generally composed of the following components: 
a.	Flat plate collection . System which collects solar radiation to heat a liquid which in turn will be used to heat water or enclosed areas. This system generally contains a plate (panel) over tubes housed in a shell. 
b.	Evacuated tube collection. System general composed of hollow tubes which contains a liquid used for the purpose of heating large volumes of water or heat water to a high temperature. 
(3)	Concentrated solar systems. A solar collection system that uses mirrors or lenses to concentrate sunlight and create temperatures high enough to heat water or fluids to drive steam turbines that in turn create electricity: 
a.	Parabolic trough. Curved mirrors are used to focus the sun's radiant energy onto a receiver tube that runs down the center of a trough. High temperature transfer fluid passes through a heat exchanger to heat water. 
b.	Compact linear fresnel reflector. Similar to the parabolic trough, with the exception of long parallel rows of mirrors being used as a lower-cost option. 
c.	Power tower. Structure where mirrors are used to focus the radiant energy of the sun on a receiver at the top of a tower to heat transfer fluid to produce steam. 


( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-274. - Solar energy system structures and components. 
The terms provided in this subsection include legal, scientific, technical, and other general terms that are referenced in the provisions of this article, for which the inclusion of a related definition may assist in the application, interpretation, and administration of the provisions of this section. 
(1)	Building-mounted solar energy system. A solar energy system in which solar panels are mounted on top of a roof or on the side of a building. (See Figures 2.4 A1 and A2). Building-mounted systems may be flush-mounted or non-flush-mounted. 
Figures 2.4.A1 and 2.4.A2 (Building-mounted examples) 

(2)	Building-integrated solar energy system. A type of building-mounted system that is an integral part of a building rather than a separate device, replacing a typical component of a building. Examples include, but are not limited to, solar energy systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights and awnings. (See Figures 2.4 B1 and B2.) 
Figures 2.4.B1 and 2.4.B2 (Building-integrated examples) 

(3)	Ground-mounted solar collection system. Solar energy system that is directly installed in the ground and is not attached or affixed to an existing structure. This can include pole-mounted systems that allow for the tracking of the sun. 

(4)	Parking-mounted solar collection system. A solar energy system that is installed above a paved surface vehicle parking area. Parking-mounted systems may cover any amount of parking spaces on a parcel but may not be installed in such a way that prevents the use of more than ten percent of existing spaces. (See Figures 2.4 D1 and D2.) A system mounted on top of a parking garage would be considered a building-mounted system. Such systems cannot impact the minimum number of parking spaces or the dimensions of parking spaces as required by City of Thomson Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. 
Figures 2.4.D1 and 2.4.D2 (Parking-mounted examples) 

(5)	Solar panel. For the purpose of this article, a solar panel may refer to a solar module or surface component of a flat plate collector. Solar panels are meant to absorb, not reflect, sunlight. 
(6)	Power inverter. A device that inverts the direct current (DC) electricity produced by a solar PV system into usable alternating current (AC). 
(7)	Mechanical equipment related to solar energy systems. All items not listed in these definitions that are directly related to a construction and operation of a solar energy system including, but not limited to, on-site transmission lines, pumps, batteries, inverters, mounting brackets, framing, foundations or other structures, etc. 
(8)	Off-grid solar photovoltaic system with battery back-up. Solar PV electricity system designed to operate independently from a local utility grid and provide electricity to a building, boat, recreational vehicle, sign, remote pump, gates, etc. These systems usually require a battery bank to store electricity generated by solar for use at night or a rainy day. 
Figures 2.4.D1 and 2.4.D2 (Parking-mounted examples) 

( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-275. - Other terms related to solar land uses. 
The terms provided in this subsection include legal, scientific, technical, and other general terms that are referenced in the provisions of this article, for which the inclusion of a related definition may assist in the application, interpretation, and administration of the provisions of this section. 
Flush-mounted means a type of building-mounted system in which there is no space between the solar panels or collectors and the structure of the building. 
Kilowatt (kW) means a measure of the use of electrical power equal to 1,000 watts. 
Kilowatt-hour (kWh) means a unit of energy equivalent to one kilowatt (one kW) of power expended for one hour. 
Megawatt (MW) means a measure of the use of electrical power equal to 1,000 kilowatts. 
Megawatt-hour (MWh) means a unit of energy equivalent to one megawatt (one MW) of power expended for one hour. 
Mobile home park solar energy system means a solar energy system installed in a mobile home park is defined as a principal solar energy system (PSES) and shall follow all application procedures for a principal solar energy system (PSES). 
Roof pitch means the final exterior slope of a building roof calculated by the rise over the run, typically but not exclusively expressed in twelfths such as 3/12, 9/12, 12/12. 
Solar collector coverage means a solar energy system that is an integral part of a building rather than a separate device, replacing a typical component of a building. Examples include, but are not limited to, solar energy systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights and awnings. 
Solar energy easement means easement that limits the height or location, or both, of structures or vegetation, or both, for the purpose of providing access to sunlight. 
Solar farm is a term used to describe large-scale solar energy systems. These facilities are typically larger tracts of land containing hundreds of arrays of photovoltaic panels covering the majority of a parcel. A solar farm development is associated with a principal solar energy systems. 
Solar garden is a term used to describe a small-scale solar energy system that is sometimes operated under the form of a cooperative. These facilities generally contain a smaller amount of arrays for the purpose of sharing the benefit of energy production. A solar garden development is usually associated with accessory solar energy systems. 
Solar glare means the effect produced by light reflecting from a solar panel with an intensity sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Secs. 21-276—21-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS—REGULATIONS 

Sec. 21-281. - Applicability. 
All solar energy systems are subject to supplemental and use-specific regulations. Principal solar energy systems and accessory solar energy systems referenced as a special use require legislative approval as provided by this ordinance and are subject to all conditions listed in applicable sections of this article and may be subject to additional conditions of the legislative body. Accessory solar energy systems referenced as administrative permit uses may be approved by the zoning administrator subject to the adherence to the conditions listed in the applicable sections of this article. 
(1)	Land uses listed in Table 3.1 shall be permitted with conditions or permitted as a special use in each applicable zoning district. Uses shall not be permitted, buildings and structures associated with such use shall not be erected, structurally altered or enlarged on property, unless said use is permitted within the applicable zoning district as listed in Table 3.1 and in accordance with one of the following designations: 
"P" (Permitted Use)—Indicates that the use is permitted in the zoning district. 
"AP" (Administrative Permit)—Indicates the use is permitted in the zoning district subject to administrative review and use-specific requirements contained in division 5. 
"S" (Special Use)—Indicates that the use may be permitted by the governing body subject to use-specific requirements contained in division 4 and procedural requirements listed in the city/town/county ordinance. 
(2)	Any listed use that does not have a letter P, AP, or S listed in a particular zoning district is prohibited in that zoning district. 
(3)	The size of any solar system within this jurisdiction shall be determined based first upon the square footage of all equipment and, if necessary, second upon electrical capacity of the system. 
Table 3.1: Solar Energy System—Application Review Process 

 
S—Not permitted by right, but are subject to approval by a locally appointed and elected body. 
AP—Permitted by right but are subject to additional land-use specific provisions (administrative process). 
P—Permitted by right and are processed through building permit procedures. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Secs. 21-282—21-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES OR SUPPLEMENTAL USE REQUIREMENTS—PRINCIPAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS 

Sec. 21-291. - Dimensional requirements. 
(a)	Minimum lot sizes. The minimum lot size (in acres) needed to place a principal solar energy system is listed in Table 4.1 (below). 

 
(b)	Setbacks. Principal solar energy systems shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet in addition to existing setback established in the zoning district. This applies to edge of any solar collectors or mechanical equipment related to solar energy systems. Power inverters, transformers, and other related equipment connected with the inversion of power shall have a setback of 50 feet in addition to existing setback established in the zoning district. 
The ideal location for power inverters, transformers and related equipment should be located in the center of the principal solar energy system development. Deviations from this ideal must be requested in the development request. 
(c)	Height of principal solar energy system collector. Height of ground-mounted or parking-mounted solar collectors and mounts shall not exceed 20 feet in height when oriented to maximum tilt for principal solar energy system collectors. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-292. - Relationship to other land uses. 
(a)	Airports . Any solar energy system proposed within a 20,000-foot radius of an airport runway shall present evidence that they have gone through a review process with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). This review from the FAA shall indicate that the proposed solar energy system shall not interfere with normal operation of aircraft in an area. This review must be presented and evaluated by staff prior to any development beginning. 
(b)	Historic districts. No principal solar energy system shall be located in a designated National Register Historic District. Districts in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article was derived are the Boneville District, the Thomas Carr District, the Hayes Line District and the Wrightsboro District. When additional designations are made by the United States Department of the Interior, this location restriction shall apply upon any subsequent location request. 
In addition, no principal solar energy system shall be located in the City of Thomson Historic District as adopted by the city council of the City of Thomson. As the district is expanded by the City of Thomson City Council, this location restriction shall apply upon any subsequent location request. 
(c)	Historic structures. All historic structures as recorded by the Historic Preservation Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources located within 1,000 feet of a proposed development must be listed and located in a development application. 
(d)	Environmentally sensitive areas. Principal solar energy systems proposed for development in an environmentally sensitive area must provide an environmental impact statement for evaluation prior to approval. 
(e)	Residential land uses. Principal solar energy systems may be allowed in areas in residential zoning districts (or areas in which the primary land use is residential) as long as the minimum lot size is met (Table 4.1) and setbacks are met (section 21-291(b)). 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-293. - Buffering and screening. 
(a)	Fencing . A security fence at a minimum height of eight feet with a gate and locking mechanism shall enclose the perimeter of the principal solar energy system to deny access to any individuals not authorized to be on the property and for public safety. 
(b)	Buffering and screening. After a review of a proposed solar energy system by the zoning administrator or legislative body, either entity may require a buffer or screening for the proposed solar facility. If it is determined that either a buffer or screening is necessary, one or a combination of the following options may be implemented: 
(1)	On-site mature vegetation exist at a minimum height of ten feet and depth of the building set-back for the zoning district plus 20 feet between the security fence and the adjacent properties and right-of-way; 
(2)	A single row of evergreens in combination with mature vegetation installed at a height of five feet achieving opaqueness and a minimum height of ten feet in five years; 
(3)	A double row of off-set evergreens absent mature vegetation, installed at a height of five feet achieving opaqueness and a minimum height of ten feet in five years; or 
(4)	A berm combined with evergreens vegetation installed at a height of five feet achieving opaqueness and a minimum height of ten feet in five years. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-294. - Signage. 
(a)	Allowed signage. The manufacturer's and/or installer's identification and appropriate warning signs shall be posted in a clear and visible manner at the site. This sign must follow the provision of the sign ordinance for the area in which it is located. A warning sign concerning voltage must be placed on the main gate and include the name and contact phone number for the solar energy system operator in case of emergency. 
(b)	Advertisements . No business signs, billboards, or any other advertising shall be installed on any mechanical equipment or solar panels nor placed on the property on which the solar energy system is the principal use. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-295. - Construction and operation. 
(a)	Transmission lines. All power transmission lines located within the principal solar energy system on a single lot shall be placed underground to the extent possible. 
(b)	Glint and glare. All solar panels or arrays used for the principal solar energy system shall be located to avoid glint and glare onto upon adjacent properties and adjacent roadways in a manner that shall not create a safety hazard. 
(c)	Noise . Noise levels of all mechanical equipment related to principal solar energy systems should not exceed 65 decibels (dB) at the property line on which the PSES is located. 
(d)	Decommissioning . Applicants proposing a principal solar energy system shall include in its application to develop a principal solar energy system contingency plans for decommissioning of the system that shall include plans for disassembly of the system and its removal. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-296. - Application required for principal solar energy systems. 
Principal solar energy systems may be permitted within the boundaries of the City of Thomson as a special use. This requires the potential developer of this facility to go through established procedural processes within the article and provide a submittal package as established in section 21-297. No land disturbance permit may be issued for or principal solar energy system to begin development without approval from the city council of the City of Thomson. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-297. - Processing applications for principal solar energy systems. 
A principal solar energy solar system may only be approved as a special use on a lot. A special use application must be submitted as set forth in the article and shall also be subject to and processed in accordance with this section. A special use is not a use by right, and may be subject to approval, approval with conditions, or denial by action of the city council of the City of Thomson acting upon a recommendation of the City of Thomson Planning Commission. A submittal package is required for proposed principal solar energy systems which shall include the following: 
(1)	Application . A special use application shall be submitted by anyone wishing to place a principal solar energy system within the municipal/county boundaries. 
(2)	Recorded plat or boundary survey. 
(3)	Site plan. The scaled site plan must show property boundaries, location and size (area) of solar collectors and mechanical equipment related to solar, fencing, and if applicable the location of natural buffering and screening features located on the property. 
(4)	A description of solar collectors and mechanical equipment related to solar including: 
a.	UL certification for equipment on site; 
b.	Written documentation stating that the facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state regulations. 
(5)	Other information as may be required by the development code administrator. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Secs. 21-298—21-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES AND SUPPLEMENTAL USE REQUIREMENTS—ACCESSORY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS 

Sec. 21-301. - Applicability. 
This section applies to all accessory solar energy systems except for ground-mounted systems with coverage of greater than 50 percent of the footprint of the principal structure on lot, which are treated as principal solar energy systems. 
(1)	Solar energy systems constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section. 
(2)	Any upgrade, modification, or structural change that materially alters the size or placement of an existing solar energy system shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
Notation: Even if they are deemed accessory to the principal use of a property, ground-mounted systems covering an area equivalent to more than 50 percent of the footprint of the primary structure on the property are regulated as principal solar energy systems, with requirements set out in division 4. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-302. - General requirements. 
The installation and construction of an accessory solar energy system shall be subject to the following development and design standards: 
(1)	An accessory solar energy system is permitted in all zoning districts as an accessory to a principal use. 
(2)	A solar energy system connected to the utility grid shall provide written authorization from the local utility company acknowledging and approving such connection. 
(3)	An accessory solar energy system may be roof-mounted, ground-mounted, parking-mounted, or any combination of the three, provided the system(s) meet the supplemental requirements pertaining to accessory solar energy systems. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-303. - Dimensional requirements. 
(a)	Minimum lot sizes. There is no minimum lot size requirement for an accessory solar energy system. 
(b)	Setbacks . 
(1)	Ground-mounted systems may be located within required building setbacks. 
(2)	The minimum solar energy system setback distance from the property lines shall be equivalent to the accessory building setback requirement of the underlying zoning district. 
(3)	With respect to building-mounted systems, only building-integrated and/or flush-mounted solar energy systems may be installed on street-facing building elevations. 
(4)	In residential zoning districts, a ground-mounted system, parking-mounted system, or system attached to an accessory building shall not be located within a required street setback or street/front yard. This restriction shall also apply to the side yard in any residential district. Any side yard application shall be subject to approval by a locally appointed and elected body as part of the application process. 
(c)	Height . 
(1)	A building-mounted system may be mounted on a principal building or accessory building. A building-mounted system, whether mounted on the principal building or accessory building, may not extend more than ten feet above the highest point of the roof line of a flat roof and not above the roof line of any other roof, such as, but not limited to, gable, gambrel, or hip roofs. 
(2)	A building-mounted system may not extend more than ten feet beyond the maximum principal building height or accessory building height specified for the building type in the underlying zoning district. In no instance shall any part of the solar energy system extend beyond the edge of the roof. 
(3)	Ground-mounted and parking-mounted systems shall not exceed the maximum building height for accessory buildings. If no height limit is specified for accessory buildings, ground-mounted or parking-mounted systems may not exceed 20 feet in height. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-304. - Parcel or building coverage. 
(a)	Building-mounted systems may cover any amount of a roof but may not extend beyond the roofline. 
(b)	Accessory ground-mounted systems may cover an area no larger than 50 percent of the footprint of the principal structure on the parcel. Any larger and the system is treated as a principal solar energy system. 
(c)	Parking-mounted systems shall only cover paved surfaces intended for parking. Non-residential driveways may not be covered by parking-mounted systems. 
(d)	Only building integrated systems shall be installed on residential-type roofs visible from public right-of-ways. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-305. - Screening. 
All mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for the operation of the solar energy system shall comply with the following: 
(1)	Mechanical equipment for nonresidential systems shall be screened from any adjacent property that is residentially zoned or used for residential purposes. The screen shall consist of shrubbery, trees, or other non-invasive plant species which provide a visual screen. In lieu of a planting screen, a decorative fence may be used. 
(2)	Mechanical equipment shall comply with the setbacks specified for accessory structures in the underlying zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-306. - Historic districts. 
Accessory solar energy systems on buildings or properties within federal, state, or local designated historic districts or on locally designated historic buildings will require a certificate of appropriateness unless the installation is not visible from the street. A certificate of appropriateness from the City of Thomson Historic Preservation Commission shall be an essential component of any application. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-307. - Other considerations. 
(a)	Accessory solar energy systems must comply with all applicable building and electrical code requirements as adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
(b)	Owners of accessory solar energy systems are solely responsible for negotiating with other property owners for any desired solar easements to protect access to sunlight. Any such easements must be recorded with the McDuffie County Clerk of Superior Court. 
(c)	Solar panels shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto nearby properties or roadways. 
(d)	Solar panels shall not be placed in the vicinity of any airport in a manner that would interfere with airport flight patterns. Acknowledgment from the Federal Aviation Administration will be necessary. 
(e)	All power transmission lines from a ground-mounted solar energy system to any building or other structure shall be located underground unless precluded by building codes adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
(f)	A solar energy system shall not be used to display advertising, including signage, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags, banners or similar materials. The manufacturers and equipment information, warning, or indication of ownership shall be allowed on any equipment of the solar energy system provided they comply with the prevailing sign regulations. 
(g)	The design of the solar energy system shall conform to applicable industry standards. The local utility provider shall be contacted to determine grid interconnection and net metering policies. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-308. - Approvals and permits. 
(a)	All accessory solar energy systems other than building-mounted (flush-mounted) systems and building-integrated systems shall require administrative plan approval resulting in a building permit. 
(b)	All accessory solar energy systems other than building-mounted (flush-mounted) systems and building-integrated systems shall require a building permit. 
(c)	Systems that do not meet the conditions in this section will require a variance. 
(d)	A solar energy system shall not be constructed until a building permit has been issued following a zoning review. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-309. - Plan applications. 
(a)	Plan applications for accessory solar energy systems shall be accompanied by to-scale horizontal and vertical (elevation) drawings. The drawings must show the location of the system on the building or on the property for a ground-mounted system, including the property lines. 
(b)	For all building-mounted (non-flush-mounted) systems, the elevation must show the highest finished slope of the solar collector and the slope of the finished roof surface on which it is mounted. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Sec. 21-310. - Administrative variance. 
This Code encourages the installation of productive solar energy systems and recognizes that a balance must be achieved between character and aesthetic considerations and the reasonable desire of building owners to harvest their renewable energy resources. Where the standards in this article cannot be met without diminishing, as defined below, the minimum reasonable performance of the solar energy system, an administrative variance may be sought from the zoning official. An administrative variance shall be granted if the administrative variance standards are met. 
(1)	Minimum performance design standards. . The following design considerations are needed for the efficient operation of a solar energy system: 
a.	Fixed-mount active solar energy systems. Solar energy systems must be mounted to face with 45 degrees of south (180 degrees azimuth). 
b.	Solar electric (photovoltaic) systems must have a pitch that is within 20 degrees of latitude, a pitch of between 20 and 65 degrees. 
c.	Solar hot water systems. Solar collectors need to be mounted at a pitch between 40 and 60 degrees. 
(2)	Standards for an administrative variance. A variance shall be granted by the zoning official if the applicant demonstrates that the following safety, performance and aesthetic conditions are met: 
a.	Aesthetic conditions. The solar energy system must be designed to blend into the architecture of the building or be screened from routine view from public right-of-ways other than alleys to the maximum extent possible while still allowing the system to be mounted for efficient performance. 
b.	Safety conditions. All applicable health and safety standards are met. 
( Ord. No. 557, 7-9-15 ) 
Chapter 22 - COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to adopt by ordinance a plan for the zoning of the city, § 1.02(z). 
Cross reference— Any ordinance pertaining to zoning map amendments safe from repeal, § 1-7(18); zoning of business selling alcoholic beverages, § 3-3; buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; planning and development, ch. 14; stormwater management, ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, ch. 18; subdivision of land, ch. 19; utilities, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to exercise power of zoning, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, sec. II, par. IV. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Authority. 
This chapter is in pursuance of the authority granted by the constitution of the state and it is hereby ordained by that authority. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 100, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-2. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this chapter shall govern all land, buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 101, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-3. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, City of Thomson, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 102, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use or structure shall mean a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. 
Automobile wrecking shall mean the dismantling, storage, sale, or dumping of used motor vehicles, trailers or parts thereof. 
Billboard shall mean any form of outdoor advertising whose face area is greater than 250 square feet by measuring the outermost square or rectangular perimeter. 
Building. See "Structure." 
Building area of a lot shall mean that portion of a lot bounded by the required rear, side and front building setback lines. 
Building height shall mean the vertical distance from the established average sidewalk grade, street grade or finished grade at the building lines, whichever is the highest, to the highest point of the building. 
Building setback line shall mean a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the property line and a building on a lot, within which no building or other structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided. 
Building setback, front, shall mean the minimum allowable distance between the property line and the front of a building or structure on a lot. The front setback distance is applied to the full width of the lot and is parallel to or concentric with the street centerline. 
Building setback, rear, shall mean the minimum allowable distance between the rear property line and a building or structure on a lot. The rear setback applies to and extends the full width of the lot. 
Building setback, side, shall mean the minimum allowable distance between the side property line and a building or structure on a lot. The side setback applies to the full depth of a lot. 
Centerline shall mean that line determined as such by the official authority having jurisdiction over the street, otherwise it shall be the succession of midpoints between the identifiable limits of any improvements on the ground or of any easement. 
Clinic shall mean an establishment where medical or dental patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination or treatment. 
Club or fraternal organization (nonprofit) shall mean golf courses, tennis courts and similar recreational uses of a noncommercial nature, and specifically excluding commercial driving ranges, miniature golf courses and similar uses. 
Convenience gas station shall mean building and premises where gasoline and oil may be dispensed at retail. Uses permissible also include the sale of cold drinks, package foods, tobacco and similar convenience goods for station customers. 
Day care center shall mean a licensed and approved public or private operation; the purpose of which is to care for children in a group setting where education may be involved and meals may be served. 
Dwelling shall mean a building or portion of a building arranged or designed to provide living quarters for one or more families. 
Dwelling, single-family, shall mean a detached dwelling other than a mobile home designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. 
Dwelling, two-family, shall mean a detached or semi-detached dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by two families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other on a single lot. 
Dwelling, group, shall mean a building or portion of a building occupied or intended for occupancy by several unrelated persons or families, but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons or families. The term "group dwelling" includes but is not limited to the terms "roominghouse," "apartment hotel," "fraternity house" or "sorority house." A hotel, motel or tourist home shall not be deemed to be a group family dwelling as herein defined. 
Dwelling, multi-family, shall mean a dwelling or dwellings on a single lot, designed for or occupied by three or more families living independently of each other, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. 
Dwelling unit shall mean one or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for use on a basis involving owner occupancy or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis, with provisions for cooking, eating and sleeping, and physically set apart from any other rooms or dwelling units in the same structure. 
Family shall mean one or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit provided that unless all members are related by blood, legal adoption or marriage such family shall contain no more than five persons. Domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises. 
Intermediate care home shall mean rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar use established and operated to provide lodging and meals and/or domiciliary care for aged, infirm, chronically ill or convalescent persons. 
Kennel shall mean any place in or at which any number of dogs are kept for the purpose of sale or in connection with boarding, care or breeding, for which any fee is charged. 
Lot shall mean a parcel or tract of land held in one ownership to which zoning regulations are to be applied, which may include one or more separately deeded or platted parcels or other such "lots of record." 
Lot area shall mean the total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
Lot frontage shall mean the length of a straight line drawn between the two points where the abutting property lines or other adjacent lot lines cut a given street line of a public street. A lot may have more than one frontage. 
Lot lines shall mean the boundary dividing a given lot from the street, an alley or adjacent lots. 
Lot of record shall mean a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court. 
Mobile home shall mean a detached single-family dwelling unit with all of the following characteristics: 
(1)	Designed for long-term occupancy and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath and kitchen facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections. 
(2)	Prefabricated and designed to be transported fully assembled into one unit on its own wheels or on a flatbed or other trailer or detachable wheels. 
(3)	Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a complete dwelling including major appliances and furniture and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports and connection to utilities and the like. 
(4)	Being at least eight feet but not greater than 14 feet in body width exclusive of any acceptable incidental appurtenances such as windows, porches, etc. 
Mobile home park shall mean any plot or tract of land on which two or more mobile homes are to be located or intended to be located for purposes of residential occupancy. 
Modular/double-wide home shall mean a single-family dwelling premanufactured in two pieces and transported to the building site having all the following characteristics of a permanent dwelling: 
(1)	All wheels, axles and tongues removed. 
(2)	A permanent masonry foundation enclosing all four sides. 
(3)	A composition asphalt shingle roof (no metal) with a minimum pitch of three to 12. 
(4)	Two by four framed exterior walls. 
(5)	Wiring to meet the National Electrical Code. 
Nonconforming use shall mean any building, structure or use of land existing at the time of enactment of this chapter which does not comply with or conform to the provisions of the zoning district in which it is located. 
Sign shall mean and include every outdoor advertising device, billboard, poster panel, freestanding ground sign, roof sign, projecting sign, pylon sign, illuminated sign, sign painted on a wall, window, marquee, awning or canopy and shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, ribbon, banner, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when the same is placed in view of the general public traveling along a public street right-of-way. 
Sign, on-site, shall mean an outdoor advertising device relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located. On-site signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business. 
Sign, off-site, shall mean an outdoor advertising device other than an on-site sign. Off-site advertising includes billboards, panels and other advertising signs. 
Structure shall mean anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, billboards, satellite dishes, storage buildings, and poster panels. Excluded are fences less than eight feet in height and structures less than 30 inches in height. 
Use shall mean the purpose for which land or a building or other structure is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
Variance shall mean a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this chapter, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of a structure, size of yards and open spaces, off-street parking and loading requirements, street access requirements and sign regulations. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited in a zoning district shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconforming uses in a zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district. 
Yard shall mean a required open space other than a court unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot upward, provided however, that fences, walls, poles, posts and other customary yard accessories, ornaments and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 106, 6-26-86; Ord. No. 494, 9-11-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-5. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter are as follows: to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to sustain the stability of neighborhoods; to protect property against blight and depreciation; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; to conserve the value of buildings; to encourage the most appropriate use of land and all buildings and structures and to assist the orderly, efficient and integrated development of the city in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 103, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-6. - Application of zoning ordinance. 
Except as otherwise provided, no structure or land shall, after the adoption of this chapter be used, and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or moved unless in conformity with the requirements herein specified for the district in which it is located. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 400, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-7. - Provisions declared to be minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 407, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-8. - Complaints regarding violations. 
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the building inspector. He shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 408, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-9. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)	Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to comply with the requirements thereof shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned in the city jail for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition shall pay the cost of such action. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties provided in this section. 
(b)	In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this chapter the city building inspector, city attorney or other appropriate authority of the city or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specially damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use; or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 409, 6-26-86) 
Secs. 22-10—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-31. - District boundaries. 
The boundaries of the various districts are shown upon the official zoning map of the city. The official zoning map is hereby made a part of this chapter. All such maps and all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if all the matter and information set forth by such maps were fully described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 105.1, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-32. - Authenticity of zoning map. 
As evidence of the authenticity of the zoning maps of the city, they shall be signed and dated by the chairman of the planning commission, the mayor and attested by the city administrator upon the adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 105.2, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-33. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
(a)	Unless otherwise shown on the official zoning map of the city, the boundary lines of zoning districts are lot lines, the centerlines of streets or alleys or such lines extended, railroad right-of-way lines, the centerlines of creeks and streams or corporate limit lines as they existed at the time of the enactment of this chapter. 
(b)	Zoning district boundary lines not coinciding with lot lines, the centerlines of streets or alleys or such lines extended, railroad right-of-way lines, the centerlines of creeks or streams or the corporate limit lines as it existed at the time of the enactment of this chapter, shall be determined by use of the scale of the official zoning map of the city, unless actual dimensions are noted. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 105.3, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-34. - Zoning map amendments. 
(a)	If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in the district boundaries or other information portrayed in the official zoning map, changes shall be made on the official zoning map by the building inspector promptly, after the amendment has been approved by the city council. No amendment to this chapter which involves matter portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry have been made on such map. 
(b)	Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the office of the building inspector shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land in the city. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 105.4, 6-26-86) 
Secs. 22-35—22-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC DISTRICTS 

Sec. 22-46. - Residential districts. 
The several residential districts of the city are intended to establish residential districts and to protect property in the districts from the depreciating effects of incompatible land use. Residential uses are intended to be the primary use within each district but an intermixture of dwelling classes is permitted where population density and available services permit. The residential districts are intended to preserve and protect the residential character of neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 200, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-47. - R-1 single-family residence district. 
The R-1 single-family residence district is a low-density, single-family residential district established to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
(1)	See section 22-57 for permitted uses. 
(2)	See section 22-58 for lot and building/structure setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 200.1, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-48. - R-1A single-family residence district. 
The R-1A single-family residence district is a medium-density single-family residential district established to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
(1)	See section 22-57 for permitted uses. 
(2)	See section 22-58 for lot and building/structure setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 200.2, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-49. - R-1B single-family residence district. 
The R-1B single-family residence district is a high-density, single-family residential district established to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
(1)	See section 22-57 for permitted uses. 
(2)	See section 22-58 for lot and building/structure setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 200.3, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-50. - R-2 multi-family residence district. 
The R-2 multi-family residence district is a medium- to high-density multi-family residence district established to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
(1)	See section 22-57 for permitted uses. 
(2)	See section 22-58 for lot and building/structure setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 200.4, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-51. - B-1 business district. 
The B-1 business district is intended to be a general commercial zone to provide a wide variety of commercial facilities serving a large market area. 
(1)	See section 22-57 for permitted uses. 
(2)	See section 22-58 for lot and building/structure setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 201.1, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-52. - B-2 business district. 
The B-2 business district is intended to be a heavy commercial zone to provide a wide variety of commercial facilities, commercial uses needing access to major streets, and commercial uses utilizing large sites, as well as the coordinated development of high-density residential uses. 
(1)	See section 22-57 for permitted uses. 
(2)	See section 22-58 for lot and building/structure setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 201.2, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-53. - P professional district. 
The P professional district is intended to provide areas for professional uses and related uses such as prescription shops and optical sales, and to complement the character of adjacent districts. This district is not intended to accommodate general and highway oriented commercial uses. 
(1)	See section 22-57 for permitted uses. 
(2)	See section 22-58 for lot and building/structure setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 201.3, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-54. - S special district. 
The S special district is established to provide for the proper placement of private, semiprivate, and public uses which require special consideration because of their character, physical setting, size, and/or relation to surrounding land uses. 
(1)	See section 22-57 for permitted uses. 
(2)	See section 22-58 for lot and building/structure setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 201.4, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-55. - I-1 light industrial district. 
The I-1 light industrial district is intended to provide areas for light industrial uses and related uses such as wholesaling, warehousing and storage, and to protect adjacent districts from potentially harmful effects. This district is not intended to accommodate general commercial uses or residential uses. 
(1)	See section 22-57 for permitted uses. 
(2)	See section 22-58 for lot and building/structure setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 201.5, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-56. - I-2 heavy industrial district. 
The I-2 heavy industrial district is intended to provide areas for basic industrial and related uses, to encourage the proper design, placement and grouping of industrial uses, and to protect adjacent districts from potentially harmful effects. This district is not intended to accommodate general commercial uses or residential uses. 
(1)	See section 22-57 for permitted uses. 
(2)	See section 22-58 for lot and building/structure setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 201.6, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-57. - Permitted and conditional use chart. 
The following table indicates where uses are permitted on all zoning districts. Zoning district designations are listed across the top of the chart. Uses are listed alphabetically down the chart. 
(1)	If a specific use is permitted in a zoning district, it is designated by a capital "P." 
(2)	If a specific use must be reviewed and approved by the planning commission under section 22-143, it is designated by a capital "C." 
(3)	If there is a blank space under the zoning district designation then the use is not permitted in that district. 

 
(Ord. No. 426, art. II, § 202, 6-26-86; Ord. No. 428, 8-14-86; Ord. No. 466, 6-11-92) 
Sec. 22-58. - Zoning affects every structure. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be used, no structure erected and no grading, filling or excavating or otherwise alteration of landforms shall be permitted except in conformity with the provisions specified in this chapter for the districts in which located. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 300.1, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-59. - Lot, building/structure setback requirements. 
The various lot and building/structure setback requirements in each of the zoning districts of the city shall be as follows: 

 
1   For first three dwelling units, plus 2,500 for each additional dwelling unit. 
2   See section 22-102 for exceptions. 
3   See section 22-105 for exceptions. 
4   See section 22-103 for exceptions. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 203, 6-26-86) 
Secs. 22-60—22-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 22-72. - Preapplication conference. 
Before submitting an application for a special district, an applicant shall confer with the building inspector to obtain information and guidance before incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 405.1, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-73. - Application. 
(a)	An applicant desiring to establish a special district shall provide, upon request, two copies of a master plan indicating the following: 
(1)	A vicinity map showing the location of the site. 
(2)	The existing development within 300 feet from the boundaries of the subject property. 
(3)	The size of the site. 
(4)	The topography of the site at five-foot contour intervals. 
(5)	Existing streams, marshes, natural drainageways, floodplains and other natural features. 
(6)	Existing streets, easements. 
(7)	Additional data including an organized and conveniently related arrangement of buildings; off-street parking and loading facilities; internal automotive and pedestrian circulation; entrance and exits to public streets and pedestrian ways; service fencing and walls; exterior lighting on premises; size, location and orientation of signs and relation to and safeguards for all property surrounding the lot. 
(8)	If appropriate, the plan shall also show the manner of improving and maintaining in open use portions of the tract subject to periodic inundation and shall demonstrate that hazards or damage to other property will not be created by any channeling, cutting, filling, bulkheading or other treatment of water flow from or past the site; by erosion from increased rate, volume or reduction of flow; by deposition of debris or other floodborne materials from the site or as a result of its development; by excessive slopes remaining at the edges of cuts or fills; by damaging increases in the ground water level of surrounding property; or by other actions in developing the tracts and its auxiliary facilities. If potential hazards or damage might reasonably be expected from any of these causes, the plan shall show how it is to be averted. 
(b)	The applicant shall also provide two copies of a written report or statement containing the following information: 
(1)	An explanation of the character of the special district. 
(2)	A general explanation of the proposal including densities, water supply, sewerage disposal, protective covenants and other pertinent information. 
(c)	A development schedule indicating: 
(1)	The approximate date when construction of the project can be expected to begin. 
(2)	The stages in which the project will be built and the approximate date when construction of each stage can be expected to begin. This schedule shall be updated annually through planning commission review on the anniversary of its approval. 
(3)	The approximate date when the development will be completed. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 405.2, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-74. - General conditions which may be attached. 
In reviewing the proposed development plan, the planning commission may require rearrangement of the structures or uses as proposed to assure that the requirements set forth in this division are met. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 405.3, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-75. - Review and update. 
The applicant under this division shall submit an annual report outlining the status of the proposed project within a special district until the development is completed. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 405.4, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-76. - Revisions of plans after final approval. 
Any change in the approved master development plan which affects the intent and character of the development, the density of land use, the location or dimension of streets or similar changes shall be reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the city council after receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission regarding the changes. A request for a revision of the master development plan shall be supported by a written statement explaining why the revisions are necessary or desirable. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 405.5, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-77. - Rezoning. 
Special district zoning only allows the use shown on the developmental plan. It is the intent and purpose of this section that the city council, when approving a special district, specify the permitted use. Such rezoning shall only add the use so specified. In order to utilize the property for some other permitted use within a special district, an application for rezoning must be filed. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 405.6, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-78. - Reversion to former zoning. 
In the event that the requirements and criteria of the application and developmental plan as approved by the city council under this division are not met, the property shall revert to its former zoning. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 405.7, 6-26-86) 
Secs. 22-79—22-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 22-102. - Modification of building setbacks for existing developments. 
District requirements for building line setbacks from the street right-of-way line may be modified where the majority of the frontage within 200 feet on each side of a lot within the same block and district and fronting on the same street with such lot is developed with less than the required setback. In such case the required building setback shall be the average of existing setbacks, counting any undeveloped frontage as if it were developed at the required setback distance from the street, but shall not be less than 15 feet. This modification shall not apply in case such existing development is located along any right-of-way scheduled to be widened. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 300.2, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-103. - Exemptions to height restrictions. 
The following structures or parts thereof are hereby exempt from the height limitations as set forth in the zoning districts: 
(1)	Agricultural buildings: barn, silo, windmill, grain elevators and other farm structures, but not including dwellings. 
(2)	Cooling towers, gas holders or other industrial structures where required by the manufacturing process. 
(3)	Church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flagpoles, radio towers and aerials. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 300.3, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-104. - Street access control. 
In order to promote the safety of the motorist and pedestrian and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)	Vehicular access from properties to streets shall not exceed 36 feet in width. 
(2)	No more than two points of vehicular access from a property to each abutting public street shall be permitted for each 400 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof; provided however, that lots with less than 100 feet of frontage shall have no more than one point of access to any one public street. 
(3)	No point of access shall be allowed within 35 feet of the right-of-way line of any street intersections. 
(4)	No curbs on city streets or rights-of-way shall be cut or altered for access without approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 300.4, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-105. - Modification of building setbacks. 
(a)	In residential districts, the side and rear building setbacks for accessory buildings not exceeding 400 square feet may be reduced to five feet provided such buildings do not encroach on any drainage or utility easements. 
(b)	In commercial and industrial districts, the side and rear building setbacks along adjoining commercially or industrially zoned property may be reduced to zero with an approved two-hour fire wall. 
(c)	In industrial and commercial districts, the side and rear building setbacks along residentially zoned property shall be as specified in the lot requirements of the appropriate district or as required by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 300.5, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-106. - Nonconforming uses of land and structures. 
(a)	Intent. It is the nature of this section to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights; however, this chapter recognizes that the elimination of existing structures and uses that are not in conformity with this chapter is as much a subject of health, safety and general welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of new uses which would violate the purpose, intent and provisions of this chapter. A structure, building or use which was established before the effective date of this chapter and which does not conform to one or more of the requirements of this chapter is a nonconformity. Such nonconformity may be continued in perpetuity, shall not be converted to any other use except a conforming use and shall not be reestablished after discontinuance of operation for one year. 
(b)	Maintenance and repairs. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 75 percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure, provided that the bulk existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(c)	Expansion of nonconformity. A nonconforming use of land or structure cannot be expanded except upon approval of the planning commission under provisions of this chapter as outlined in section 22-143. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 301, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-107. - Off-street parking requirements. 
In all districts, at the time of the erection of any building or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats and/or floor area, or before conversion from one type of use or occupancy to another, there shall be provided permanent off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)	Combination of required parking space. The required space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot but the required space assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except where the parking space required for churches or other assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night, on Sunday, or otherwise does not coincide with an adjacent use, such required parking may be assigned to the adjacent use. 
(2)	Proximity of off-street parking spaces to use. All required parking for all uses shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building (or open use area) it is to serve, provided, however, that no required parking spaces may be located across any major street from the use it is intended to serve. 
(3)	Requirements for design of parking lots: 
a.	Except for parcels of land devoted to one- and two-family residential uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain access. 
b.	Each parking space shall be not less than 200 square feet in area and parking areas shall be paved or have an approved all weather surface. 
(4)	Off-street parking requirements by use. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for each type use shall be determined by the following: 
a.	Single- and multi-family residences: two spaces per residence. 
b.	Group dwellings, roominghouses and boardinghouses: one space for each two rooms to be rented. 
c.	Tourist home, motel, hotel, motor courts: one space for each room to be rented, plus one additional space for each three employees. 
d.	Medical and dental clinics: six spaces per doctor, plus one additional space for each two employees. 
e.	Hospital: one space for each two beds intended for patient's use, exclusive of bassinets, plus one space for each three employees including doctors. 
f.	School: one space for each classroom and administrative office, plus one additional space for each six seats in the largest assembly area or room. 
g.	Auditorium, theatres, churches, funeral homes and similar places of public assembly: one space for each four seats, or 12 feet of benches, or per 30 square feet of usable floor area in the largest assembly room, plus one space for each 200 square feet of floor or ground area used for amusement, entertainment or assemble exclusive of the major assembly room. 
h.	General and professional offices: one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
i.	Gasoline service station: five spaces for each service bay, plus one space for each two employees. 
j.	Restaurants: one space per 150 square feet of usable floor area, plus one space for each two employees. (For drive-in restaurants, one space for each 50 square feet of floor area.) 
k.	Other retail uses: one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
l.	Wholesale uses: one space for each employee on the largest shift, plus one space for each 200 square feet of selling area. 
m.	Warehouse and storage uses: one space for each employee on the largest shift, plus one space for each 600 square feet of storage or warehousing area. 
n.	Industrial uses: one space for each two employees on the largest shift. 
(5)	Restriction on use of required parking. The required off-street parking shall be for employees, occupants, clients and visitors and shall be limited in use to temporary storage of motor vehicles with current license plates. The storage of merchandise or motor vehicles for sale, the servicing or repairing of vehicles or equipment and regular truck loading and unloading thereon is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 302, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-108. - Off-street loading and unloading requirements. 
In any district and on the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehousing, retail selling, wholesaling, hospital, funeral home or other uses which in the opinion of the building inspector involve the receipt of distribution of vehicles, material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading or unloading services adjacent to the space or opening used for loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or alleys. Each loading space provided shall be an area 12 feet by 45 feet with a 14-foot height clearance where uses require trailer-truck loading or ten feet by 25 feet with a height clearance of 14 feet for uses not requiring trailer-truck loading. All loading spaces shall be located so as to contain adequate maneuvering room to permit convenient access to the loading space. A sufficient number of loading spaces shall be provided as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 426, § 303, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-109. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 541, adopted July 9, 2009, effective October 1, 2009, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has replaced § 22-109 with a new Article V, §§ 22-201—22-214 at the editor's discretion. The user's attention is directed to Art. V, §§ 22-201—22-214 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 22-110. - Automobile wrecking yards, junkyards and salvage yards. 
The following regulations shall apply to all automobile wrecking yards, junkyards and salvage yards. No automobile wrecking yard, junkyard or salvage yard shall be permitted closer than 300 feet to any residential district. All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed fence or wall or chainlink fence, except driveway areas. Fences or walls shall be not less than eight feet in height. Storage between such fence or wall and the street or property lines is expressly prohibited. Any fence or wall erected for screening purposes shall be properly painted or otherwise maintained in good condition. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 305, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-111. - Unspecified uses. 
(a)	It is not the intent of this chapter to prohibit any valid use of land or structures where it can be shown that such use is essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare and is in harmony with the objectives and elements of the city's development plan. 
(b)	When such a use is not specified as a permitted use in any zoning district, the planning commission shall by resolution recommend to the city council the appropriate zoning district in which such a use may be located. The city council shall decide the question of an unspecified use as provided for in section 22-141. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 306, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-112. - Customary home occupations. 
(a)	A customary home occupation is a business or profession carried on by an occupant of a dwelling as a secondary use which is clearly incidental to the main residential use. A home occupation shall: 
(1)	Employ not more than one nonresident of the household. 
(2)	Be conducted entirely within the principal building and out of sight of neighboring properties. 
(3)	Utilize not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the principal building. 
(4)	Produce no alteration or change in the character or exterior appearance of the principal building from that of a dwelling. 
(5)	Contain no outside accessory building, repair or storage shops. 
(6)	Have no distribution center requiring bulk deliveries and local dispensing. 
(7)	Not be used for storage for more than one commercial vehicle licensed as one ton or less in capacity per family residing on the premises. 
(b)	The following occupations, are considered customary home occupations: 
(1)	Barbershops and beauty shops. 
(2)	Artists, dressmakers, seamstresses, tailors, crafts and interior decorators. 
(3)	Professional office for architects, accountants, lawyers, engineers, doctors, dentists, insurance agents, real estate agents and other similar personal service occupations. 
(4)	Teaching, musical instruction and day care limited to six pupils at a given time. 
(5)	Office for record maintenance only for businesses, e.g., electricians, plumbers, HVAC and other contractors which perform their services at other locations. 
(6)	Agents for manufacturers and sales persons for records and bookkeeping only. Any orders shall be solicited away from the dwelling and no deliveries may be made at the dwelling. 
(7)	Any similar use which the planning commission deems to be a home occupation by reason or acceptance as a home occupation in the community. 
(c)	Applications for approval of a customary home occupation as a conditional use shall be submitted to the planning commission as provided for in section 22-143. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 307, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-113. - Accessory uses in residential districts. 
(a)	No accessory living quarters, garage apartments or similar accessory living quarters, shall be located in an R zone, except that a bona fide guest house where no rent is paid, or servants' quarters, shall be permitted upon a lot area of 15,000 square feet or more. Such accessory building shall not be closer than ten feet to any lot line. 
(b)	Where the rear yard abuts upon a street, no accessory building shall be closer to the rear lot line than the required front setback for the zone. 
(c)	No outdoor advertising sign or business sign shall be permitted as an accessory use, except that a real estate sign not larger than eight square feet shall be permitted where the disposal of a building, structure, or land is involved, and such sign is on the premises of the property advertised for disposal. 
(d)	Private garages, storage buildings, greenhouses, childrens' play houses, summer houses, home workshops, swimming pools, and satellite dishes are permitted accessory uses. 
(e)	All accessory uses shall conform to the building/structure setback requirements; except that portable storage buildings less than 200 square feet may be located within five feet of rear and side property lines. No accessory use shall be located between the street right-of-way line and the principal use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 308, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-114. - Animals. 
Livestock and/or pets, other than dogs and cats which have been tagged and inoculated, will not be permitted. Quarters of dogs or cats shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. See section 22-57 for permitted uses on kennels, animal hospitals, etc. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 309, 6-26-86) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4. 
Sec. 22-115. - Railroad rights-of-way designated R-1a (medium density residential). 
All railroad rights-of-way situated within the geographical limits of the City of Thomson shall be and the same are hereby designated as R-1a (medium density residential). 
( Ord. No. 552, § 1, 1-10-13 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 552, § 1, adopted Jan. 10, 2013, was not specifically amendatory. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 22-115. 
Secs. 22-116—22-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-136. - Enforcing officer. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city building inspector. This official shall have the right to enter upon any premises for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. In addition, he shall issue or cause to be issued all building permits and make and maintain records thereof, issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records thereof, and conduct inspections as prescribed by this chapter and other such inspections as are necessary to insure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 402.1, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-137. - Building permits required. 
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building or structure including accessory structures, or to commence the moving, alteration or repair of any structure including accessory structures, until the building inspector has issued for such work a building permit containing a statement that the plans, specifications and intended use of such structure in all respects conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 402.2, 6-26-86) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 
Sec. 22-138. - Application for building permit. 
(a)	Application for a building permit shall be made in writing at city hall on forms provided for the purpose. It shall be unlawful for the city building inspector to approve the plans or issue a building permit for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to be in conformity with this chapter. To this end, the city building inspector may require that every application for a building permit for excavation, construction, moving or alteration shall be accompanied by a plan or plat drawn to scale and showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the building inspector to ascertain whether the proposed excavation, construction, moving or alteration is in conformance with this chapter: 
(1)	The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot to be built upon. 
(2)	The shape, height, use and location on the lot, buildings or structures to be erected or altered. 
(3)	The sizes, locations and use of all existing buildings or structures on the lot. 
(4)	The number of dwelling units the building, if residential, is designed to accommodate. 
(5)	The setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots. 
(6)	The layout of off-street parking and unloading spaces. 
(7)	Signature of the county health officer approving the proposed location of the septic tank and field lines provided public sewerage is not available. 
(8)	Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential in determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(b)	If the proposed excavation, construction, moving or alteration as set forth in the application for a building permit is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the city building inspector shall issue a building permit for such excavation, construction, moving or alteration. If the application for a building permit is not approved, the city building inspector shall state in writing on the application the cause of such disapproval. Issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any provision of this chapter, and building permits shall be void after 12 months from date of issue unless substantial progress on the project has been made by that time. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 402.3, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-139. - Certificate of occupancy. 
No land or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved or altered in its use shall be occupied or used until the city building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued with the provisions of this chapter. If the certificate of occupancy is not granted upon request, the building inspector shall state in writing the reasons why the certificate was not granted. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 402.4, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-140. - Schedule of fees. 
The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, zoning map amendment, appeals and variance applications from time to time. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the building inspector and may be altered or amended only by the city council. Until all applicable fees have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 406, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-141. - Zoning changes and amendments. 
The city council may from time to time amend, supplement or change the boundaries on the zoning districts established on the comprehensive zoning map of the city, or the requirements set forth in this chapter. Any proposed amendments, supplement or change shall first be submitted to the planning commission for its recommendation. The following procedures shall be required when any request is made for a change in the zoning district boundaries: 
(1)	Any person desiring a change in the existing boundaries of any zoning district shall first file a petition requesting such change, together with a plat of the property to be changed and the cement fee therefor with the building inspector. 
(2)	Within 15 days after receiving the petition, the building inspector shall in writing inform the applicant of the date on which a public hearing will be held to consider the zoning change. 
(3)	Upon receiving a petition for a zoning change and establishing the date of the public hearing concerning the petitioned request, the property owner shall erect in a conspicuous place on the property in question or on the right-of-way of the nearest public road, if the property does not front a public road, a sign of not less than nine square feet with not less than three-inch black letters upon a white background, a sign giving public notice of both the existing zoning district in which the property is located and the requested change and the scheduled date and place for the public hearing. 
(4)	At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the scheduled public hearing, the city administrator shall advertise such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(5)	The public hearing shall be conducted by the city planning commission. 
(6)	The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council stating its approval or disapproval of the requested zoning change. Such recommendation shall be made by the planning commission within 30 days of the public hearing or the requested zoning change shall be deemed to have been recommended for approval by the planning commission. The recommendation to the city council shall be based upon a review of the following criteria: 
a.	Existing uses and zoning of nearby property. 
b.	The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions. 
c.	The extent to which the destruction of property values of the plaintiffs promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
d.	The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
e.	The suitability of the subject property for the zoning purposes. 
f.	The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property. 
g.	Conformity with or divergence from the land use plan. 
(7)	No application for amendment of this chapter once heard and acted upon by the planning commission shall be accepted for a rehearing until at least 12 months shall have passed since action was taken by the planning commission. 
(8)	An application may not be withdrawn or amended by the applicant after the public hearing has been advertised. However, the planning commission may by a majority vote allow an application to be withdrawn without prejudice. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 404, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-142. - Variances. 
After written denial of a building permit, a property owner may make application for a variance, using forms available. Upon receipt of an application, the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing. The property owner shall erect in a conspicuous place on the property in question a sign giving public notice of the appeal at least 15 days prior to the scheduled hearing. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to city council on applications for variances within 30 days after such public hearing and in accordance with the standards provided below. Variances from the terms of this chapter may be recommended in such individual hardship cases of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the planning commission based on the following criteria: 
(1)	Variances shall be granted only where special circumstances or conditions fully described in the finding of the planning commission do not apply generally in the district. 
(2)	For reasons fully set forth in the findings of the planning commission, the special circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of any reasonable use of his land. Mere loss in value shall not justify a variance. There must be a deprivation of beneficial use of land. 
(3)	The granting of any variance shall be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter and shall not be injurious to the neighborhood, detrimental to the public welfare or in conflict with the city's development plan. 
(4)	In reviewing an application for a variance, the burden of showing that the variance should be granted shall be upon the person applying therefor. 
(5)	The planning commission or the city council may, when granting a variance, establish reasonable conditions concerning the use of such property and may establish a time period for such variances. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 403.3, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-143. - Conditional use approvals. 
The planning commission is authorized to hear requests for conditional uses as provided by this chapter and to recommend to the city council approval or disapproval of conditional use applications. A conditional use application shall not be heard by the planning commission until: 
(1)	A written application for a conditional use is submitted indicating the section of this chapter under which the conditional use is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested. 
(2)	Notice of such hearings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property for which conditional use is sought by the property owner at least 15 days prior to the scheduled hearing. 
(3)	The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. 
(4)	The commission shall make written findings to city council certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual conditional uses and that satisfactory provision and arrangement has been made concerning the following, where applicable: 
a.	Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe. 
b.	Off-street parking and loading areas where required. 
c.	Refuse collection areas and availability of utilities. 
d.	Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, and harmony with properties in the district. 
e.	Required building setbacks. 
f.	General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 403.4, 6-26-86) 
Secs. 22-144—22-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPEALS 

Sec. 22-156. - General procedure. 
All questions of interpretation and enforcement shall first be presented to the city building inspector. Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the building inspector by first appealing to the planning commission and then to the city council. Recourse from the decision of the city council shall be to the courts as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 401, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-157. - Authority of commission. 
In addition to such other powers given, the planning commission shall: 
(1)	Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination or refusal made by the building inspector or other administrative official in the carrying out or enforcement of any provision of this chapter. 
(2)	Hear requests for interpretation of the zoning map and for decision of any special questions upon which the building inspector is authorized to pass. 
(3)	Hear and recommend to the city council applications for approval or disapproval for variances from the terms of this chapter. 
(4)	Hear and recommend to the city council on applications for conditional use approvals. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 403.1, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-158. - Appeals to the planning commission. 
An appeal to the planning commission may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any governmental officer, department, board or bureau affected by any such decision of the city building inspector based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the planning commission a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city building inspector shall transmit to the commission all papers constituting the record upon which the action was taken. The commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matters referred to it. The property owner shall erect in a conspicuous place on the property in question a sign giving public notice of the appeal at least 15 days prior to the scheduled hearing. Any party or person may appear at the hearing in person, by agent, or by attorney. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 403.2, 6-26-86) 
Secs. 22-159—22-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 22-171. - Creation. 
There is hereby created the city planning commission, to consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 104.1(a), 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-172. - Appointment, terms of members. 
The initial members of the planning commission shall be appointed to the following terms: one member shall serve a five-year term; one member shall serve a four-year term; one member, a three-year term; one member, a two-year term; and one member, a one-year term. Thereafter, successors to the initial members shall serve a five-year term and until their successors are duly appointed. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 104.1(a), 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-173. - Officers. 
The planning commission shall elect from among its members a chairman and a vice chairman. They shall serve for one year or until they are reelected or successors are elected. The chairman shall supervise the affairs of the commission, shall preside at all meetings and shall appoint such committees as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of the commission. The vice chairman, in the absence or disability of the chairman, shall perform all the duties and exercise the powers of the chairman. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 104.1(b), 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-174. - Personnel. 
(a)	The city administrator shall be the commission secretary. The secretary shall record and maintain permanent minutes of the commission proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact; shall keep records of official action; shall summarize accurately the minutes of all hearings; shall have published in a local newspaper public notice of meetings or hearings as required by this chapter; and shall be the custodian of such public minutes and records in the city hall. 
(b)	The city building inspector shall be assigned to the planning commission as a staff member to investigate alleged zoning violations, report findings and information concerning applications before the commission, and to perform the tasks needed by the commission in carrying out its duties as required by the chairman. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 104.1(c), (d), 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-175. - Duties. 
It shall be the duties of the planning commission to: 
(1)	Review and approve all plats. 
(2)	Review and approve all development plans. 
(3)	Review and approve all subdivision developmental plans. 
(4)	Conduct required public hearings and recommend to the city council approval or disapproval of all requests for zoning changes. 
(5)	Recommend to the city council any changes to this chapter. 
(6)	Conduct required public hearings and recommend to the city council approval or disapproval of all requests for variances. 
(7)	Conduct required public hearings and recommend to the city council approval or disapproval of all requests for conditional use approvals. 
(8)	Conduct such other business and affairs as may be, from time to time, granted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 104.2, 6-26-86) 
Sec. 22-176. - Meetings. 
(a)	Regular meetings of the planning commission shall be held on the second Thursday of each month at 6:30 p.m., in the city hall unless otherwise determined by the chairman. Notification must be given to members, however, not less than 24 hours prior to the time set for such hearings. 
(b)	Special meetings may be called by the chairman at his discretion, or upon the request of two or more members, provided that 48 hours notice is given each member. 
(c)	All meetings shall be open to the public. 
(d)	A quorum shall consist of three members for any regular or special meeting, and as required for any decision, determination, or official action by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 104.3, 6-26-86; Ord. No. 539, 6-12-08) 
Sec. 22-177. - Hearings. 
(a)	At the time of the hearing before the planning commission, the applicant may appear in his own behalf or be represented by his counsel or agent. 
(b)	The applicant or his representatives may make an initial statement outlining the nature of his request prior to introducing evidence. 
(c)	The commission shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence, but it may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, incompetent or unduly repetitious testimony or evidence. 
(d)	The chairman shall rule on all questions relating to the admissibility of evidence, which may be overruled by a majority of the members. 
(e)	Final decisions or recommendations shall be made within 30 days from the date of the hearing. 
(f)	All decisions or recommendations of the commission shall be made at a public meeting by motion made and seconded, and by the chairman polling the membership by a roll call vote. The motion which decides the issue shall be in the form of findings of fact and shall state the reasons for the findings by the commission. 
(g)	Any member who has an interest in a matter under consideration shall not vote thereon and shall remove himself from any meeting or hearing at which such matter is under consideration. 
(h)	The city attorney shall be consulted in cases where the powers of the commission are not clearly defined. 
(i)	The commission may adopt other such rules and procedures it feels necessary to perform its duties. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 104.4, 6-26-86) 
Secs. 22-178—22-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIGN STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 544 , adopted Mar. 11, 2010, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, §§ 22-201—22-214, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 22-201. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)	In order to protect the public safety, including traffic safety, to assure aesthetic harmony and compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the city, to protect the public investment in streets and roads, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, and to provide for orderly and reasonable display of advertisements for the benefit of all its citizens, the governing authority finds that the improper control of signs would be detrimental to the unique characteristics of the city. The governing authority thus determines that the public health, safety, and welfare require the adoption of this article. 
(b)	The governing authority finds that signs and advertising are proper and necessary uses of private property and can constitute a legitimate business entitled to the protection of the law. A sign by its very nature is designed to draw an individual's attention to that sign. This characteristic makes signs a valuable medium of communication; however, this same characteristic can distract motorists and pedestrians, thus creating traffic hazards. 
(c)	The governing authority further finds that the clutter created by an excess in number, size, and height of signs creates a distraction to travelers and negatively impacts the general appearance of an area. Signs may lessen the aesthetic qualities of an area and may intrude upon the residential character of an area, as well as property values. 
(d)	The governing authority further finds that signs and advertising should be reasonably regulated in the interest of traffic safety, aesthetics and public welfare by the establishment of standards for the location, size, illumination, number, construction, and maintenance of all signs and advertising structures in the city, and to ensure that they are structurally safe and sound. 
Note: At its discretion, the planning commission may defer the review of the sign and/or sign material to the historic preservation commission. 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
Sec. 22-202. - Permitted signs. 
Note: For purposes of these standards, all signs referenced herein, unless otherwise specified, shall be restricted to static signs (non-changeable copy). For digital or manual change copy signs, see section 22-203(9) and (10). 
Table S:1 Permitted Signs by Zoning District 

 
Footnotes: 
(1)  Wall sign only is permitted for approved "home occupations," and approved conditional uses. Such signs shall be mounted flat to the front (street) facade of the residence and within the immediate proximity of the main entrance, as approved. 
(2)  Individual tenant street/exterior signs are prohibited! 
(3)  64 sq. ft. if heated building space is less than 50,000 sq. ft., 96 sq. ft. if (heated) building space is greater than 50,000 sq. ft. 
(4)  For developments located on corner lots, see section 22-203(7). 
(5)  See section 22-206(k). 
(6)  Exterior wall signage may cover five percent of each exterior wall (excluding any openings). Also see section 22-205 and 22-206. 
(7)  Opaque window signs may not cover more than 25 percent of the total area of window. 
(8)  Due to weight, hanging signs should not exceed one inch in thickness. 
(9)  For residential subdivision entrance sign, see section 22-203(1). 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Signs on the rear of buildings are permitted but limited to hanging signs, or, exterior wall signs complying with the area requirements referenced in footnote 6 above. 
(12)  Lots having a free-standing (FS) building with a front yard areas suitable for monument sign placement. For free-standing buildings not having a suitable front yard area, a facade hanging sign is permitted. Such sign shall adhere to the same requirements (including footnote 13 below) as a hanging sign permitted in the TB-2 CW district. 
(13)  For commercial buildings sharing one or more of its exterior walls as a common wall (CW) with an adjacent structure, and those locations not having a suitable yard area for a FS sign. Such signs shall be anchored securely to the wall and supported by a decorative steel support. Sign placement: Minimum height above sidewalk or common grade—nine feet. Maximum height—18 feet. Maximum protrusion from exterior wall (including support)—five feet. Also see section 22-206. 
(14)  If externally illuminated, light flooding beyond sign face should be avoided. 
(15)  Maximum sign depth (thickness)—eight inches. 
(16)  Reserved. 
(17)  Upon review and approval, a mansard roof signs may be approved if mounted in a vertical (0°—Upright) position with the mounting supports recessed so as to not be readily visible. 
(18)  Upon review and approval, churches in residential districts may be permitted a monument sign up to 64 sq. ft. 
(19)  Only district allowing digital signs. 
(20)  Temporary signs (section 22-208) not permitted. 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
Sec. 22-203. - Additional permitted signs. 
The following signs are also permitted: 
(1)	Subdivision entrance signs. Unless otherwise referenced or specified, subdivision entrance signs shall be of monument type not exceeding 64 square feet in area, six feet in height, 12 feet in width. 
(2)	Entrance/exit signs. In the commercial and industrial zones: Two single or double-faced pole or monument style signs each clearly indicating "Entrance" and "Exit" respectively. Each sign may not exceed three feet in height, nor three square feet per face. Such signs shall be internally illuminated only and may be placed within one foot of the right-of-way. Such signs shall not obstruct the view of on-coming traffic. 
(3)	Obscured signs. Any sign not visible from the outside of a structure is not regulated by this section. 
(4)	Holiday lighting. Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message. 
(5)	Construction/home improvement signs. 
a.	Residential home construction and improvement signs may be placed on the site of the construction or repair provided all such signs do not exceed nine square feet in size and are removed within seven days after completion of work. 
b.	Commercial and industrial construction signs displaying the intended occupant (i.e., "Coming Soon") or the names of the contractor(s) or subcontractor(s) may be placed on the site of the construction or repair provided each sign does not exceed 32 square feet and are removed within seven days after cessation or completion of construction. 
(6)	Temporary type signs. (See section 22-208.) 
(7)	Corner lot signage . Upon approval, those developments having more than one entrance may be permitted a monument sign at each entrance provided there is 1,000 feet of frontage between each sign. 
(8)	Election/candidate signs. Election/candidate signs shall require no permit and may be permitted in all zoning districts. Such signs shall be limited to one double face sign per road frontage and shall not exceed six square feet in any residential district, nor 32 square feet in any nonresidential zoning district. Signs shall be permitted 12 weeks prior to the election and should be removed within five days following any election or runoff election and shall thereafter be forfeited to the city for immediate removal. All such signs shall conform to any other applicable provisions of these regulations. 
(9)	Digital monument signs. Digital monument signs shall adhere to the following requirements in addition to the requirements set forth for all monuments signs referenced in subsection (11) immediately below. 
a.	Digital message boards may be incorporated into an approved monument sign only. 
b.	Are permitted in the TB-2 (Highway Business District) only. 
c.	Shall display (in permanent, non-digital form) the name of the development. Such name shall be displayed above the digital board portion of the sign. 
d.	Shall have a message duration of each display (ad.) between four and ten seconds—eight seconds is recommended. Periodic or continuous scrolling messages are prohibited. Rapid "Vegas style" flashing messages are prohibited. 
e.	Transition time between messages of between one and four seconds—one to two seconds is recommended. 
f.	Intensity shall not be unreasonably bright for the safety of the motoring public. 
(10)	Manual change copy monument signs. Manual change copy signs may be incorporated into an approved monument sign only. Such signs shall adhere to the following requirements in addition to the requirements set forth for all monuments signs referenced in subsection (11) immediately below. Such sign shall adhere to the following requirements: 
a.	At the owner's discretion, the lower 50 percent of the sign face may include up to four horizontal lines of change copy channeling for advertising purposes. If the owner elects this option, the upper 50 percent of the sign face shall be reserved for the name and address of the business. 
b.	The use of a new or existing portable sign in, or as a substitute for, a manual change copy sign is prohibited. 
(11)	Monument signs—General requirements. As referenced in Table S:1, monument signs are the only permitted ground sign in all zoning districts with the exception of the TB-2 (CW)—Central Business District, and shall adhere to the following requirements: 
a.	Unless otherwise approved, monument signs shall be fully enclosed with the sign faces mounted or enclosed within the body of the monument sign. 
b.	Monument signs may be one-sided, or two-sided with such sides being parallel (i.e., back-to-back) and, unless otherwise approved, with its faces positioned perpendicular to the right-of-way. 
c.	Signs shall be constructed of brick or stone with mortared joints, unless otherwise approved, and with minimum addition of alternate suitable (approved) materials. 
d.	Perimeter columns, if incorporated, shall be minimum width of 20½ inches, and shall not extend higher that 18 inches above the uppermost horizontal surface of the top of the sign, nor exceed the maximum permitted sign height or width as referenced in Table S:1 herein. 
e.	Shall include a cap or cap molding which, unless otherwise approved, shall have a minimum thickness of one inch, and shall extend outward over the body of the monument sign a minimum of two inches. 
f.	The use of a new or existing portable sign in, within, or as a substitute for a monument sign is prohibited. 
(12)	Weekend directional signs. Weekend directional signs shall be limited to garage, yard, and estate sale signs and are permitted in all zoning districts. Applications, signs, and sign approval may be obtained at City Hall (see sample sign below). 

Such signs shall conform to the following rules and regulations for weekend directional signs: 
a.	Garage sale signs require a permit. 
b.	Only signs acquired at the Thomson City Hall are permitted. Such signs shall not be altered in any way including the attachment of balloons. 
c.	No additional writing is permitted on the sign. 
d.	Signs may be placed two days prior to the sale. 
e.	Signs must be removed immediately after the sale. 
f.	No sign can be placed in a median. 
g.	No sign can be affixed to a utility pole, tree, traffic sign, or other structure not approved by the City of Thomson. 
h.	No sign can be placed more than three feet above the ground. 
i.	Signs placed in public right-of-way must be at least five feet from the curb or asphalt, and no more than ten feet from the curb or asphalt. Signs must be placed within 50 feet of an intersection. 
j.	All illegal signs will be removed. 
(13)	PUD identification signs. Upon review and approval by the planning commission a PUD or multi-tenant development may be permitted to provide identification hanging signs identifying the name and/or address of the establishment. Such signs shall be mounted perpendicular to the storefront facade, located above the entrance to the establishment, hung from the ceiling of a covered walkway, or such other location as is approved, and shall not exceed 18 inches in height and 24 inches in width. The bottom of the sign shall be a minimum of nine feet above the level of the walkway. To be eligible for such signage, such PUD or multi-tenant developments shall consist of multi-common wall storefronts with uniformity of architectural design. 
(14)	A-frame signs. In addition to the permitted signs referenced in Table S-1, an A-frame or folding "sandwich" sign shall be permitted for each establishment located in any nonresidential district, and shall conform to the following: 
a.	Only one non-illuminated sign per establishment. 
b.	Such sign shall be placed at the entrance to the establishment and shall not violate the provisions of this article, and section 22-205(16). 
c.	Such sign shall not exceed 41 inches in height above the walkway or 26 inches in width including any additions, appurtenances, or extensions. 
d.	Such sign shall be displayed only during business hours. 
e.	Such sign shall only be displayed in an open upright position. 
f.	Such sign shall not be placed so as to impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
Sec. 22-204. - Exempt signs. 
No sign permit shall be required to display any of the following signs in any zoning district; provided, however, that the signs comply with the requirements set forth for each such type of sign; that all other regulations in these standards shall apply to such signs, including, but not limited to, location requirements and sign prohibitions; and that no such sign shall be illuminated. 
(1)	Reserved. 
(2)	Real estate signs. 
a.	One real estate sign per single-family residential lot, not exceeding six square feet in area, is permitted, but shall be removed within five days of the closing or consummation of an agreement for the sale, rental or lease of the property advertised. 
b.	Real estate signs shall be allowed on other than single-family lots, not to exceed 16 square feet in area, and shall be limited to two such signs per project, or one such sign per entrance. Such signs shall be removed within five days of the closing or consummation of the sale, rental or lease of the property as, advertised. 
c.	All real estate signs shall be properly maintained and erected in an absolute upright vertical position. 
(3)	Real estate directional signs. 
a.	Real estate directional signs may not contain any commercial message or advertisement, but may contain the name, trademark or trade symbol of the development or property to which directions are being provided and/or the real estate company offering the property. 
b.	Reserved. 
c.	Real estate directional signs shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
d.	Real estate directional signs shall not exceed a maximum size of four square feet. 
e.	Real estate directional signs shall not be illuminated. 
f.	Real estate directional signs shall be removed within five days of the consummation of the sale or lease of the property to which directions are provided on such sign. 
g.	There may be no more than four real estate directional signs providing directions to any one residential, commercial or industrial development, or more than two signs providing directions to any one lot. 
h.	Real estate signs located within a public right-of-way shall be removed. Also see section 22-205(16). 
(4)	Worship directional signs. 
a.	Worship directional signs are allowed in all zoning districts. 
b.	Worship directional signs shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
c.	Worship directional signs shall not exceed a maximum size of six square feet. 
d.	Worship directional signs shall not be illuminated. 
e.	There shall be no more than four worship directional signs providing directions to any church or other place of worship on any intersection or any other location. 
f.	Worship directional signs shall be erected on supports provided specifically for that purpose, and no more than one such support may be erected at any street corner. 
g.	Worship directional signs located within a public right-of-way shall be removed. Also see section 22-205(16). 
(5)	Official signs. Signs placed by a governing body including, but not limited to, any federal, state, county or municipality. When appropriate, city officials will make an effort to comply with the sign regulations contained herein. 
(6)	Private and public recreational support signs. Private and public recreational activities support signs shall be those signs erected on inside walls, fences, dugouts, press boxes, stadium stands, concession stands, ticket booths and fencing for race tracks which are sold by private and/or public organizations to support recreational activities of the type sponsored by the city, the board of education and/or recreation department. 
(7)	Temporary signs for civic, religious and school organizations or special events. 
a.	Temporary signs for civic, religious and school organizations or special events, either on-site or off-site, and shall include, but are not limited to, special event notices, temporary meeting location notices, or signs promoting the activities of such organizations. Such activities shall be nonprofit activities. 
b.	Any temporary sign for civic, religious and school organizations or special events shall be allowed in all zoning districts for a period of 30 days. 
c.	Temporary signs for civic, religious and school organizations or special events shall not exceed eight square feet in area, and shall be located at least five feet from the right-of-way. 
d.	No part of a temporary sign for civic, religious and school organizations or special events shall be located in or on a public right-of-way. 
e.	To prevent wind damage to a temporary sign for civic, religious, and school organizations or special events, or other property, the sign must be securely anchored to the site in a manner approved by planning commission. 
(8)	Official flags. 
a.	Official flags may be displayed on a lot as follows: 
1.	The official flag of the United States of America or of the State of Georgia may be displayed on any lot. If placed on a flagpole such flagpole shall not exceed the height limitation of the zoning district in which the flagpole is located. 
2.	No more than one official flag, excluding the official flag of the United States of America or of the State of Georgia, shall be displayed on any one lot by a person occupying said lot, and such official flag shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, or be located on a flagpole that exceeds the height limitation of the zoning district in which the flag is located. 
b.	The official flag of the United States of America shall be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the United States, as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
Sec. 22-205. - Prohibited signs, displays, or advertising. 
Signs which are prohibited include, but are not limited to: 
(1)	Temporary signs (section 22-208) in the TB-2 CW and TB-2 FS districts. 
(2)	Signs, displays, advertising, or objects for sale, which are located on any public right-of-way or sidewalk. Also see section 22-205(17). 
(3)	Roof signs, including, but not limited to signs which are mounted or suspended from a structure's roof, top of parapet, or any wall or facade sign extending above the parapet or the upper extent of the structure's wall. 
(4)	Portable signs including, but not limited to, portable box signs, posters, and placards as seen below. Those in existence upon the adoption of this article shall be removed. 

(5)	Banners in existence prior to the adoption of this article shall be removed. (See section 22-208.) 
(6)	Animated signs involving the movement, flapping, or rotation of the sign itself or portions or parts thereof. 
(7)	Flashing, blinking, or signs of varying light intensity with the exception of signs referenced in section 22-203(9). 
(8)	Exposed neon or signs containing exposed neon tubing which are not enclosed within a channel or box lettering. 
(9)	Signs which contain, or are an imitation of, an official traffic sign or signal, or can be confused with an official traffic sign including those signs employing the word "Stop," "Yield," "Go," etc. 
(10)	Signs that have been abandoned, including signs that advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer active or in existence. 
(11)	Signs not in good repair, including any sign which is in a state of disrepair or disassembly, or any sign which has its internal lighting exposed to view for more than 30 days. 
(12)	Signs or advertising devices attached directly onto any vehicle parked for more than 48 hours so as to be visible from a public right-of-way, except for work vehicles of a business, and common carriers or other vehicles used for daily transportation with a valid license plate. 
(13)	Signs attached to any mansard roof, awning, or roof overhang, unless otherwise approved. 
(14)	Canopy or awnings having a commercial message sign attached to or incorporated within the canopy or awning, with the exception of the name and address of the establishment. 
(15)	Strip panel rotating signs. 
(16)	Signs emitting any audible sounds, message, smoke, fumes, or other emission. 
(17)	Prohibited signs—Forfeited. 
a.	Any sign, display, advertisement, installed or placed on public property including right-of-ways or sidewalk except in conformance with the requirements of these standards, or approved as in the case of an A-frame sidewalk sign. 
b.	Any item or object for sale which is placed on any public right-of-way or sidewalk shall immediately be removed by its owner. 
c.	Signs attached to, or painted on, any street signs or markers, traffic control signs or devices, any sign pole, fence, utility pole or post, tree, rock, or other natural object or feature not specifically approved for sign support. 
Such signs may be forfeited to the public and subject to immediate confiscation. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the city shall have the right to recover from the sign owner or person(s) placing or maintaining such sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign. 
(18)	Signs mounted to fences and walls other than for public safety or as may be permitted in section 22-204(6). 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
Sec. 22-206. - Standards. 
(a)	Computation of sign area. The area of a sign shall be computed as the area within the smallest square, rectangle, or portion thereof enclosing, or which would have enclosed, the outer limits of the sign face and sign frame or cabinet, base, text, material, texture or color forming an integral part of the sign or used to differentiate the sign face and frame from the structure upon which it is placed. The calculated area representing the standards/support poles supporting such sign and that open area associated with such supports shall be excluded from such calculation. In the case of monument signs, the area of the sign shall include the entire structure including the area of the sign, base, and any side supports or columns. 
(b)	Content . Any sign, display or device allowed under these standards may contain any commercial or non-commercial message, except that such messages cannot be profane, depict obscenity as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, nor can it depict sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3, nor advertise any illegal activity. 
(c)	Embellishments . Sign embellishments, including, but not limited to protrusions or extensions are prohibited. 
(d)	Number . For the purposes of determining the number of signs, ground signs shall be equal to the number of sign structures. All other non-ground signs shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements, such elements shall be considered to be a single sign. 
(e)	Illumination . 
(1)	Residential land uses. Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, as in the case of subdivision entrance signs, preexisting nonconforming commercial uses and approved conditional uses, no sign shall be illuminated within any single-family residential district. 
(2)	For nonresidential land uses. No sign shall be illuminated if located within 100 feet of a residence unless otherwise approved. Such distance shall be measured from the outermost portion of the lighted portion of the sign to the nearest portion of the residential structure, excluding any overhangs or unheated additions which may include porches, stoops, patios, decks, and the like. 
(3)	In the PUD and industrial districts all signs over six feet in height, if illuminated, may be internally or externally illuminated utilizing low wattage luminaries designed to reduce light glow. 
(f)	Support and stabilization. No signage shall employ the use of guy wires or other external support bracing for stabilization. Whether placed permanently or temporarily, and unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, all ground signs shall be affixed to the ground. However, in the case of hanging signs an external brace/hanger shall be permitted but shall not employ the use of guy wires for stabilization. 
(g)	Setbacks . Unless otherwise approved, all ground signs, or portions thereof, shall be setback at least five feet from any public right-of-way or property line. No permanently affixed ground sign shall interfere with any public utility or vehicular line of sight. 
(h)	Corner visibility. No sign or sign structure above the height of three feet may be sited within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of opposing streets. 
(i)	Fire safety. No sign or sign structure may be erected or maintained which obstructs any form of fire escape or fire lane. 
(j)	Overhanging signs. Unless otherwise approved, no exterior free standing sign, or portion thereof, may project or extend over any residential, commercial, or industrial structure, driveway, or parking area. 
(k)	Sign review: Design, construction, material, location and placement . The design, construction, material, location, and placement of all signs shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission. Such review may include the assistance of the city's code enforcement personnel, and, if applicable, the historic preservation commission. Materials and design which are not commonly used in sign construction, are aesthetically inappropriate, are considered unprofessional, or may detract from the zoning district, property, or property value, are prohibited. 
(l)	Placement . Unless otherwise approved, facade signs shall be centered within the facade sign band where available, or centered on the building facade. Facade signs shall not cover or interfere with any existing or proposed architectural features. 
(m)	Sign height . The height of signs shall be governed by the standards specified within each zoning district as found in Table S1. 
Elevation variance: The planning commission may grant an administrative variance regarding the height of a sign when installed immediately adjacent to, or within 100 feet of a right-of-way where the unaltered common grade at the sign base is greater than five feet below the common grade of the roadway as determined by the planning commission. 
(n)	Uniformity of design. For all developments or projects under single ownership or development (i.e., PUD, shopping centers, mixed use, multi-family, multi-store front, etc.) or projects incorporating a thematic design, unless otherwise approved, all signs shall incorporate a uniformity or consistency of design. 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
Sec. 22-207. - Reserved. 
Sec. 22-208. - Short duration temporary signs (one to seven days). 
The following standards shall govern short duration temporary signs/banners: 
(1)	Short duration temporary signs include: 
a.	Signs not exceeding six feet in height, nor 16 square feet per side, and shall not be more than two-sided. 
b.	Banners. 
(2)	Short duration temporary signs may be erected in any zoning district with the exception of TB-2. 
(3)	Short duration temporary signs may be erected for a maximum of seven consecutive days, eight times per year. 
(4)	No more than one sign can be erected on any lot, structure, or location at one time. 
(5)	Such signs shall be made of water proof material. 
(6)	Such signs must be attached to its own mounting device. The mounting must be secure to prevent the sign from blowing off of the device. The mounting device or sign should bear the name and phone number of the party responsible for the device. 
(7)	Sign placement shall not violate the provisions of section 22-205(16) of this article. 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
Sec. 22-209. - Procedures. 
(a)	Sign permit. 
(1)	A sign permit is not required for the erection of an exempt sign referenced in section 22-204 or window signs, however, all signs using electrical wiring and connections shall require an electrical permit. 
(2)	For all other signs a sign permit is required before a ground or wall sign may be erected; and before an existing sign may be enlarged, relocated, or substantially improved. 
(3)	Effective upon approval of a sign application/permit any and all liability for cost of injury or damage shall be assumed by the permitee. 
(4)	If the proposed sign is to be placed within the historic preservation district, a certificate of appropriateness may be required to obtain the sign permit. 
(b)	Application . Except for weekend directional signs as referenced in section 22-203(10), applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner or owner's agent with the planning commission upon forms as provided, and shall include such information as may be requested, including, but not limited to: [For all permanent exterior ground and facade signs.] 
(1)	The design of all permanent ground and facade signs associated with the development or business. Such illustration shall be "to scale" showing at a minimum a front and side elevation of all sign's to include notations of the sign's overall height and width and general description of their materials, and their proposed location. 
(2)	If externally illuminated, the light fixtures shall be represented on the front and side elevations. 
(3)	If a site plans is required, all ground signs shall be indicated. 
(c)	Expiration date. A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign installation or erection for which the permit was issued has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance, provided however, that an extension of the permit may be granted. 
(d)	Processing of application. Upon receipt of an application for a sign as permitted under the provisions of these standards the planning commission shall examine and process the application within 15 working days. A permit may be denied if the applicant, landowner, or lessee or other party is presently maintaining any sign in violation of the sign provision of this section. 
(e)	Fees . No permit should be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the planning commission and the appropriate fee has been paid, such fees having from time to time been established by the mayor and council. 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
Sec. 22-210. - Inspection. 
Effective with the adoption of this article, enforcement personnel for the City of Thomson are hereby empowered to enter upon or into a building, structure, or premises upon which a sign is located for the purpose of inspecting the sign, its structural and electrical connections, and to ensure compliance with the provision of these standards. 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
Sec. 22-211. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)	Procedure upon denial. Upon denial of an application for a sign permit the aggrieved party may appeal any decision to the city council. 
(b)	Variances . 
(1)	The city council may grant variances from the provisions of these standards. 
(2)	Administrative . Administrative variances may be granted provided any variance that is granted should conform to the intent and purpose of these sign standards. 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
Sec. 22-212. - Construction and maintenance. 
It shall be unlawful to erect or place any sign which does not conform to the requirements of these standards: 
(1)	All signs for which a permit is required, together with all supports, shall be kept in constant repair and unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal shall periodically be given a protective coat of opaque paint or other approved coating. The area immediately in front of all freestanding signs shall be maintained free of high weeds, grass, and debris. 
(2)	The owner or tenant shall be required to remove from the premises discarded or unusable paper, sign faces, parts and debris resulting from the changing of the advertising copy or message or maintenance of any sign or sign structure. 
(3)	All signs shall be erected and maintained in an absolute vertical upright position. 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
Sec. 22-213. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Removal with notice. City of Thomson enforcement personnel may order the removal of any sign in violation of these standards. Such notice shall be given to the owner of record of the property upon which the sign is, or is proposed to be, erected following the notice provision found herein. If a sign permit was previously issued, such removal notice shall operate to revoke such permit. The removal order shall be issued only after the appropriate party fails to comply with the terms of such notice after the receipt of written notice of noncompliance from the enforcement personnel. 
(b)	Removal without notice. The enforcement personnel of the City of Thomson may, upon passage of these sign regulations, remove, or direct the removal of any sign in violation of these standards, without giving notice to any party, if: 
(1)	Said sign or any portion of said sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property. 
(2)	Said sign poses an immediate threat to the life, health, or safety of any member of the public. 
(c)	Cost of removal. The cost of the removal of any sign as provided for in these standards shall be the responsibility of the property owner and without liability to the City of Thomson, its officers, agents and employees. If removed by the city, the city shall be afforded all means available to remedy the collection for the cost associated with such removal. Removed signs shall be temporarily stored, and if remain unclaimed for more than 60 days from the date of removal, such sign shall be considered forfeited and may be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(d)	Invalid permits. The enforcement personnel may issue a removal order when it has been determined that a permit was improperly issued as a result of misstatement of fact, or fraud, that the sign has not been placed or constructed in compliance with these standards or with the specifications of the application or site plans, that the sign permit has expired, or that the sign is otherwise not in compliance with the provision of these sign standards. 
(e)	Nonconforming signs. 
(1)	Signs which do not comply with these standards but were legally placed before the effective date of this article shall become nonconforming with respect to the requirements set forth herein. 
(2)	With the exception of portable signs (section 22-205(3)) which shall be removed, all nonconforming signs, on-site or off-site, shall be permitted to remain for the duration of the current property or structure occupant, whether owner or tenant for which the sign(s) was established, or use continued. Thereafter, upon a change in occupancy, whether owner or tenant, all such nonconforming signs shall be removed, and all new signs shall come into conformity with the requirements set forth herein. 
(3)	Signs which were illegally erected, established or maintained with respect to the applicable requirements of prior ordinances shall be removed or brought into compliance herewith. 
(4)	Nonconforming signs made of paper, cloth, or other non-durable material, all temporary signs, other than those permitted therein, and any signs that are not permanently affixed to a building or the ground, or are located within a public right-of-way, shall be removed. 
(5)	Except as provided in subsection (e)(7) below, should a nonconforming sign be removed such signs shall not be replaced unless in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(6)	Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs such as repainting, electrical repairs and neon tubing may be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to bring such sign into conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(7)	If a nonconforming sign must be removed due to a city, county, or state road improvement or other public project, the planning commission may authorize the relocation of such sign. Such sign shall, however, meet the district setback requirements. 
(f)	Penalties . Without limitation, sign erectors or owners, property owners, tenants, and/or associated parties may be cited for the violation of any provision of these sign standards. 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
Sec. 22-214. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section, or by the City of Thomson or its agent. The definition or meaning of any word associated with this article may be defined by use of the American Heritage Dictionary, Second College Edition, Copyright © 1991, with interpretation by the City of Thomson or its agent as to the applicability of the definition to the provisions of this article. 
Alley means a public way dedicated to and accepted by a governing body, providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties within a block. 
Banner means a pliable, weather-proof form of notice or advertisement that is tied or hooked to a fixed means of support. Also see section 22-208. 
Building means any structure attached to the ground and intended to provide shelter or housing for, or enclosure of persons, animals, plants, or chattels. Also, see "Structure." 
Building, height of means the vertical distance from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof, to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, and to the deck line for mansard roofs. 
Council means the elected City Council for the City of Thomson. In the context of this article, the term "council" shall include the mayor unless otherwise referenced. 
Embellishment(s) means a structural protrusion or addition to or from a sign face or frame generally for the purpose of adding a visual dimensional image to the sign or sign face. 
Frontage (building) means the distance along the front of a building. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Thomson. 
Height means, when referring to signs, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the sign. 
Lot means a parcel of land which satisfies the applicable area and dimensional requirements for the general zoning district within which it is located, or upon which exists a legal nonconforming use or structure and which has frontage along or legal access to a public street, and is intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for land development. A recorded lot shall have a separate tax parcel reference number designated in the office of the county tax commissioner and/or the county tax assessor. 
Mayor means mayor of the City of Thomson. 
Nonconforming sign means a structure sign legally existing at the time of the enactment of this article or at the time of a zoning amendment which does not conform with the applicable regulations of the general zoning district in which it is located. 
O.C.G.A. means Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Planned development/planned unit development (PUD) means an area of land intended to be developed by a landowner, developer, corporation, group, etc., as a single development, the design of which may incorporate multiple densities or uses. A planned development may be designated as a planned unit development (PUD), a mixed use development (MUD), shopping center, office park, or other similar development so designated by the planning commission. 
[For residential planned development, refer to the city's subdivision ordinance.] 
Professional . When used in connection with "use," "office," and "occupancy," the term professional is defined as a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in rendering a high or technical degree of personal, executive, or administrative services or activities, including, but not limited to, accountants, architects, engineers, land surveyors, doctors, lawyers, planning and zoning officials, stockbrokers, and administrative agencies considered professional in character. Occupations that are considered professional in nature typically are represented by national organizations which promulgate ethical codes and standards of conduct for persons employed in that trade. These national organizations also provide a forum for exchange of ideas and may issue licenses for persons practicing the professional trade. This term may not include those persons defined as professional by the business license provisions of the State of Georgia. 
PUD . See Planned unit development above. 
Sign means any display or words, shapes, or images designed to convey a message to the viewer, located within or on the exterior of any dwelling, building, object or structure, or located on any lot, or upon a dedicated supporting structure, object, device, including poles, banners, windows or other devices located upon such lot. 
Sign, exterior wall means a sign which is permanently affixed to the exterior wall of a structure. Such sign is affixed by use of bolts or other mounting hardware and is mounted parallel to, and flush to the wall surface. 
Sign face: 
Single. means any advertising sign having a single face or board for advertising display. Such sign is positioned so that the display face is parallel to the public thoroughfare. 
Double means any advertising sign having two separate or independent faces or boards for advertising display. Such double face signs shall have the advertising boards facing in opposite or nearly opposite directions and positioned so that the display faces are perpendicular to the public thoroughfare. 
Sign, ground means a sign that is permanently affixed to the ground and is wholly independent of a building for support. Freestanding signs are included in this definition, as are signs on poles, frames, or other mounting structures other than buildings. Not to be confused with monument signs. 
Sign, hanging means a sign which is hung from a supporting fixture which if affixed to the exterior wall of a structure. Unless otherwise approved, such sign shall be hung so as to be perpendicular to the exterior wall. 
Sign, monument means a commercial or industrial low profile ground sign commonly placed at the entrance of the development or establishment which is used to advertise the name of the development or establishment and which may display a list of tenants. The length of the sign base rests entirely on the ground and is not elevated or supported by poles, columns, or other supports. 
Sign, off-site/on-site. Off-site means a sign advertising a product, service, or business which is not located at the lot or location of the business advertising the product, service, or business. On-site means a sign which is located on the same lot as the business advertising such product, service, or business. 
Sign, portable means signs which are themselves portable, movable, transportable, or designed as such, or are attached to a portable fixture such as vehicles, trailers, movable structures, or attached to approved sign structures which are not permanently anchored to the ground or a wall. Such signs include, but are not limited to trailer signs, portable box signs, curb-type signs, banners, posters or placards. Inflatable figures and objects (e.g., creatures, beer cans) also fall into this category. For clarification, banners may be permitted on a temporary basis under section 22-208 of this article. 
Sign, public purpose and safety means a sign erected by a municipal, county, state or federal governmental agency or office in furtherance of official business, public purposes, or public safety. 
Sign, weekend means a garage, yard, or estate sale sign. Also see section 22-203(10) of this article. 
Sign, window means a sign adhered to the interior or exterior of a see through window. Such sign must be supported by the window glass or window frame. 
Street means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which has been improved to provide a principal means of motor vehicle access to abutting properties. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground and extending 12 inches above common grade. 
Variance means the application and granting of relief from any of the dimensional standards set forth in this article as granted by the Thomson City Council. 
( Ord. No. 544, 3-11-10 ) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 