5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
1/192
THE CODE OF THE CITY OF EDISON, GEORGIA
____________
Published in 2011 by Order of the City Council
____________
Adopted: February 13, 2012
Effective: February 13, 2012
____________
hc; OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF
EDISON, GEORGIA
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION
____________
Reeves Lane, Mayor
Walt Pierce, Councilmember
Lewis Shingles, Councilmember
Billy Timpson, Councilmember
Rob Turner, Councilmember
City Council
____________
Bill Mills
City Attorney
____________
Peggy M. Simpson
City Clerk
CURRENT OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF
EDISON, GEORGIA
____________
Reeves Lane, Mayor
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
2/192
Ben Dismukes, Councilmember
Bobby Johnson, Councilmember
Billy Timpson, Councilmember
Rob Turner, Councilmember
City Council
____________
Bill Mills
City Attorney
____________
Peggy M. Simpson
City Clerk
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Edison, Georgia.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1973 Code, embracing ordinances adopted through November
11, 1973 and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note
appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the
first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate
any section of the 1973 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter
have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law
have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of
this Code.
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government
codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number,
and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is
numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the
same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new
material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section
would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be
placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article
embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included
by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained
when including new chapters.
Page Numbering System
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
3/192
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which
represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that
portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of
an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are
typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:
CHARTER CHT:1
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1
CODE CD1:1
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1
CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1
CODE INDEX CDi:1
Indexes
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some
of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local
government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as
guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested.
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this
system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page
or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the
manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are
received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached
instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid
misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Daryl Jaquette, Editor, of the
Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their
sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to Reeves Lane, Mayor, Peggy Simpson, City Clerk, and Bill Mills, City Attorney, for their
cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the
publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
4/192
which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs.
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Edison, Georgia.
Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section
analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference
table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Edison, Georgia.
© Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Edison, Georgia. 2011.
ORDINANCE NO.
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF EDISON, GE
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
5/192
2/13/12     
Date of adoption
/s/ Reeves Lane     
Reeves Lane, Mayor
/s/ Peggy M. Simpson     
City Clerk
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for
codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are
considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are
considered "Omits."
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more
complete picture of the Code's historical evolution.
Date
Adopted
Included/
Omitted
Supp. No.
 4-11-2011(Res.) Omitted 1
12-19-2011(Res.) Included 1
 2-13-2012(Ord.) Included 1
 3-19-2012(Res.) Omitted 1
12-10-2012(Res.) Included 2
PART I - CHARTER
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city Charter, being 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 284), page 3489. Amendments are indicated by
parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains
unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
6/192
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in
text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the act
and ordaining clause have been deleted. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1, the term "mayor's court" has been changed to "municipal
court."
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, POWERS
Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation.
This Act shall constitute the whole Charter of the City of Edison, repealing and replacing the charter provided by an Act of the
General Assembly approved August 13, 1929 (Ga. L. 1929, p. 1055), as amended. The City of Edison, Georgia, in the County of
Calhoun and the inhabitants thereof are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the same name and
style of Edison, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded in all
the courts of law and equity and in all actions whatsoever and may have and use a common seal and change it at pleasure.
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries.
The boundaries of the City of Edison shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with
such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The current boundaries of the
City of Edison, at all times, shall be shown on a map to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to
be designated: "Edison, Georgia." Alterations in these boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entries upon or
additions to such map. Such entries or additions shall be made by and under the direction of the mayor.
Photographic, typed or other copies of such map certified by the mayor shall be admitted in evidence in all courts
and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map.
The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes
the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace.
Sec. 1.12. - Specic powers.
The corporate powers of the government of the City of Edison, to be exercised by the governing authority, may include the
following:
To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation and collection of taxes on all property subject
to taxation;
To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and
professions; to license and regulate such privileges, occupations, trades and professions; and to provide for
the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes;
To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money
for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the
laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city;
To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city, and to issue bonds to raise revenue to
carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia;
To acquire, dispose of and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal or mixed property in fee simple or
lesser interest inside or outside the property limits of the city;
To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers
and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or
grantor may impose;
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
7/192
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
To condemn property inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for present or future use and for any corpo
deemed necessary by the governing authority under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933 [now repealed—
Const. art. IC, § II, ¶ V], or under other applicable Public Acts as are or may be enacted;
To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities including, but not limited to, a
system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation
facilities, public airports and other public utilities; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fees, fares, assessments,
regulations, penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same; and to fix the manner in
which such remedies shall be enforced;
To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services not to exceed periods of 30 years;
to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be
provided by the franchise grantee or contractor insofar as not in conflict with such regulations of the public
service commission;
To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, change the grade of, abandon, close, construct, pave, curb,
gutter, adorn with shade trees or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of and light
roads, alleys and walkways within the corporate limits of the city;
To grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for
the use of public utilities;
To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and
playgrounds, public buildings, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, libraries, sewers,
drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation,
sport, curative corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities and any other
public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof, and for
such purposes property may be acquired by condemnation under section 36-2
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
8/192
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)
(32)
(33)
(34)
(35)
To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air; and to prevent the pollution of natura
flow within the corporate limits of the city;
To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety
regulations not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting;
and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof;
To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become
dangerous or detrimental to the public;
To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse; to regulate the collection and
disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin,
aluminum, cardboard, paper and other recyclable materials and the resale of such items;
To levy, fix, assess and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collect and disposal and other sanitary service
charge, tax or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms
and corporations residing in or doing business in the City of Edison and benefiting from such services; to
enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting
such service charges;
To levy a fee or charge of sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating,
maintaining and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on the users of sewers
and the sewerage system a sewer service charge or fee of sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide
for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same;
To charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees and to change the same from time to time, such
fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system;
To define, regulate and prohibit any act, conduct, practice or use of property which is detrimental or likely to
be detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of City of Edison; and
to provide for the enforcement of such standards;
To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property;
To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration
and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof;
To establish minimum standards for and to regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and
equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing and housing for the health, sanitation, cleanliness,
welfare and safety of inhabitants of the City of Edison; and to provide for the enforcement of such standards;
To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentence in any public
works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares in the city or to provide for the commitment of such
persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials;
To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of loitering, disorderly conduct and disturbing the
peace in the corporate limits of the City of Edison; and to prohibit or regulate by ordinance such other conduct
and activities within the city which, while not constituting offenses against the laws of this state, are deemed by
the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the city or to the
welfare of the citizens thereof;
To regulate and license or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl; to provide for the
impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for their disposition by sale,
gift or humane destruction when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for
violation of ordinances enacted hereunder;
To regulate the operation of motor vehicles; and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or
across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city;
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
9/192
(36)
(37)
(38)
(39)
(40)
(41)
(42)
(43)
(44)
(45)
To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the o
to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance
and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles;
To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city;
To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvements;
To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and
corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefor;
To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city; and to confer
upon such agencies the necessary authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to
same;
To make, ordain and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the
security, welfare, convenience and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof and for preserving the
health, peace, order and good government of the city;
To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the
laws of the State of Georgia;
To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen;
To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without
the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an
emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city;
To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to
promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience or general welfare of
the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted
in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all
powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of
the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others
nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers but shall be held to be in addition to such
powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of
Georgia.
Sec. 1.13. - General powers.
In addition to all other powers herein granted, the city shall be vested with any and all powers which municipal corporations
are or may hereafter be authorized or required to exercise under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, as fully and
completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein, and any and all powers which the city was heretofore
authorized to exercise upon the effective date of this Charter.
Sec. 1.14. - Construction.
The powers of the city shall be construed liberally and in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular
powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the city as stated in this Charter. It is the
intention hereof to grant the city full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation
and conduct of the city and all of its affairs.
Sec. 1.15. - Exercise of powers.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
10/192
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(c)
(a)
(b)
All powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies or employees shall be carried into
execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities
shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the governing authority and as provided by pertinent laws of the State
of Georgia.
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY
Sec. 2.10. - Creation, composition, number, election.
The legislative authority of the government of the City of Edison, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall
be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmen. The mayor and councilmen shall be elected in the
manner provided by article V of this Charter.
Sec. 2.11. - Terms and qualications of oce.
The members of the council shall serve for terms of two years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified.
No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilman unless he is a resident of the City of Edison and continues to reside in
the city during his period of service. He shall also be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Edison and
shall meet the qualification standards required for members of the Georgia House of Representatives as are now or may in the
future be prescribed by the Georgia Constitution.
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; forfeiture; lling of same.
The office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office
or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia.
The mayor or any councilman shall forfeit his office if he:
Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed by this Charter or the
laws of the State of Georgia;
Willfully and knowingly violates any express prohibition of this Charter; or
Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilman shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as
provided for in article V of this Charter.
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses.
The mayor shall receive as compensation for his services the amount of $60.00 per month. The councilmen shall receive as
compensation for their services $10.00 per council meeting at which they are in attendance. The mayor and councilmen shall be
entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office.
Sec. 2.14. - Prohibitions.
Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective city office or city employment
during the term for which he was elected.
Neither the mayor nor any councilman shall vote upon any question in which he is personally interested.
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
11/192
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
The council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or
agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of
evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be
punished as provided by ordinance.
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the council.
Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the council shall be vested with all the powers of
government of the City of Edison as provided by article I of this Charter.
In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide
for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, the
Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient or helpful for the peace,
good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity or wellbeing of the inhabitants of the City of Edison and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation
thereof.
Sec. 2.20. - Duties of mayor.
The mayor shall:
Preside at all meetings of the city council;
Be the official head of the city for the service of process and for ceremonial purposes;
Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits;
Sign all written contracts entered into by the council on behalf of the city and all other contracts and
instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing;
See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed;
Appoint and remove all officers, department heads and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by
this Charter;
Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of
administrative activities;
Recommend to the council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government
and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient;
Call special meetings of the council as provided for in section 2.31 of this Charter;
Approve or disapprove ordinances as provided for in section 2.38 of this Charter;
Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports in connection with the affairs thereof
whenever he deems it expedient;
Perform other duties as may be required by law, this Charter or ordinance.
Sec. 2.21. - Mayor pro tem.
During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tem, who shall be selected as provided for in
section 2.30(b) of this Charter, or in his absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmen chosen by the council shall
be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of mayor so long as such
absence or disability shall continue.
Sec. 2.30. - Organization meeting.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
12/192
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
The council shall meet for organization on the first Monday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city c
the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows:
"I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the duties of (mayor or councilman as the case may be) of the City of
Edison and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and
of the United States of America."
Following the induction of members, the council by majority vote of all the members thereof shall elect one of their
members to be mayor pro tem, who shall serve for a term of one year and until his successor is elected and
qualified.
Sec. 2.31. - Regular and special meetings.
The council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess
any regular meeting and continue such meeting on any weekday or hour it may fix and may transact any business at
such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting.
Special meetings of the council may be held on call of the mayor or two councilmen. Notice of such special meetings
shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, or shall be left at their residences in
advance of the meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmen are present when the
special meeting is called. Notice of any special meeting may be waived in writing before or after such meeting and
attendance at the meeting shall also constitute waiver of notice of any special meeting. Only the business stated in
the call may be transacted at the special meeting except by unanimous consent of all members present. With such
consent, any business which may be transacted in a regular meeting may be conducted at the special meeting.
All meetings of the council shall be public.
Sec. 2.32. - Rules of procedure.
The council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall
provide for the keeping of a journal of its proceedings which journal shall be a public record.
Sec. 2.33. - Quorum; voting.
Three councilmen shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the council. Voting on the
adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal but any member of the
council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. The affirmative vote of three councilmen shall be required for the adoption of
any ordinance, resolution or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter.
Sec. 2.34. - Action requiring an ordinance.
Except as herein provided, every official action of the council which is to become law shall be by ordinance. Each
proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No
ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be: "The Council of the
City of Edison hereby ordains…."
An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the council and read at a regular or special meeting of the
council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the council in accordance with the rules which it
shall establish; provided, however, that ordinances, except emergency ordinances, shall not be adopted until the
next regular meeting of the council following the meeting of their initial introduction.
Sec. 2.35. - Emergency ordinances.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
13/192
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or public peace, the council may adopt one or more emergency
ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public
utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided by law. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced
in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally except that it shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration
stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be
adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three
councilmen shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every
emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not
prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance
may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency
ordinances.
Sec. 2.36. - Codes of technical regulations.
The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance.
The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances
generally except that a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall
be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to section 2.37
Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations may be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for
purchase at a reasonable price.
Sec. 2.37. - Signing, authenticating, recording; codication; printing.
The city clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose
all ordinances adopted by the council. Every ordinance shall be signed by the mayor as a matter of course after
adoption.
The council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the
force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the council by ordinance and shall be published
promptly, together with all amendments thereto, with this charter and any amendment thereto, and such codes of
technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be
known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Edison, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all
officers, departments and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a
reasonable price as fixed by the council.
The council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its
adoption. Following publication of the first Code of the City of Edison and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and
charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code currently in effect and shall be
suitable in form for incorporation therein. The council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable
with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical
regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code.
Sec. 2.38. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor.
Every ordinance adopted by the council shall be presented promptly by the city clerk to the mayor.
The mayor, within ten calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the city clerk with or without his
approval or with his disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its
return to the city clerk. If the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at 12:00 noon on
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
14/192
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
the tenth calendar day after its adoption. If the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the council
through the city clerk a written statement of his reasons for his veto. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance
the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor.
Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city clerk to the council at its next regular meeting and
should the council then or at its next regular meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of three members,
it shall become law.
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH
Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments.
The council by ordinance may establish, abolish, merge or consolidate offices, positions of employment,
departments and agencies of the city as it shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and
government of the city. The council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices and
agencies or of any departments, offices and agencies hereinafter created or established; may provide that the same
person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment and may transfer or change, add to or detract
from the functions or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city.
The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed
among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the council. Each department shall consist of
such officers, employees and positions as may be provided by this charter or by ordinance and shall be subject to
the general supervision and guidance of the council.
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city
shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. Vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in
the same manner as prescribed by this Charter for original appointment.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be
appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications.
All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance of
the city council.
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions and authorities.
All members of boards, commissions and authorities shall be appointed by the council for such terms of office and
such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance except where other appointing authority, terms of office or
manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by applicable state law.
Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment except as otherwise provided by this Charter or any
applicable state law.
No member of any board, commission or authority shall assume office until he shall have executed and filed with
the city clerk the oath as follows:
"I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the duties of (name office) of the City of Edison and that I will
support and defend the charter thereof."
Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three
members of the council.
Members of boards, commissions or authorities may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance
of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
15/192
(f)
(g)
The qualifications required of members of boards, commissions and authorities shall be as prescribed by the mayor an
Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by applicable state law, each board, commission or authority of city
government shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice chairman for terms of one year
and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each
board, commission or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city or applicable state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary
for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the city clerk.
Sec. 3.20. - City manager.
The council may appoint a city manager. The duties and authority of the city manager shall be established by ordinance of the
council and, so doing, the council may specifically delegate to the city manager any of the administrative or budgetary duties of the
mayor.
Sec. 3.30. - City attorney.
The council shall appoint a city attorney together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized by ordinance and
shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible
for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal
court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the councilmen, mayor and other officers and employees of
the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his
position as city attorney.
Sec. 3.40. - City clerk.
The council may appoint a city clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council, to maintain in a safe place all
records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the
council may direct.
Sec. 3.41. - City tax collector.
The council may appoint a city tax collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other monies belonging to the city subject to
the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city. The city tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all
general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities.
Sec. 3.42. - City accountant.
The council may appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant.
Sec. 3.43. - Consolidation of functions.
The council may consolidate any two or more of the positions of city clerk, city tax collector and city accountant, or any other
positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any such other positions.
Sec. 3.50. - Position classication and pay plan.
The council may prepare a position classification and pay plan which shall be adopted by ordinance. Said plans may apply to
all the employees of the City of Edison and employees of any of its agencies and offices. When a pay plan has been adopted, the
council shall not increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except by amendment of said pay plan.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
16/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
Sec. 3.51. - Personnel policies.
The council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning:
The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment;
The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service
ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan;
Hours of work, vacation, sick leave and other leaves of absence, overtime pay and the order and manner in
which layoff shall be effected; and
Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of the
personnel affairs of the City of Edison.
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH
Sec. 4.10. - Creation of municipal court.
There is hereby established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Edison which shall have jurisdiction and
authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall
have the power and authority to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish
witnesses for nonattendance; to punish any person who may counsel, advise, aid, encourage or persuade another whose
testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to
try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are placed within the
jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws
subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. Said court shall be presided over by the judge of said court.
Sec. 4.11. - Judge.
The judge shall be appointed by the council.
No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years. The judge
shall serve at the discretion of the council. The compensation of the judge shall be fixed by the council.
The judge pro tem. shall serve in the absence or disqualification of the judge, shall be appointed by the council, shall
take the same oath as the judge and shall exercise the same powers and duties as the judge when acting in the
judge's stead.
Before entering on the duties of his office, the judge shall take an oath before the city clerk that he will truly,
honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor or partiality. The
oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the council.
Sec. 4.12. - Convening.
Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current
the dockets thereof.
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers.
The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Edison and for violation of its ordinances. The
municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided such punishment shall
not exceed $100.00 or ten days in jail. The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction;
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
17/192
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
provided, however, that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months or
both. As an alternative to fine or imprisonment the municipal court may sentence any offender upon conviction to
labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares or other public works for a period not exceeding six
months.
The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall
be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to
superior courts for violations of state law.
The municipal court shall have the authority to establish bail and recognances to insure the presence of those
charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash, personal property or
real property as surety for appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for
his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at
such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least
two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security
for the appearance of a defendant at trial and such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial,
the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the City of Edison or the property so
deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and
to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes.
The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by
probable cause that a state law has been violated.
The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary or proper
to the conduct of said court.
The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the
issuance of summons, subpoenas and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by
this Charter or by state law.
The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the
City of Edison granted by state laws generally to mayor's, recorder's and police courts and particularly by such laws
as authorize the abatement of nuisances.
(Ord. of 1-6-1992; 1993 Ga. Laws, page 5445)
Sec. 4.14. - Appeal.
The right of appeal and any bond as may be required to secure the costs on appeal to the Superior Court of Calhoun County
from the municipal court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and
appeal bonds from the probate court; provided, however, that any person who fails to file his appeal within ten days of the date of
his conviction shall be deemed to have waived any such right. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding.
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court.
With the approval of the council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations
necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the
council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations relative to the procedure and operation of the superior court under
the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted for said court shall be filed with the city clerk
and shall be available for public inspection. Upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court
proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings.
Sec. 4.16. - Authorizing and funding a system of indigent defense and a prosecutor in the Municipal Court of the City of Edison.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
18/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
The mayor and council shall have the power to provide for a system of defense for indigent persons charged in the Municipal
Court of the City of Edison with violations of ordinances and/or state laws, and for the prosecution of such cases by a prosecutor,
and to provide for and require the expense of same to be prorated over all criminal cases disposed of by the court, and all bond
forfeitures in said cases, to be imposed by the municipal court judge and collected in all criminal cases and in bond forfeitures in
such cases as costs in addition to fines, penalties, and all other costs.
(Ord. of 3-28-2005(1), § 1)
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS
Sec. 5.10. - Regular elections, time for holding.
The mayor and councilmen serving on the effective date of this Act shall serve out the remainder of their terms of office. On
the first Tuesday in December of even-numbered years, there shall be an election for mayor and council posts number one and
two. On the first Tuesday in December of odd-numbered years, there shall be an election for council posts number three and four.
The terms of office of members of the council shall begin at the day and hour of taking of office as provided for in article II, section
2.30 of this Charter.
Sec. 5.11. - Qualifying, nomination of candidates, absentee ballots.
The council may, by ordinance, prescribe rules and regulations governing qualifying fees, nomination of candidates, absentee
ballots, write-in votes, challenge of votes and such other rules and regulations as may be necessary for the conduct of elections in
the City of Edison.
Sec. 5.20. - Applicability of general laws.
The procedures and requirements for election of all elected officials of the City of Edison as to primary, special or general
elections shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code, as now or hereafter amended.
Sec. 5.21. - Special elections, vacancies.
In the event that the office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the council or those
remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office; provided, however, that if such
vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of office, said vacancy in office shall be filled by appointment by the
remaining members of the council. Both special elections and qualifications of candidates therefor shall conform to the applicable
provisions of this Charter, to the Georgia Municipal Election Code and Title 34A of the Code of Georgia of 1933 [see now O.C.G.A. §
3-2-1 et seq.], as now or hereafter amended.
Sec. 5.30. - Grounds for removal.
The mayor or any councilman shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes:
Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office;
Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law;
Willful violation of any express prohibition of this Charter;
Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
19/192
(f)
(a)
(b)
Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by law.
Sec. 5.31. - Procedure for removal.
Removal of an elected officer from office may be accomplished by one of the following methods:
By action of three-fourths vote of the entire membership of the council. In the event that an elected officer is
sought to be removed by the action of the council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying
the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of
such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the
right of appeal from the decision of the council to the Superior Court of Calhoun County. Such appeal shall be
governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court.
By information filed with the Superior Court of Calhoun County as provided by law.
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE AND FISCAL
Sec. 6.10. - Property taxes.
All property subject to taxation for state or county purposes, assessed as of January 1 of each year, shall be subject to the
property tax levied by the City of Edison. The council shall use the county assessment for the year in which the city taxes are to be
levied and shall request the county to furnish appropriate information for such purpose.
Sec. 6.11. - Tax levy.
The council shall be authorized to levy an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the
city for the purpose of raising revenue to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services and
for any other public purpose as determined by the council in its discretion. The council is also authorized to provide for sufficient
levy to pay principal and interest on general obligations. The City of Edison is hereby exempted from the provisions of Georgia
Code sections 92-4101 through 92-4104 inclusive [now repealed].
Sec. 6.12. - Tax due dates and tax bills.
The council shall provide by ordinance when the taxes of the city shall fall due and in what length of time said taxes may be
paid. The council shall provide by ordinance for the payment of taxes due to the city in installments or in one lump sum, and when,
how and upon what terms such taxes shall be due and payable. The council may authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to
the time when due.
Sec. 6.13. - Collection of delinquent taxes.
The council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi. fa. issued by the city clerk and executed by
any police officer of the city under the same procedure provided by the laws governing execution of such process from the
superior court or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property upon which
city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment date of each year, which lien shall be superior to all other liens except that it
shall have equal dignity with those of federal, state or county taxes. In cases of hardship, the council shall have discretionary
authority to waive any and all penalties imposed by this Charter on delinquent taxes, fees, assessments or on other amounts due
to the city.
Sec. 6.14. - Licenses, occupational taxes, excise taxes.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
20/192
The council shall have full power to levy by ordinance such license and specific or occupation taxes upon the residents of the
City of Edison, both individual and corporate, and on all those who transact or offer to transact business therein, or who practice or
offer to practice any profession or calling therein, as the council may deem expedient for the public health, safety, benefit,
convenience or advantage of the city; to classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in
any lawful way; to require such persons to procure licenses; to compel the payment of such licenses by execution or any other
lawful manner; to make laws and regulations necessary or proper to carry out the powers herein conferred; and to prescribe
penalties for the violation thereof. The council shall have full power and authority to levy an excise tax not prohibited by general
law.
Sec. 6.15. - Sewer service charge.
The council by ordinance shall have the right, power and authority to assess and collect fees, charges and tolls for sewer
services rendered both within and without the corporate limits of the City of Edison, to provide for the cost and expense of
furnishing the collection and disposal of sewage through the sewerage facilities of the city. If unpaid, said sewer service charge
shall constitute a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be second in priority only to liens for county and city
property taxes. Said lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes.
Sec. 6.16. - Sanitary and health services charge.
The council shall have authority by ordinance to provide for, enforce, levy and collect the cost of sanitary and health services
necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms and corporations residing in or doing business in the City of Edison
and benefiting from such service. Such authority shall include the power to assess, levy and collect annual or monthly sanitary
taxes or fees in such amount or amounts and based upon and in accordance with such classification of property and sanitary
service or services provided, as may be fixed by ordinance. Said sanitary taxes and the assessment thereof shall be a charge and
lien against the real estate in respect to which said taxes are so assessed and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other
liens except liens for county and city property taxes. Said lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same
remedies as a lien for city property taxes.
Sec. 6.17. - Special assessments.
The council shall have power and authority to assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or
improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers or other utility mains and appurtenances, under such terms
and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall be levied against the owner or owners of
property which abuts the improved public appurtenances and shall become delinquent 30 days after their due dates. They shall
thereupon be subject, in addition to fi. fa. charges, to a penalty of ten percent and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate
of seven percent per annum from date due until paid. A lien shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens
except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes. Said lien shall be enforceable by the same
procedures and under the same remedies as provided for in this article for city property taxes.
Sec. 6.18. - Transfer of executions.
The city clerk shall be authorized to assign or transfer any fi. fa. or execution issued for any tax or for any street, sewer or
other assessment in the same manner and to the same extent as provided by Georgia law regarding sales and transfers of tax fi.
fas. Such transfer or assignment, when made, shall vest the purchaser or transferee with all right, title and interest as provided by
Georgia law governing sales and transfers of tax fi. fas.; provided, however, that upon levy of execution and sale of property
pursuant to such tax fi. fa., whether assigned, transferred or executed by the city, the owner of such property in fee simple or
lesser interest shall not lose his right to redeem the property in accordance with the requirements of redemption of property sold
under state or county ad valorem tax fi. fas., as said requirements now exist or as may be hereinafter provided by law.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
21/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Sec. 6.20. - General obligation bonds.
The council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or
venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of this state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance
with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken.
Sec. 6.21. - Revenue bonds.
Revenue bonds may be issued by the council as provided by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved March 31,
1937, known as the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761), as now or hereafter amended [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], or by any
other Georgia law as now or hereafter provided.
Sec. 6.22. - Short-term notes.
Pursuant to applicable state law, the city may obtain temporary short-term loans between January 1 and December 31 of each
year.
Sec. 6.30. - Fiscal year.
The council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial
accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, institution, agency and activity of the city government unless
otherwise provided by state or federal law.
Sec. 6.31. - Preparation of budgets.
The council may provide by ordinance the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual
operating budget, a capital improvements program and a capital budget including requirements as to scope, content and form of
such budgets and programs.
Sec. 6.40. - Contracting procedures.
All contracts exceeding $500.00 shall be made or authorized by the council and no contracts exceeding $500.00 shall bind the
city unless reduced to writing and approved by the council.
Sec. 6.41. - Centralized purchasing.
The council may by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the City of Edison.
The council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the City of Edison for governmental
or other purposes at a public or private sale, with or without advertisement, for such consideration as the council
shall deem equitable and just for the city.
The council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the
mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and
that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value.
Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of the city a small parcel or
tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the
council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cutoff or
separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way
of said street, avenue, alley or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
22/192
adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall
convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after
advertisement was or is hereafter made.
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 7.10. - Ocial bonds.
The officers and employees, both elected and appointed, of the City of Edison shall execute such official bonds in such
amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require.
Sec. 7.11. - Existing ordinances and regulations.
Existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Edison not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall continue in
effect until they have been repealed, modified or amended by the council. Existing rules and regulations of departments or
agencies of the City of Edison not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall continue in effect until they have been
repealed, modified or amended.
Sec. 7.12. - Penalties.
The violation of any provisions of this Charter for which penalty is not specifically provided herein is hereby declared to be a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or both such
fine and imprisonment.
Sec. 7.13. - Specic repealer.
An Act incorporating the City of Edison in the County of Calhoun, approved August 13, 1929 (Ga. L. 1929, p. 1055), is hereby
repealed in its entirety and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety.
Sec. 7.14. - Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears
that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part or parts held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being
the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted
separately and independently of each other.
Sec. 7.15. - Eective date.
This Charter shall become effective on May 1, 1975.
Sec. 7.16. - Repealer.
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed.
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS
This table shows the location of amendments to the city Charter found in the Georgia Session Laws. The Charter is derived from
1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 284), page 3489.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
23/192
Ga. Laws
Year
Act No. Page Section Section
this Charter
1993 5445 4.13
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES
This table shows the location in the Charter of ordinance amendments.
Ordinance
Number
Date Section Section
this
Charter
 1- 6-1992(Ord.) 4.13
 3-28-2005(1)(Ord.) 1 4.16
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Edison,
Georgia," and may be so cited.
(Code 1973, § 1-1)
State law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19.
Sec. 1-2. - Denitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be
observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which
shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be
repugnant thereto.
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular
trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such
subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the
old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to
when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
24/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions
contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the council may be fully carried out.
In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for
the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes
greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction
or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general.
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the
circumstances.
City. The term "city" means the City of Edison, Georgia.
City council, council. The term "city council" or "council" means the city council of the city.
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Edison, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only
the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall
have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such
action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the
following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven
days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation.
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction
"and," "or" or "either/or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or"
are interchangeable:
The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply.
The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any
combination.
The term "either/or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but
not in combination.
County. The term "county" means Calhoun County, Georgia.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be
construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act.
Following. The term "following" means next after.
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders.
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is
otherwise declared.
Judge. The term "judge" means the municipal judge.
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a
servant, agent or employee.
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive.
May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
25/192
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Number. The singular and plural number includes the other, unless expressly excluded.
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation.
O.C.G.A., state acts. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. A reference to a
state act, whether by year and act number, year, act number and page, year and page or short title is a reference to such act as,
amended.
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards,
commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other
agencies of the city.
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land.
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or
body politic and corporate, as well as an individual.
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property.
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before.
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property.
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate.
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for
the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirmed person.
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia.
Street or road. The terms "street" and "road" include any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other
public highway in the city, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof.
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or
oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
Week. The term "week" means seven days.
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals.
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year.
(Code 1973, § 1-2)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
26/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; eect of history notes; references in Code.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such
sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the
catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal
effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of the matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, cross
references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise
appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect.
All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions
or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.
(Code 1973, § 1-3)
Sec. 1-4. - Eect of repeal of ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit,
prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the
ordinance repealed.
(Code 1973, § 1-4)
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; eect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be
numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of
these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or
omitted are readopted as a new Code.
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference
to the section number of this Code in the following language:
"Section ____________ of The Code of the City of Edison, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new
provisions may then be set out in full as desired.
If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used:
"The Code of the City of Edison, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or
subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered ____________, that reads as follows:…." The new material may then be set out in full
as desired.
All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by
section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be.
(Code 1973, § 1-6)
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code.
Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement
to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
27/192
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(d)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(d)
numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, this
Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from
this Code by the omission thereof from the reprinted pages.
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal,
nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the
supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may:
Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in
the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles.
Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in this Code and, where
necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers.
Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this
division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into this
Code).
Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into
this Code.
In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the
supplement or already embodied in this Code.
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations.
In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means:
Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by
rule or regulation authorized by ordinance;
Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by
ordinance; or
Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by
rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to
perform an official duty, unless it is provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in
this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon
the officer or employee.
Except as otherwise provided:
A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both. As an alternative to fine or imprisonment the municipal
court may sentence any offender upon conviction to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks,
squares or other public works for a period not exceeding six months.
With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation
continues is a separate offense.
With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation
continues is a separate offense.
The imposition of a penalty does not prevent the revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
28/192
(e)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
administrative sanctions.
Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by
injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty
does not prevent equitable relief.
(Code 1973, § 1-8; Ord. of 12-13-1982(2))
State law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2).
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of Code.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the
incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
(Code 1973, § 1-5)
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time
of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-10. - Prior oenses, penalties, contracts or rights not aected by adoption of Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any
penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.
The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any
use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this
Code.
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not aected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any of the following ordinances or portions of
ordinances not in this Code, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if
published at length in this Code:
Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments
of indebtedness.
Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement.
Granting any right or franchise.
Making or approving any appropriation or budget.
Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code.
Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan.
Levying or imposing any special assessment.
Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any
street, sidewalk or alley.
Providing for or dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision.
Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
29/192
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Providing for zoning or rezoning property.
That is temporary, although general in effect.
That is special, although permanent in effect.
The purpose of which has been accomplished.
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Municipalities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. - Election to use county registration list.
Authority. Pursuant to the authority granted in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-125, the city elects to use the registration system of
the county to maintain the registration list of electors of the city, and a copy thereof is available from the county
board of registrars.
Registration of electors. Any person who is a resident of the city and who is registered as an elector with the county
board of registrars and possesses the qualifications prescribed by the laws, and constitution of the state shall be
eligible to vote in a municipal primary or election in the city.
List of registered voters. At least 14 days prior to any election or primary held in the city a list of the registered
voters residing within the city shall be furnished to the city council.
(Ord. of 5-13-1985, §§ 1—3)
Sec. 2-2. - Recreation commission.
Established; composition; terms; vacancies. Under the provisions of House Bill 794, approved February 1, 1946, Act
No. 622 of the Georgia Municipal law, there is hereby established a recreation commission. This commission shall
be appointed by the city council and/or county commission and shall consist of not less than five or more than nine
persons serving without pay. The term of office shall be five years or until their successors are appointed and
qualified, except that the members of such a commission first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the
term of one member shall expire annually thereafter. Vacancies in such commission occurring otherwise than by
expiration of term shall be filled by another appointment for the unexpired term.
Election of officers. Immediately after their appointment, they shall meet and organize by electing one of their
members president and such other officers as may be necessary. The recreation commission shall have power to
adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the proper conduct of recreation for the city.
Duties and powers. The recreation commission shall provide, conduct and supervise public playground, playfields,
indoor recreation centers, and other recreation facilities owned or controlled by the city (town, village, or county). It
shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the
people in a wholesome or constructive manner. It may conduct such activities on properties under its own control,
on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof, and on private properties with the consent of the
owners.
Appointment of superintendent. The recreation commission shall have the power to appoint or designate someone
to act as superintendent who is trained or properly qualified for the work, and such other personnel as the
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
30/192
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
commission deems proper.
Budget. Annually the recreation commission shall submit a budget to the city council for its approval. The
commission may receive fees and revenues from the operation of recreation facilities and programs, and may also
solicit or receive any gifts or bequest of money or other personal property or any donations to be applied, principal
or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreation purposes.
Annual report. The recreation commission shall make an annual report to the city council and such other reports as
from time to time may be requested.
(Ord. of 2-19-1975, §§ 1—6)
Sec. 2-3. - Planning commission.
Composition; terms; vacancies; removal; compensation. The planning commission shall consist of five members,
who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the city council. The terms of the members shall be for four years,
except that in the appointment of the first planning commission. Under the terms of the ordinance from which this
section is derived, the first member shall be appointed for a term of one year, the second member shall be
appointed for a term of two years, the third members shall be appointed for a term of three years, and the
remaining members shall be appointed for a term of four years each. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for
the unexpired term by the city council who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on
written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for
actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties.
Powers and duties. From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its
officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then the planning commission shall have all the powers,
duties and responsibilities set forth in the state constitution.
(Ord. of 5-15-1989, §§ 1, 2)
Secs. 2-4—2-24. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL
Sec. 2-25. - Meeting dates.
The council shall meet at least once per month. The regular meetings of the council shall be on the second Monday night of
each month, except in the month of January when the regular meeting shall be held on the first Monday night.
(Code 1973, § 2-1)
Sec. 2-26. - Compensation.
Mayor. The salary of the mayor is $200.00 per month.
Councilmembers. The compensation of members of the council is $75.00 per each regular meeting attended, and
$25.00 per each special meeting attended.
(Ord. of 9-4-2001, §§ I, II)
State law reference— Authority to fix compensation and benefits for officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4.
Secs. 2-27—2-55. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
31/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-56. - Oath and bond of ocers required.
Every officer, before entering upon the duties of his office, must take an oath similar to the oaths of the city councilmembers,
substituting his office for councilmember when the term "councilmember" occurs in said oath. Every officer appointed or elected
by the city council shall give such bond and security as is, or may be required of him, conditioned for the faithful performance of
his duty.
(Code 1973, § 2-3)
Sec. 2-57. - Grounds for removal or suspension of ocers.
An officer, elected by the city council, shall be removed from office or suspended as the council may elect for one or more of
the following causes:
Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office;
Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or
Failure to perform the duties of office.
(Code 1973, § 2-4)
Secs. 2-58—2-87. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - CITY CLERK
Sec. 2-88. - Oath of oce.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city clerk shall take the following oath: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I
will well and truly demean myself as City Clerk of the City of Edison, and I will keep a true record of the proceedings of said City
Council, and perform such other duties as may be required of me as Clerk. Further, I will properly demean myself as Treasurer of
the City of Edison, that I will keep a true record of the finances of the City and keep a true account of monies expended and
received by said corporation, and well and truly account of all monies expended and received by said corporation, and well and
truly account for same, so help me God."
(Code 1973, § 2-27)
Sec. 2-89. - Duties; general enumeration.
The general duties of the city clerk are to:
Keep correct and full minutes of the proceedings of the city council together with all ordinances and
resolutions passed by it, in a book or register kept for that purpose.
Receive all applications or petitions made to the city, to place them before the mayor, or city councilmember,
at the meeting of the council next succeeding the receipt thereof.
Attend all council meetings.
Receive all applications for licenses and to issue the same as prescribed by ordinance.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
32/192
(5)
(6)
(7)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Carefully preserve the records of the city and all valuable documents placed in his hands, as clerk, and while such
documents are free and open to inspection, not to permit them to be removed or taken away except by order of t
Keep a correct digest of all returns of taxable property in the city.
Keep the following books:
A book of rough sheets of the minutes;
A book of neat and accurate minutes;
A book for recording licenses issued;
An ordinance book;
A book of charges in which all costs must be entered as coming into his hands, including the information
of from whom, when, what account and the amount of monies received by the city clerk;
An account of all monies paid into the city treasury;
A checkbook which shall contain a margin showing the number, amount, date, for what purpose ordered,
and to whom issued in each case; and
A book in which he shall register the names and places of business and the date of license of each person
doing or carrying on any business, calling, trade or profession in the city, under the proper classification.
Keep a book in which he shall enter all sums of money paid, to whom paid, when paid, and for what purpose,
and all sums of money received, from whom, when and on what account, and take a receipt for all money paid
out, and pay out the same only when approved and audited as prescribed in this Code.
Keep all funds or other valuables belonging to the city in a safe place of deposit.
Furnish the council monthly statements, with a detailed report of all receipts and explanations, and the
different orders upon which money has been paid out by him, and all sources from which he has received
money, and his book shall at all times be subject to examination by the council.
Pay out no money except upon orders passed by the city council, drawn up and signed by him, and
countersigned by the mayor, or in his absence, by the mayor pro tem.
Correct all executions for taxes or fines.
(Code 1973, §§ 2-29, 2-30)
Secs. 2-90—2-106. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.; local government investment pool, O.C.G.A. § 36-83-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 2-107. - Fees and charges.
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance it is provided that any fee or charge is "as established by the city" or substantially
similar language appears, such language shall mean that the fee is as provided by ordinance. Such fees may be consolidated into a
fee schedule.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
33/192
Sec. 2-108. - Payment of claims after council approval.
All claims against the city, other than for officials' salaries and expenses, shall be left with the city clerk at least two days before
any regular meeting of the city council. If the council approves the payment of the same, then the city clerk shall draw an order for
the same on the treasurer.
(Code 1973, § 2-31)
Secs. 2-109—2-129. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.
Sec. 2-130. - Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on the following June 30th.
(Ord. of 7-1-1979)
State law reference— Establishment of fiscal year, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3.
Sec. 2-131. - Annual budget.
An annual budget for the city and for each department thereof shall be adopted on or before the last meeting in June of each
year for the ensuing fiscal year.
(Ord. of 7-1-1979, § 17-2)
State law reference— Adoption of budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-6.
Sec. 2-132. - Quarterly reports.
There shall be prepared and issued at the end of each quarter during the fiscal year a budget report on the accounting system
and placed on file in the minutes of the city council.
(Ord. of 7-1-1979, § 17-4)
Sec. 2-133. - Accounting method established.
There shall be established and maintained a double entry accounting system on a cash basis and all accounts shall be posted
promptly.
(Ord. of 7-1-1979, § 17-5)
Secs. 2-134—2-164. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING
FOOTNOTE(S):
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
34/192
(a)
(1)
(2)
(b)
--- (4) ---
State Law reference— Preferences for products manufactured in state, O.C.G.A. § 36-84-1 et seq.; Georgia Local Government
Public Works Construction Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq.
Sec. 2-165. - Signed requisition and recordkeeping required.
The mayor or mayor pro tem is the agent for the city for the purpose of purchasing all goods, wares, fixtures or supplies of any
kind for the city and all purchases made shall be made through the mayor's or mayor pro tem's office by requisition upon the city
clerk, which requisition shall be signed by the particular department head and by the city clerk, or mayor. The city clerk is required
to keep a copy of all purchase orders and all requisitions on file in his office. No purchase order is required for any purchase of
$100.00 or less.
(Code 1973, § 2-5)
Sec. 2-166. - Sealed bids required for items costing more than $5,000.00.
No purchases of any kind whatsoever exceeding the cost of $5,000.00 shall be made by the city without first obtaining sealed
bids on such purchases by the city from not less than two separate and distinct suppliers or sellers. Said purchase shall be made
from the lowest bid received; exception may be made in cases of emergency or necessity, such cases to be adjudged by the
council.
(Code 1973, § 2-6)
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulation of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. - Denitions.
The definitions in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 apply to this chapter.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 1)
Sec. 4-2. - Malt beverages tax.
Imposed. There is hereby imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the city a specific excise
tax as follows:
Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a
tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same
rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons.
Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of
$0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces.
Tax in addition to other charges. The excise tax provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be in addition to
any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling malt
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
35/192
(c)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
(c)
beverages at retail or wholesale within the corporate limits of the city.
Penalty. The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal
to five percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance
were due and a further penalty of five percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period,
or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent
report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount
of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report.
(Code 1973, §§ 3-24, 3-27, 3-28)
State law reference— Tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq.
Sec. 4-3. - Wine tax.
In addition to the annual retail license fee required, there is hereby levied an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine by the
package computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter sold,
displayed or stored in the city. Said tax shall be paid to the city by the wholesale distributor on all wines sold to retailers in the city,
as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping, or in any way delivering wine to any retailer, shall collect the excise tax at
the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the 20th day of
the month following. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the ordinance from which this section is derived for any wholesale
distributor to sell, ship or delivery in any manner any wine to a retailer without having collected said tax. It shall be unlawful and a
violation of this section for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any wine on which such tax has not been paid.
Each wholesaler shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement of collection of said tax. Every wine
distributor shall deliver a copy of each delivery ticket to the city clerk after making a delivery, said delivery ticket to show the exact
quantity delivered and the amount of tax collected thereon
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 15; Ord. of 2-13-1984)
State law reference— Wine tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60.
Sec. 4-4. - Persons eligible for licenses; nancial responsibility required.
No license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be issued to:
Any applicant who is not of good moral character. Corporation applicants shall be of good business reputation.
An applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state, local law or ordinance of a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude, or has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any criminal offense
involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, or tax law violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the
applicant would not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with law or
ordinance.
A person whose place of business is conducted by an employee, manager or agent unless the manager, agent
or employee possesses the same qualifications as the licensee. Corporation applicants shall be of good
business reputation.
A person who does not possess financial responsibility. Financial statements must be submitted with each
completed application as prescribed by the council. Evidence of financial responsibility shall include evidence
that the person can obtain adequate liability insurance for the business and premises to be licensed.
No license shall be issued for any location or premises where the sale of any alcoholic beverages to be sold under
the license is prohibited by state law or city ordinance.
No license shall be granted to any person who is not at least 21 years of age unless the business is managed by a
person who is at least 21 years of age.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
36/192
(d)
(e)
No employee of the city shall be issued an alcoholic beverage license.
No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued if such issuance is prohibited by this chapter.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, §§ 2, 3, 16, 17; Ord. of 2-13-1984; Ord. of 7-17-2001, § 3A-6)
State law reference— Standards for issuance of alcoholic beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-2-2; location restrictions for sale of
alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21.
Sec. 4-5. - Toilet facility only to be accessible from inside building.
All toilets or restroom facilities maintained in the premises of any business engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be
entered only from the inside of the building in which any such business is conducted, and shall not be accessible from the outside.
(Code 1973, § 3-1)
Secs. 4-6—4-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE PACKAGE STORES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 4-31. - Penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be punished as provided in general penalty section 1-7, and such conviction shall
automatically revoke the permit and license of the one so convicted.
(Code 1973, § 3-34)
Sec. 4-32. - Right of entry.
The mayor or city police shall have the right to enter upon the premises where malt beverages or wine is sold at retail in the
city, at any reasonable hour when such business is open, for the purpose of checking on the amount of malt beverages or wine on
hand and to make such other reasonable investigation of such retail sales of malt beverages or wine as will furnish information on
the number of sales of such retail malt beverages or wine dealer.
(Code 1973, § 3-29)
Sec. 4-33. - Signs warning no liquor drinking on premises required.
Every person engaged in the sale of malt beverages or wine shall display prominently in such place of business a sign in bold
letters: "DRINKING OF WHISKEY OR ANY SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR PROHIBITED ON THESE PREMISES."
(Code 1973, § 3-2)
Sec. 4-34. - Wholesaling to unlicensed retailers prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any wholesale dealer in malt beverages or wine to sell, dispense or deliver any malt beverages or wine
to any person who is not duly authorized and licensed to sell malt beverages or wine at retail within the city.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
37/192
(a)
(b)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
(Code 1973, § 3-33)
Sec. 4-35. - Closing hours.
Enumerated. Any business selling malt beverages or wine in the city shall close said place of business not later than
12:00 midnight on each day said business is open for operation, and remain closed until 7:00 a.m. following.
Revocation of license for violation. Should any person keeping any business wherein is sold or offered for sale malt
beverages or wine, sell or offer the same for sale after 12:00 midnight and before 7:00 a.m. on any day, or otherwise
violate this chapter or applicable state law, the license to sell beer or wine shall be revoked by the city, and no new
license for such sales shall be issued or allowed to such person for the sale of malt beverages or wine in such
business location for a period of one year from the date of said revocation; and no license for such sales of malt
beverages or wine shall be issued to the person holding such revoked license, or to who such license which was
revoked had previously been issued for a period of one year from the date of such revocation.
(Code 1973, §§ 3-5, 3-6)
State law reference— Hours of sale of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20.
Secs. 4-36—4-55. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Local malt beverage licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local wine licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40.
Sec. 4-56. - Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any malt beverages or wine within the limits of the city without first obtaining from
the council a license to sell the same.
(Code 1973, § 3-30)
Sec. 4-57. - Application required; investigation and report; action by council.
Persons desiring to sell malt beverages or wine shall file a license application with the city clerk, who shall refer the
same to the chief of police or mayor or his designee for investigation. Said officer shall investigate:
The moral fitness and reputation of the applicant;
The applicant's reputation as a peaceful citizen or law violator;
The general character and reputation of the applicant's place of business; and
Any other facts that the council should know in considering the granting of a permit and license to the
applicant.
It shall be the duty of said officer to report his findings to the council at the next regular meeting or as soon
thereafter as possible, at which the applicant shall personally appear, which body shall either grant or refuse the
permit and license.
(Code 1973, § 3-31)
Sec. 4-58. - Conditions required for lawful establishment.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
38/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Sales of such malt beverages or wine shall be lawful within the limits of the city by licensed persons under the following
conditions:
Must hold a permit and license paid for in full. The permit and license shall be issued only in the name of the
operator of said business. No permit and license shall be transferable and in the event of a change in operator,
a new permit and license must be obtained in the name of the new operator. No one-half year license or any
portion of a year license will be issued.
No sales shall be made by any persons outside the place of business of the license.
The city council and city police shall have the full authority and privilege of making inspections at any time to
see that laws are not violated.
Every person shall file with his application the names and ages of every person employed by him in said
business. Changes of employees after a permit and license has been granted shall be immediately reported to
the chief of police or city clerk.
(Code 1973, § 3-32)
Secs. 4-59—4-74. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - MALT BEVERAGE AND WINE SALES FOR ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) ---
State Law reference— Malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 4-75. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Church means a regular house of worship.
Conviction means an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of bond by a person
charged with a crime.
Distance means the measurement in a straight line in linear feet from the nearest wall enclosing the proposed premises of the
licensee to the nearest property line of any school, college or church.
Licensee means the authorization by the city council to engage in the sale of malt beverages for on-premises consumption.
Premises means the definite closed area wherein malt beverages are sold, which is owned by or under control of the person to
whom the license is issued.
Retail sale means the selling or offering for sale any malt beverage or wine to any member of the public.
School or college means only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach subjects commonly taught in the
common schools of this state.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
39/192
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(b)
The term "school or college" includes licensed preschool and/or kindergarten facilities.
The term "school or college" does not include private schools where only specialized subjects are taught.
(Ord. of 7-17-2001, § 3A-1)
Sec. 4-76. - Hours of sale.
It shall be unlawful to sell any malt beverage or wine for on-premises consumption between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
8:00 a.m.
(Ord. of 7-17-2001, § 3A-17)
State law reference— Hours of sale of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20.
Secs. 4-77—4-92. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) ---
State Law reference— Local malt beverage licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local wine licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40.
Sec. 4-93. - Required.
Term; prohibited acts. No person shall sell malt beverages or wine for on-premises consumption without first
obtaining a city license for the calendar year in which such business in the city is conducted. No person shall sell
malt beverages for on-premises consumption after such license has expired or been revoked.
Class of license. This license shall be for the sale of malt beverages or wine for on-premises consumption. No malt
beverage shall be sold at retail for consumption on the premises except at a:
Restaurant, described as any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a
place where meals are served and where meals are actually regularly served, such place being provided with
adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and having employed there in sufficient number
and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guest.
Tavern, which means a place of entertainment for the accommodation of the public where malt beverages or
wine is sold at retail for on-premises consumption.
(Ord. of 7-17-2001, §§ 3A-2, 3A-18)
Sec. 4-94. - Application
Required; contents. The application for license shall be in writing and addressed to the council, and shall set forth
therein the following information:
The location of the place of business wherein malt beverages or wine are to be sold;
The age, name and present occupation of applicant; and
The names and ages of persons who shall be employed in the carrying on of such business.
The application shall be signed by the applicant and must be verified by oath of such applicant. Such application and
oath must be on a form provided by the city clerk.
Fee. All applicants for license shall pay a fee in an amount as established from time to time by the city at the time
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
40/192
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
such application is filed; and $100.00 of such fee shall be retained by the city in the event the application is
withdrawn or not approved. The city shall issue a receipt to the applicant and attach a copy of the receipt to the
application.
Duty to provided information. All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records pertinent to the
application requested of them in writing to the council and the failure to furnish such date, information and records
within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application.
The applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the city
police department or council, and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such
application and/or license issued under the terms of this chapter. The failure to produce such person within 30 days
after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of any application pending under this chapter.
Deadline for processing. The city shall require not less than 30 days or more than 60 days from the date of
completing the application for processing any application for license under the terms of this chapter.
State license; display of local certificate. Application for license shall be made to the clerk and accompanied by the
amount of the license fee. Licenses shall be posted conspicuously in the licensee's place of business. Before
operating under such city license, the licensee must secure the state license and comply with all provisions of
O.C.G.A. title 3; and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to furnish to the licensee such certificate, copy of the city
license, or other evidence as may be required by the state revenue commission in order to show payment of the city
license.
(Ord. of 7-17-2001, §§ 3A-10, 3A-13)
Sec. 4-95. - Notice of application.
All applicants for a license shall, within ten days after filing of such application, publish an advertisement in the
official newspaper of the city wherein all legal advertisements are published to the effect that such application has
been made, listing the name of the applicant, the complete address of the place of business where such application
for the sale of malt beverages is proposed, and the date of the hearing thereon. This advertisement shall run for a
period of two weeks preceding the next regular meeting of the council. Such advertisement shall be filed with the
proper officer or agent of such paper within ten days following the date of application. The cost of such
advertisement shall be paid by the applicant and a copy of the published notice shall be filed with the city clerk.
The advertisement required by subsection (a) of this section shall be and read substantially as follows:
Notice of Application for Retail License to sell malt beverages or wine. The undersigned has made application to the
Council of Edison, Georgia for a retail license to sell malt beverages or wine for on premises consumption at ____________.
This application will be heard by the Council at its regular meeting to be held at ____________ o'clock p.m. on the
____________ day of ____________, ____________.
No application for a license under this division shall be acted upon or issued by the council until after advertisement
and public hearing thereon, as required therein.
A public hearing upon all applications for a license under this division shall be held before the council at its regular
meeting not less than 30 days or more than 60 days after the filing of the application.
(Ord. of 7-17-2001, § 3A-4)
Sec. 4-96. - Police investigation and report required.
All applicants shall be investigated by the police department or such other person as may be designated by the council. The
report of such investigation shall be presented to the council for consideration with the application.
(Ord. of 7-17-2001, § 3A-5)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
41/192
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(a)
Sec. 4-97. - Fingerprints.
Each applicant for a license to sell malt beverages or wine in this division who has not heretofore been licensed by
the city to sell alcoholic beverages, at retail, shall be required to submit to a complete fingerprinting record and test,
pursuant to the rules and regulations established by the city from time to time, the same being used by the city to
supplement the information contained on the application and to make available to the city any records of criminal
offenses, either federal or state from other jurisdictions.
The council, within its own discretion, from time to time may require employees, male and female, working in any
establishment dispensing malt beverages or wine, to submit to the same complete fingerprinting record and test
and for the same purposes of supplementing any information available to the city with respect to employees.
(Ord. of 7-17-2001, § 3A-7)
Sec. 4-98. - Distance requirements; reissue after denial or revocation.
It shall be unlawful to issue any license under this article within 300 feet of any church.
It shall be unlawful to issue any license under this article within 300 feet of the grounds of any school or school
building.
In the event the council revokes or denies any license at any location within the city, no new license shall be granted
by the city for the period of six months after the date of revocation or denial, at the same location. After notice to
the council that a person holding a license or his employee or agent, has been accused of prohibited acts, no new
license shall be issued for such location until after the disposition of the complaint.
(Ord. of 7-17-2001, § 3A-8)
Sec. 4-99. - Duration; renewals.
All licenses granted pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the same shall be
issued. The fee shall be due and payable in advance by January 1 of each year.
Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file applications with the requisite fees heretofore provided with
the city clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be
filed December 1 of each year, otherwise no renewal license shall be granted; but an application for renewal shall be
required and shall be treated as an initial application, and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules
and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license has been held. All licenses granted hereunder
shall be for the calendar year and the full license fee must be paid for a license issued at any time during the license
year.
(Ord. of 7-17-2001, §§ 3A-11, 3A-21)
Sec. 4-100. - Nontransferable.
Licenses issued under authority of this article shall not be transferable from one person to another nor from one location to
another except with the express written approval of the council.
(Ord. of 7-17-2001, § 3A-9)
Sec. 4-101. - Suspension; revocation.
Any license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any licensee may be suspended
or revoked for the due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing held for the purpose of considering any
such suspension or revocation. At least five days prior written notice of a time, place and purpose of such hearing, a
statement of the charge or charges upon which such hearing shall be held shall be given to the holder of such
license which is sought to be suspended or revoked.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
42/192
(b)
(c)
(d)
Due cause for the suspension or revocation of any license shall consist of a violation of any laws or ordinances regulati
business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business, o
violation of any state, federal, municipal ordinance that would prevent one from obtaining a license, or for violation of
provision of this chapter.
The mayor is hereby authorized to suspend any license issued under this article in any emergency situation such as
civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation that he deems some immediate suspension necessary for the
protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city, and the suspension may be effective immediately and
shall remain in force until the mayor determines the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of the
council.
When a license is suspended or revoked, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee to the
holder of such suspended or revoked license. When a license is revoked, the licensee may not reapply for a license
under this article for a period of three years from such revocation.
(Ord. of 7-17-2001, § 3A-13)
Sec. 4-102. - Sales under suspended license prohibited.
No person whose license has been suspended or revoked pursuant to any provisions of this chapter shall sell any beverages
covered by the suspended or revoked license during the period of such suspension or after revocation. No license shall be
suspended or revoked without the council first giving to said licensee written notice of the reason thereof, and within five days
thereafter the licensee shall have the right of a hearing before the council and may present any evidence or give any reason why
the license should not be suspended or revoked, except for the suspension provided for in section 4-101(c).
(Ord. of 7-17-2001, § 3A-14)
Secs. 4-103—4-132. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - PACKAGE SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) ---
State Law reference— Distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 4-133. - Copy of article to be kept on licensed premises; licensee responsible for acts of employees.
All holders of a license for the sale of distilled spirits shall keep a copy of the ordinance from which this article is derived in his
premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms of this article and each licensee or his agents
selling distilled spirits shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this article. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts
of his employees in any violation of this article or of the laws of the state or the rules and regulations of the state revenue
commissioner.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 20)
Sec. 4-134. - Authority to inspect.
The business premises of the holder of a retail distilled spirits license for the sale of distilled spirits shall be open to inspection
at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
43/192
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(b)
(1)
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 21)
Sec. 4-135. - Package sales only.
All retailers licensed under this article shall sell or offer to sell in the original unbroken package only and shall sell no package
containing less than one-half pint.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 7)
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26.
Sec. 4-136. - Tax.
In addition to the annual retail distilled spirits license fee, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22
per liter of distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter which
shall be paid to the city on all distilled spirits sold, displayed or stored in said city. Said tax shall be due and payable to the city by
the wholesale distributor on all distilled spirits sold to retailers in the city at the time of delivery and remitted the together with a
summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the 20th day of the month following. It shall be unlawful and a violation of
this article for any wholesale distributor to sell, ship or delivery in any manner any distilled spirits to a retailer without having
collected said tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any
distilled spirits on which such tax has not been paid. Each wholesaler shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected
as reimbursement of collection of said tax. Every distilled spirits distributor shall deliver a copy of each delivery ticket to the city
clerk after making a delivery, said delivery ticket to show the exact quantity delivered and the amount of tax collected thereon
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 15; Ord. of 2-13-1984)
State law reference— Local tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80.
Sec. 4-137. - Sales and deliveries to take place on business premises.
No retailer shall sell or deliver any distilled spirits to any person except in said retailer's place of business.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 9)
Sec. 4-138. - Sale of other products.
No retailer shall sell or offer for sale or display or keep in stock, at his place of business where distilled spirits are
offered for sale, any other product or commodity, except the following:
Wines, when properly licensed;
Beverages containing no alcohol commonly used to dilute distilled spirits;
Malt beverages or beer, when properly licensed;
Tobacco products; and
Packaged ice.
No beverages or packages of ice may be opened or consumed in said place of business.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 8)
Sec. 4-139. - Days and hours of sale.
No retailer shall be in his place of business or open his place of business, or furnish, sell or offer for sale any distilled spirits or
other alcoholic beverages, with the exemptions set forth in this article, at any of the following times:
At any time Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day;
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
44/192
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the council; or
On any day before 8:00 a.m. or after 11:45 p.m.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 10; Ord. of 8-11-1986)
State law reference— Hours of sale of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20.
Sec. 4-140. - Storage.
No licensed retailer shall keep any distilled spirits stored in any bonded or other type warehouse in the city, nor shall he enter
into any type of arrangement whereby distilled spirits ordered by him is stored for him by any licensed wholesaler. A retailer shall
keep no inventory or stock of distilled spirits at any place except his licensed place of business, and within his licensed place of
business his storage space for distilled spirits shall be immediately adjacent to the room in which he is licensed to do business.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 13)
Sec. 4-141. - Gambling prohibited; exceptions.
Except as authorized by law, there shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punchboards, vending machines, slot
machines, pin ball machines, pool tables, lotteries or tickets or chances therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding
money or any other thing of value in any licensed retailer's place of business or in any room adjoining the same, owned, leased or
controlled by licensee and any violation of this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of license.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 24)
Secs. 4-142—4-165. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE
Sec. 4-166. - Required.
A separate retail distilled spirits license shall be required for each place of business.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 5)
Sec. 4-167. - Application and license term and renewal.
An application for a retail distilled spirits license shall be made, on forms furnished by the city.
A retail distilled spirits license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and no such licenses may
be renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make
a new application for such year on or before November 1 of the preceding year.
In addition to the completion and submission of application form as required by the city, each applicant shall attach
thereto a completed application form with all attachments and requirements for a state license.
Before any retail distilled spirits license is granted, the applicant must post with the city, along with his application, a
personal performance bond; said bond to be conditioned requiring the faithful observance and performance by the
licensee of the rules and regulations contained in the ordinance from which this division is derived. Upon a violation
of this article or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of
the violations as determined by the council after a hearing is held by the council after a three day written notice is
given the violator. Said bond is to be payable to the city in the amount of $500.00, said bond to be approved by the
council and shall be executed in a form to be furnished.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
45/192
(e)
(f)
(g)
A notice of each application shall be advertised in the official newspaper of the city wherein all legal advertisements are
to the effect that such application has been made once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the meeting of th
council that the application is to be acted upon.
All applications for a retail distilled spirits license shall be presented in person.
The making of any statement on an application for a license to sell liquor distilled spirits which shall be later found
to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of said license.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, §§ 14, 18, 22)
Sec. 4-168. - Maximum number of licenses issued to one person.
Only two retail distilled spirits licenses shall be issued to any one person in the city, and no person who holds a retail distilled
spirits license in any other county or municipality of the state, shall be eligible to receive a retail distilled spirits license. As used in
this section, the term "person" includes all members of such licensee's family and the term "family" includes any person related to
the holder of such license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the civil law.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 3)
Sec. 4-169. - Restrictions—Location.
Each application for a retail distilled spirits license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises
showing the distance to the nearest church or school or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with
O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 4)
Sec. 4-170. - Same—Building.
No retail distilled spirits license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is
complete and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless the a building permit
and plans and specifications of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the
proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the laws of the
state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the building inspector. Each
building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premise on all sides
of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside
retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of said building. Each applicant for a retail distilled spirits
license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the
applicant is leasing the building.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 6)
Sec. 4-171. - Fee.
The annual fee for a retail distilled spirits license shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license, said fee to accompany the
application and shall be either in cash or a bank certified check. Such fee shall be in an amount as established from time to time by
the city.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 15; Ord. of 2-13-1984)
Sec. 4-172. - Nontransferable and nonassignable.
No retail distilled spirits license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location, and in the event that a
licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender his license to the city.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
46/192
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 19)
Sec. 4-173. - Display.
Licenses under this article shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which same was issued.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 25)
Sec. 4-174. - Revocation or suspension.
In addition to any penalty contained in section 1-7 or otherwise:
A violation of this article by a licensee is grounds for the revocation of a license issued under this article.
A violation of state or federal laws and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the sale and
distribution of distilled spirits by a licensee shall subject the licensee to the immediate suspension or
revocation of his license.
(Ord. of 2-14-1977, § 26)
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. - Denitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning indicated in
this section unless the context requires otherwise.
Abused animal means any animal which is:
Mistreated, beaten, tormented or teased;
Deprived of water, food or shelter;
Kept under unsanitary conditions;
Abandoned; or
Trained for fighting other animals.
Animal means a multicellular organism of the kingdom Animalia, differing from plants in certain typical characteristics such as
a capacity for locomotion, nonphotosynthetic metabolism pronounced response to stimuli, restricted growth, and fixed bodily
structure.
Animal control board means a board consisting of the mayor and two other city councilmembers appointed by the city council.
Animal control officer means the person charged by the city council with enforcing this chapter.
At heel means a condition in which an animal is in the immediate vicinity of its owner and clearly under the voice control of
that person and that control is clearly being exerted.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
47/192
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
At large means an animal shall be deemed at large when the animal is in any public street right-of-way, park or other public
grounds, or when off the said premises of the owner or person who has custody of said animal, and not under restraint or under
the immediate control (at heel) of the owner or the person who has custody of said animal.
Cat means a feline of whatever breed and all ages.
Court means the municipal court of the city with jurisdiction to hear violations of city ordinances.
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust
owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of an animal within this city.
Poison means a substance that through its chemical action usually kills, injures or impairs an organism.
Potentially dangerous dogs.
The term "potentionally dangerous dogs" means any dog that bites a human being without provocation on
either public or private property at any time after January 1, 1999.
The term "potentionally dangerous dogs" does not include:
Dogs which merely chase someone or act aggressively;
Dogs used by law enforcement officers; or
Dogs who attack in response to torment, abuse, or assault.
Pound means those premises designated by the city council for the purpose of holding and caring for animals found to be at
large by those persons charged with the enforcement of these regulations.
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owners
property, securely enclosed indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of
young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure
top, and, if the dog is enclosed with a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence
constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such
enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.
Rabies vaccination means the inoculation of an animal with an approved rabies vaccine.
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or
cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death.
Under restraint means secured by a leash or lead not to exceed six feet in length held by a responsible, able bodied person.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, §§ 1.01, 1.02)
Sec. 6-2. - Interference with ocials prohibited.
No person shall resist or interfere with an animal control officer or any other city official in the performance of his official duty
in enforcing this chapter, nor shall any person fail or refuse to exhibit the vaccination certificate of any animal required to be
vaccinated by this chapter when required to do so by any animal control officer or other city official.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 2.03)
Sec. 6-3. - Hogs prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the city any hog.
(Code 1973, § 4-1)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
48/192
Sec. 6-4. - Nuisance animals.
The council, upon formal complaint by any citizen concerning an animal, shall conduct an investigation to determine whether
the animal constitutes a nuisance. If the council determines that the animal does constitute a nuisance, the owner of the animal
shall be so notified and shall be given a reasonable period of time during which to correct those conditions constituting the
nuisance. Failure to correct said nuisance within a period of time considered reasonable by the council shall be punishable as
prescribed in general penalty section 1-7.
(Code 1973, § 4-17)
Sec. 6-5. - Abandonment prohibited.
No person shall release an animal on any property public or private, with the intention of abandoning the animal.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 2.09)
Sec. 6-6. - Livestock on public rights-of-way prohibited.
No one shall allow or permit any horses, cattle, sheep, goats, or other livestock to run at large on public rights-of-way or to be
staked so that they can go upon public rights-of-way or to drive or lead any such animals along or on the public rights-of-way
unless fastened to a rope, chain or other substantial leading device, which rope, chain or other substantial leading device is
securely held by a responsible person during all the time that such animals are being led or driven along and over the public rightsof-way.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 2.08)
Sec. 6-7. - Unlawful to permit animals in heat to roam or run free.
No owner or custodian of any animal in heat shall permit the animal to roam free. Such animal shall be confined in a building
or securely enclosed in a manner that shall not allow contact with a non-neutered male animal except for planned breeding.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 2.11)
Secs. 6-8—6-32. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - DEAD ANIMALS UPON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
Sec. 6-33. - Prohibited; exception.
No person shall abandon a dead animal on any public property or public right-of-way unless the place in which the animal is
being left is a public dump or other facility designed for receiving such and had been designated by the city as a public facility for
receiving trash or refuse.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 2.05)
Sec. 6-34. - Removal from public rights-of-way.
The owner of dead animals upon the public rights-of-way, shall remove the same so as not to constitute a nuisance. If the
owner fails to do so the city shall remove and dispose of such carcass on public rights-of-way, and charge the cost of such removal
and disposal to the owner of the carcass if known.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 2.04)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
49/192
Sec. 6-35. - Removal from private property.
When any animal is found on private property, the owner of the dead animal or the owner of the premises upon which such
animal is located shall remove the same immediately at his own cost. Failure to do so in a timely manner is hereby declared a
nuisance and constitutes a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 2.06)
Sec. 6-36. - Abandonment upon private property.
No person shall intentionally abandon a dead animal on any private property belonging to another unless the person so doing
shall have first obtained permission from the owner of the property on which the animal is being left.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 2.07)
Secs. 6-37—6-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 6-61. - Animal control department designated.
The authority and responsibility for administration of these regulations shall rest with the city council. In exercising that
authority and discharging that responsibility the council shall designate the animal control department head to be charged with
enforcing this chapter. The animal control department shall coordinate and cooperate with the county health department and such
other agencies as the council deems advisable. The animal control department head shall issue interpretations on this chapter
upon written request.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 8.03)
Sec. 6-62. - Duty of animal control ocer.
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer under the direction of the animal control department head to enforce these
regulations.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 8.04)
Sec. 6-63. - Authority to kill certain animals.
Any animal found at large in violation of this chapter, which cannot be safely impounded or poses a real threat to city officials
citizens, other domesticated animals or livestock may be slain by any police officer, or animal control officer when in the presence
of and having had permission given by a police officer. Such measures shall only be used when tranquilizing the animal fails or
there is a significant risk of immediate danger.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 6.03)
Secs. 6-64—6-84. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
50/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Sec. 6-85. - Conscation of suspected abused animals.
If an animal control officer or any law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that any animal is subject to abuse,
he shall confiscate and impound the animal pending the conclusion of an investigation. Said investigation shall he completed by
the end of the seventh business day, at which time a finding shall he issued by the animal control officer and the department head
of the city animal control. If a finding is made that the animal is being abused, cruelty to animal charges shall be filed against the
owner and the animal will become the property of the city. In the event that a determination is reached that the animal is not being
abused, the animal will be returned to the owner, and followup investigations may be conducted by the animal control officer at
the discretion of the department head of the city animal control and the animal control officer. The responsibility for costs related
to the confiscation and impoundment during the investigation will rest with the owner regardless of the determination reached.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 6.02)
Sec. 6-86. - Procedure when animal running at large.
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to apprehend any animal found running at large contrary to the
provisions of this chapter and impound such animal in the animal shelter designated by the city council.
All animals impounded by the city shall be held until claimed by the owner for a minimum of two calendar days to
include the day the animal was impounded, whichever comes first. Longer periods of custody may be used if in the
opinion of the holding agency personnel the animal is likely to be claimed by its owner or a new owner will be
found, provided that in either case there is a reasonable expectation that the fees, fines, or other charges provided
for in this division will be paid.
Any animal not claimed within the times provided in subsection (b) of this section shall become the property of the
agency serving as the city's animal shelter to dispose of humanely in accordance with their regulations and policies.
In lieu of, apprehending and impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer, upon determining the
owner, may return the animal to the owner (if able to apprehend said animal) and issue a summons requiring the
owner to appear in the court of jurisdiction for violation of this chapter. Said summons may be issued without
apprehending the animal if the owner of said animal can be identified.
It shall be the responsibility of the animal control officer to make reasonable efforts to ascertain the owner of each
impounded animal as soon as possible after taking it into custody. If the owner is identified, a reasonably
expeditious effort shall be made to notify said owner of the impoundment of the animal and make the owner aware
of the city animal control laws, the period of impounding, charges to be made and any fees owed the city.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 4.01)
Sec. 6-87. - Reclamation.
Any person may make application to the agency designated by the city council to operate a pound for the city for
the return of any animal impounded therein and upon presentation of proof satisfactory to the agency that such
person is rightly entitled to the possession of such animal may recover it upon presentation of an impound fee to be
fixed by agreement between the city council and said agency, together with the reasonable expense of the animal's
keep. The agency shall retain any fees collected by it under this section.
No animal shall be released to a potential new owner prior to the end of the impoundment period stipulated in
section 6-86(b).
If after consultation with a licensed veterinarian, an animal is determined to have a terminal illness, a potentially
lethal wound or (in the case of an animal whose owner has not been identified) a communicable disease, such
animal shall be disposed of by humane methods without regard to the specified holding period.
Enforcement personnel following the procedures proscribed in this chapter shall not be held liable for the disposal
of any animal.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
51/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 4.02)
Sec. 6-88. - Proof of rabies vaccination required prior to release.
No animal required to be vaccinated for rabies shall be released from impoundment prior to showing proof of a current rabies
inoculation. If said animal has not had a current rabies vaccine or it cannot be shown that it has a current rabies vaccine the animal
shall be vaccinated prior to being released. The owner of the animal shall be responsible for the costs of the vaccination.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 4.03)
Sec. 6-89. - Physical facilities required.
The city animal shelter shall be located at a place or agency designated by the city council.
The facilities shall be constructed so as to provide security for the citizens of the surrounding area and for the
animals under impoundment.
Facilities for sanitary storage of feed and secure storage of medicines and other chemicals shall he provided.
Facilities for the humane destruction of animals or fowl and the appropriate means for disposal of the remains shall
he provided.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 4.04)
Sec. 6-90. - Humane treatment of animals required.
Animals under impoundment shall be treated in a humane manner. They shall he provided reasonable protection from
extremes in weather. Animals suspected of having a communicable disease shall be isolated from the remainder of the animal
population. Each animal shall be fed an adequate amount of food at least once per day, and shall have fresh water available at all
reasonable times.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 4.05)
Sec. 6-91. - Recordkeeping.
Records shall be kept at the pound and will, at a minimum, include:
A description of each animal;
The date and time it was taken into custody;
Notations as to efforts to identify and notify the owner;
Rabies inoculation status and any other pertinent medical information;
To whom the animal was released and the charges assessed and by whom laid; and
If the animal was not released, the date of disposal.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 4.06)
Sec. 6-92. - Fees.
The city council may establish fees for:
The apprehension of any animals running at large;
The impoundment of animals at the city animal shelter;
The redemption of animals impounded under the provisions of this division; and
The disposal of animals not claimed or adopted.
Such fees shall be sufficient for the city to recover the costs incurred in the administration of this chapter. These
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
52/192
(a)
(b)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(b)
(c)
fees, if any, shall be in addition to any fee charged to the animal owner by the agency serving as the city animal
shelter or fines assessed by the court for violations of this chapter.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 4.07)
Secs. 6-93—6-112. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - CONFINEMENT, VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITED CONDITIONS
Sec. 6-113. - At large animal declared nuisance.
No person owning, having an interest in, harboring or having the care, charge control, or possession of any animal
shall permit or allow it (either willfully or through failure to exercise due care of control) to be, remain, go, or run at
large upon a public right-of-way park or other public space or any open lot or land in the city other than on the
property of the said animal's owner. The presence of any animal upon a public right-of-way, park or other public
space or upon any open lot or land in the city other than on the property of the said animal's owner, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public health and safety.
All animals found to be at large in violation of this chapter may be impounded in the manner proscribed in this
chapter.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 3.01)
Sec. 6-114. - Vaccination of animals—Required.
Evidence. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any canine or feline which has not been
vaccinated against rabies as required by the rules and regulations established in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5.
Evidence of such vaccination shall consist of:
A certificate bearing the owner's name and address;
Number of the vaccination tag issued;
Date of the vaccination;
Date the animal shall be revaccinated;
Type and lot number of the vaccine administered; and
The signature of the person administering the vaccine.
Copies. The certificate shall be prepared in triplicate, the original given to the owner, the first copy filed in the office
of the county board of health, and the second copy retained by the person administering the vaccine.
Veterinary supervision needed. All vaccinations shall be administered by or under the supervision of a veterinarian
licensed by the Georgia Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners to practice veterinary medicine in the state or by
other persons qualified under state law for that purpose.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 3.02)
Sec. 6-115. - Same—Proof by wearing tag.
All animals required to be vaccinated under section 6-114 shall wear the vaccination tag issued for the current year in a clearly
visible location.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 3.03)
Sec. 6-116. - Display of vaccination certicate required upon demand.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
53/192
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
No person keeping or harboring an animal shall fail or refuse to exhibit a certificate of vaccination required by this chapter
upon demand of the animal control officer, health department representative, police officer or any other city official.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 3.04)
Sec. 6-117. - Nuisance procedure.
No person shall allow any animal over which they have custody or control to remain on their property or premises if
the same shall constitute a nuisance.
The council, upon formal complaint by any citizen concerning an animal, shall conduct an investigation to determine
whether the animal constitutes a nuisance. If the council determines that the animal does constitute a nuisance, the
owner of the animal shall be so notified and shall be given a reasonable period of time during which to correct
those conditions constituting the nuisance. Failure to correct said nuisance within a period of time considered
reasonable by the council shall be punishable as prescribed in general penalty section 1-7
(Code 1973, § 4-17; Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 3.05)
Secs. 6-118—6-147. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - RABIES CONTROL
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.
Sec. 6-148. - Duty to surrender body of animal suspected of rabies.
It shall the duty of the owner or person having custody of any animal suspected of having rabies to surrender the carcass of
the animal, or such portion of the carcass as may be requested, to the animal control officer after the death of the animal.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 5.06)
Sec. 6-149. - Quarantine required.
All veterinarians treating an animal indicating symptoms of rabies shall hold such animal in quarantine until the disposition of
said animal by the animal control officer.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 5.07)
Sec. 6-150. - Duty to report animal biting animal incident.
It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of any animal that bites another animal to report immediately to the city
animal control department the following information:
The existence and description of such animal;
The place where the biting incident occurred;
The owner's name, if known;
A description of the animal that was bitten; and
The owner's name, if known.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
54/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 5.08)
Sec. 6-151. - Management—Animals that scratch or bite humans.
Dogs and cats. A healthy dog or cat that bites or scratches a person or another animal should be confined and
observed for ten days. This required quarantine applies to dogs and cats only. A rabies vaccine should not be
administered during the observation period. While in confinement, any signs of illness should be evaluated by a
licensed veterinarian. The place of confinement shall be at the agency designated by the city council as the animal
shelter at the expense of the owner or person having custody or possession of the animal the veterinarian chosen
by the owner or person having the custody or possession of the animal at said owner's expense, or any other
confinement location so designated and approved by the animal control officer. If symptoms suggestive of rabies
are observed, the animal should be humanely killed, and a specimen should be submitted to a qualified laboratory
for testing. If the animal dies during the quarantine period, the specimen should be submitted immediately for
rabies testing.
Stray domestic animals and other species. Any stray or unwanted animal that bites or scratches a person or
domestic animal may be humanely euthanized and a specimen submitted for testing. Animals other than dogs or
cats that bite or scratch a person and are suspected of being rabid should immediately be reported to the city
animal control department. Management of animals other than dogs and cats is dependent on the animal species,
the circumstances of the bite, and the epidemiology of rabies in the area, and shall be at the discretion of the animal
control officer or the county health department or their authorized representative.
Livestock. Cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, goats, swine and sheep are not likely to be reservoirs of rabies. Treatment
will be weighed against the circumstances of exposure by the animal control officer (if the county health
department or its authorized representative). If at the time of exposure the animal is clinically ill with signs
suggestive of rabies, the animal control officer or his authorized representative, or an authorized representative
from the county health department will immediately and humanely kill the animal and a specimen will lie submitted
to a qualified laboratory for testing. The cost of testing will be the responsibility of the animal owner, if known.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 5.09)
Sec. 6-152. - Same—Animals exposed to rabies.
Any animal bitten or scratched by a bat or wild carnivorous mammal (particularly bobcat, raccoon, fox, skunk, or coyote) which
is not available for testing should be considered exposed to rabies.
Unvaccinated dogs and cats. Unvaccinated or unwanted dogs and cats bitten or scratched by a known or
potentially rabid animal should be humanely euthanized immediately. If the owner of the animal is unwilling to
have this done (upon approval of the department head of the city animal control) the exposed animal must be
placed in strict isolation for six months and vaccinated one month prior to being released. The responsibility
for isolation of an exposed unvaccinated animal remains with the owner animal must be kept in a pen that has
been built to the specifications of the State of Georgia Rabies Control Manual Appendix C, and approved by the
department head of the city animal control and the chief animal control officer. Additionally, a second fence 18
inches to 24 inches in distance from the inner pen must be erected around the perimeter to guarantee
complete isolation of the quarantined animal from other animals and human contact. The total construction
costs of this confinement area is the sole responsibility of the pet owner. Previously vaccinated dogs and cats
whose rabies vaccination has lapsed for more than 30 days are considered unvaccinated and will be treated as
such.
Vaccinated dogs and cats. Dogs and cats that are currently vaccinated (vaccinated at least one month prior to
exposure) should be revaccinated immediately confined and observed for 45 days. Confinement must be
coordinated with and approved by the city animal control and/or the county health department.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
55/192
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Livestock. Vaccinated livestock (vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with a USDA approved vaccine for that speci
days prior to the attack) bitten by a rabid animal should be revaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for
Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the city animal control and/or the county health departm
Other animals. Unvaccinated animals bitten by a rabid animal should be euthanized immediately. If an animal
has been vaccinated with a USDA approved vaccine for the species, the animal must be revaccinated
immediately and placed in confinement for a minimum of 90 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and
approved by the city animal control and/or the county health department.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 5.10)
Sec. 6-153. - Quarantine of area.
Whenever in the judgment of the city council, after consultation with the city animal control and the county health department,
the public health and safety so require the council shall declare and establish a quarantine zone or area consisting of the whole or
any part of the city, and maintain such quarantine therein until such time as they may deem it advisable to lift the same. During the
existence of such quarantine, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the rules and regulations proscribed by the city
council, with reference to such quarantine.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 5.11)
Sec. 6-154. - Retention of animals suspected of having rabies.
If the animal control officer or poundkeeper for the agency operating a pound for the city suspects that any animal
impounded has rabies he shall notify the city animal control department. A qualified veterinarian shall examine
such animal and if they believe such animal should be held for future observation, they shall so inform the animal
control officer.
If an animal does not have rabies, the animal control officer or agency operating a pound for the city shall release it
or dispose of it in the manner proscribed in this chapter.
After observation by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state, if symptoms suggestive rabies are observed, the
animal should be humanely killed, its head carefully removed and shipped on ice for examination by the state public
health laboratory. If the animal dies during the quarantine period, the head shall be submitted immediately for
rabies testing. If the animal lives through the duration of the quarantine and no symptoms of rabies are observed
that animal shall be released to the owner or turned over to the agency operating the city's animal shelter.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 5.12)
Sec. 6-155. - Animal exposed to rabies barred from city.
No person shall bring any animal into the city in which rabies has been present within six months prior thereto.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 5.13)
Secs. 6-156—6-178. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - DANGEROUS DOGS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20; vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
56/192
(a)
(b)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(b)
(c)
Sec. 6-179. - Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to clearly define local government responsibility, as well as limit the administrative and
liability burdens upon the city with regard to potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs.
A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the
law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the
meaning of this article. A dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dog within the meaning of this article if
the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other
tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have
tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 7.01)
Sec. 6-180. - Dog control ocer—Designated.
The chief animal control officer of the city shall also be designated as the dog control officer for purposes of this article. It shall
be the dog control officer's duty to investigate and classify as appropriate suspected dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs.
However, the dog control officer's duty of investigation and classification only arises when a report of an occurrence justifying said
classification occurs in the incorporated portions of the city from any law enforcement agency, rabies control office, county or state
board of health, or a written report by a citizen of the city.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 7.02)
Sec. 6-181. - Same—Responsibilities.
Investigation and classification. Upon receiving a report that a dog has acted in dangerous or potentially dangerous
manner, the dog control officer shall investigate the allegations and make a determination as to the truthfulness of
said allegations. After concluding the investigation, the dog control officer shall:
Decide if the classification of the dog as dangerous or potentially dangerous is not required; or
Classify the dog as potentially dangerous.
Notice. In the event that the dog control officer classifies the dog under investigation as dangerous or potentially
dangerous, the dog control officer must notify the owner by certified mail. The notice shall include a summary of the
reason for which the animal has been classified and provide the owners with a form to request a hearing to contest
the classification within 15 days of the notice date. If no hearing is requested, the dog's classification goes into effect
on the 15th day.
Hearing. An owner who requests a hearing under subsection (b) of this section shall be provided a hearing before
the animal control board within 30 days. The owners must be notified of the hearing date, time and location by
certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted such that owners have the opportunity to present their testimony,
cross examine witnesses, and present evidence. The animal control board shall receive such other evidence and
hear such other testimony as is reasonably necessary to make a determination to either sustain, modify, or overrule
the dog control officer's classification of the dog. Within ten days after the hearing, the animal control board shall
make a final determination as to the classification of the dog and provide notice of its determination by certified
mail to the owners. In the event that the animal control board, after a hearing, classifies a dog as dangerous or
potentially' dangerous the effective date of such classification, which shall be the date the decision is made, must be
given.
(Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 7.03)
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS
FOOTNOTE(S):
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
57/192
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
b.
c.
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Building and housing generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 8-1. - Exemption from water saving plumbing device requirements.
New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of
O.C.G.A. § 8-3-2(c) when:
The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or
sewerage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings;
When such plumbing or sewerage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or
installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this chapter were
installed;
Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such
individual's personal residence; or
Units to be installed are:
Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities;
Specifically designed it withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or
Toilets for juveniles.
The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation, who is entitled to an
exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section, shall obtain the exemption by applying at the
office of the building inspector for the city. A fee in an amount as established from time to time by the city shall be
charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption.
(Ord. of 6-10-1991, § 5)
Sec. 8-2. - Dangerous buildings.
State law adopted. This section is adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7(a) to enable the city to exercise its police
power to repair, close or demolish such dwellings, buildings, or structures in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-
2-8 through 41-2-17. The provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth in this chapter.
Police chief designated to enforce chapter. The city chief of police is hereby designated as the public officer
authorized to exercise powers prescribed in the statutes adopted in this section.
Findings of fact. It is found that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings and structures which are unfit for human
habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses due to:
Dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities;
The lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; or
Other conditions rendering such dwellings, buildings or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city.
(Ord. of 12-10-1990(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-10-1990(2), §§ 1, 2)
Secs. 8-3—8-22. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING NUMBERING
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
58/192
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
Sec. 8-23. - Failure to comply; ne.
Failure to comply with this article is a misdemeanor. The police department or their designee may cause to be
issued an arrest warrant, or summons to appear before the municipal court to answer such alleged violation. A
summons to appear may be served upon an alleged violator either in person or by certified mail.
The minimum fine for a violation of this article shall be $25.00 plus court costs.
(Ord. of 3-10-2003)
Sec. 8-24. - Scheme.
The city has established a new address numbering system, which shall be administered by the Early-Calhoun 911
Department.
Each house, building, or other occupiable structure shall be assigned a separate number. A number or alphabetical
letter shall be assigned for each separate and distinct occupant or division (i.e., apartment, company, etc.) within a
building or other occupied structure.
Existing numbers shall be changed only as necessary to ensure the effectiveness or efficiency of the Enhanced 911
System of Early-Calhoun County, as determined by the judgment of the Early-Calhoun 911 Department.
All new buildings and structures must be assigned a numbered address by the Early-Calhoun 911 Department, prior
to or simultaneous with the granting of: a building permit, septic tank permit, electrical permit, or connecting to any
city gas, water or sewerage line.
Written notification of the address assigned under the terms of this article to each house, building, or structure shall
be given or delivered to its respective owner/occupant.
Written notification of the address assigned under the terms of this article to each house, building or structure shall
also be given to the U.S. Postal 911 Address Coordinator.
(Ord. of 3-10-2003)
Sec. 8-25. - Placement.
The owner, occupant, or agent of each house, building or business shall display the assigned number on the
structure no later than March 31, 2003.
The Early-Calhoun 911 Department will supply the numbers for all structures one time, any subsequent numbers
required will be the responsibility of the property owner. The property owner, occupant, or agent of each house,
building, or other structure, shall be responsible for installation of the numbers.
Residential numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately to the right side of the appropriate door, so that the
number is clearly visible from the street, and/or the building number may be placed near the walk, driveway, or
common entrance to the building, or placed on the mailbox, gatepost, or other appropriate place, so as to be clearly
visible from the street.
(Ord. of 3-10-2003)
Sec. 8-26. - Defacing, altering, destroying, concealing or removing numbers.
Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, alter, destroy, conceal or remove any 911 address
numbers, except by the owner, occupant, or agent, as required for maintenance, upkeep and replacement as
required, to maintain the numbers in good readable condition.
Fine. The minimum fine for a violation of this section shall be $100.00 plus court costs.
(Ord. of 3-10-2003)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
59/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Secs. 8-27—8-50. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING, CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Dec. 10, 2012, added provisions designated as Ch. 8, §§ 8-1—8-6. Inasmuch as there were
already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as Ch. 8, Art. III, §§ 8-51—8-56.
Sec. 8-51. - Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State minimum standard
codes as allowed heretofore adopted. Hereinafter, all of the codes heretofore adopted shall be referred to as the "technical codes,"
as may be adopted by the state or local jurisdiction.
(Res. of 12-10-12, § 8-1)
Sec. 8-52. - Codes adopted.
The following Georgia State minimum standard codes, the latest editions as adopted and as amended, shall be enforced by the
city:
International Building Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments.
International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments.
International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments.
International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments.
National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, with Georgia Amendments.
International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments.
International Residential Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments.
International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments.
(Res. of 12-10-12, § 8-2)
Sec. 8-53. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Commercial means any type of building other than residential.
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or
renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning,
unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building.
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or
motel.
(Res. of 12-10-12, § 8-3)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
60/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
Sec. 8-54. - Code remedial.
General. These codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interest
and purposes thereof - which are public safety, health, and general welfare - through structural strength, stability,
sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to
the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures,
or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing
systems, which may be referred to as service systems.
Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is no within the purview of this code except as it
relates to the purposes stated herein.
Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of
this code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan
or their adequacy. The City of Edison, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or
hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component
of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting.
(Res. of 12-10-12, § 8-4)
Sec. 8-55. - Applicability to repairs, renovations.
The requirements herein shall apply to any residential construction initiated after December 10, 2012, and to any commercial
construction initiated after December 10, 2012, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building.
(Res. of 12-10-12, § 8-5)
Sec. 8-56. - Enforcement; penalty.
This article shall be enforced by the office of the director of public utilities of the city. Citations for violations maybe
issued by the director of public utilities for the city.
Any person violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court. Any person violating the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.
(Res. of 12-10-12, § 8-6)
Chapter 10 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
61/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 10-19. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage
of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the
President of the United States.
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan.
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which
military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy
emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation:
Firefighting services;
Police services (public safety);
Medical and health services;
Rescue;
Engineering;
Warning services;
Communications;
Defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons;
Evacuation of persons from stricken areas;
Emergency welfare services;
Emergency transportation;
Nuclear power plant protection;
Temporary restoration of public service utility services; and
Other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the
preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions.
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state
emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan.
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the governor to head the state emergency
management agency.
(Ord. of 1-3-2009, § I)
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3 et seq.
Sec. 10-20. - Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article, rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as a misdemeanor.
(Ord. of 1-3-2009, § VI)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
62/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Secs. 10-21—10-43. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 10-44. - Local organization.
It is the desire and intent of the city's governing officials that the city be a part of the county emergency management agency.
The chairperson of the county commissioners, with the concurrence of the city mayor, shall nominate, for appointment by the
state emergency management director, a director of the county emergency management agency. Upon appointment, the local
emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the
local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the chairperson or city council and shall
serve at the pleasure of such chairperson or city council. When appointed, the local emergency management director is charged
with the following duties:
Represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management.
Assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations.
Develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county emergency operations plan for
emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be
submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities within the county for approval, and thence to
the state emergency management agency for approval.
Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county
emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency
management agency.
Submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices (e.g.,
financial, daily activities, etc.).
Obtain, with the authority of the governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations
center.
Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating staff during periods of emergency, and under the
supervision of the county governing officials.
(Ord. of 1-3-2009, § II)
State law reference— Local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27.
Sec. 10-45. - County emergency management agency.
The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing city and county departments. The emergency
support functions (ESFs) and department/agency assignments are as follows: The department/agency assignments listed in the
following table are examples only. It is the responsibility of local governments to make assignments based upon local capabilities.
Emergency Support Function (ESF) Department/Agency
Transportation (P) County road department
(S) City public works
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
63/192
Communications (P) County 911/Dispatch
(S) City police department
Public works and engineering (P) County road department
(S) City public works
Fireghting (P) County re department
(S) City re department
Emergency management (P) County emergency management agency
(S) County/city governments
Mass care, housing and human services (P) County department of family and children services
(DFACS)
(S) Red Cross chapter
Resource support (P) County emergency management
(S) County/city government
Public health and medical services (P) County public health
(S) Local hospitals
Search and rescue (P) County re/rescue
(S) City re/rescue
Hazardous materials (P) County re department
(S) City re department
Agricultural and natural resources (P) County extension agent
(S) County emergency management agency
Energy (P) County emergency management agency
(S) Local utilities
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
64/192
(a)
(1)
Public safety and security services (P) County sheri
(S) City police department
Long-term recovery and mitigation (P) County emergency management agency
(S) County government
External aairs (P) County government public information ocer (PIO)
(S) City government public information ocer (PIO)
Note—(P) means primary; (S) means secondary.
Note—As appropriate to the local organization, these functions can be assigned to existing departments or may be separate.
Functions should be assigned consistent with the local emergency operations plan.
Note—Heads of the county departments listed in the table contained in this section are responsible for developing appropriate
annexes and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to the emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency
functions. Such annexes and/or SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for
submission to appropriate local officials for approval.
(Ord. of 1-3-2009, § III)
Sec. 10-46. - Volunteers.
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article shall serve
without compensation.
(Ord. of 1-3-2009, § V)
State law reference— Immunity of emergency management personnel, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-35.
Chapter 12 - ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL RESOURCES
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 12-1. - Restrictions on outdoor water use.
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs or other
plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided,
however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses:
Commercial raising, harvesting or storing of crops; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; the
commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to,
cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
65/192
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
limited to, chickens, hens, ratites and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl or animals; or the commercial
production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and aparian products or as otherwise
defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3;
Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and
state guidelines;
Reuse of graywater in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations;
Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection
Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater;
Watering personal food gardens;
Watering new and replanted plant, seed or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during
installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation;
Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such
well or surface water is on said property;
Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale or installation;
Watering athletic fields, golf courses or public turf grass recreational areas;
Installation, maintenance or calibration of irrigation systems; or
Hydroseeding.
No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this
section.
The city police department and public works department shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The
mayor and council may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement.
(Res. of 1-10-2011, § 1(16.10), (16.11); Res. of 2-7-2011, § 1(16.10), (16.11))
Secs. 12-2—12-18. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION
Sec. 12-19. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Hazardous waste and material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical
of infectious characteristics may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or
incapacitating reversible illness; or
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly
treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes are disposed of
on land by placing earth cover thereon.
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
66/192
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(Ord. of 12-13-1993, § 2)
Sec. 12-20. - Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the
establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water
system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones.
(Ord. of 12-13-1993, § 1)
Sec. 12-21. - Administration.
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including,
without limitations, those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided
in the existing city zoning ordinance, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended.
(Ord. of 12-13-1993, § 6)
Sec. 12-22. - Wellhead protection zone established.
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all area
within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is feet.
(Ord. of 12-13-1993, § 3)
Sec. 12-23. - Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted within the wellhead protection zones:
Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family districts, except that the minimum residential lot
size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and
Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary
open land use.
(Ord. of 12-13-1993, § 4)
Sec. 12-24. - Prohibited uses.
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within the wellhead protection zones, whether or not such
use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 12-23:
Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides;
Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto;
Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings
permitted under section 12-23
Sanitary landfills;
Hazardous waste disposal sites;
Stormwater infiltration basins;
Underground storage tanks;
Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead.
(Ord. of 12-13-1993, § 5)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
67/192
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Secs. 12-25—12-51. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE PROTECTION
Sec. 12-52. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a
well.
Drastic means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings
described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600/2-87-035. (Note: The Drastic methodology is the most widely
used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility.)
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharge, leaks,
impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area.
Pollution susceptibility maps means maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the state department of natural
resources. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas having high, medium and low
groundwater pollution potential.
Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer.
Significant recharge areas means those areas mapped by the state department of natural resources in the Georgia Pollution
Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type and
thickness, slope, density of lithologic contracts, geologic structure, the presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. Significant
recharge areas for the city are typified by those of the coastal plain. In the coastal plain, the significant recharge areas are the
surface outcroppings of the large and extensively used drinking water aquifers (e.g., the Floridan, the Clayton, etc.) and soils having
high permeability according to the 1976 1:750,000 Soils Association Map of Georgia.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(1), § 3)
Sec. 12-53. - Findings of fact; objectives.
In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the city
and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it
is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that the city and surrounding communities rely on as
sources of public water. Groundwater resources are contained within aquifers, which are permeable, rock strata
occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by the infiltration of surface water runoff
in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when
unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to
manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized.
The objectives of this article are:
To protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use or store dangerous pollutants in
recharge areas;
To protect groundwater quality by limiting the density of development; and
To protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
68/192
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
a.
b.
c.
have no adverse affect on groundwater quality.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(1), § 1)
Sec. 12-54. - Variances.
A variance may be approved if such approval is not contrary to the public interest and where because of the special
characteristics of the property and the activity, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will, in an individual case, result
in unnecessary hardship. However, the spirit of this article must be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial
justice done; provided that the variance, if granted, will not result in damage to the groundwater.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(1), § 5)
Sec. 12-55. - Appeals.
Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision by the enforcement officer under this article according to the appeal process
established under the city's zoning ordinance.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(1), § 6)
Sec. 12-56. - Groundwater recharge area district established.
A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction
of the city that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the state department of natural resources in the
Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition.
Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the
Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this section.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(1), § 2)
Sec. 12-57. - Criteria.
The following criteria shall apply in significant recharge areas:
The city shall not issue any permits for new sanitary landfills not having synthetic liners and leachate collection
systems.
The city shall not issue any new permits for the land disposal of hazardous wastes.
The city shall require all new facilities permitted or to be permitted to treat, store, or dispose of hazardous
waste to perform such operations on an impermeable pad having a spill and leak collection systems.
New aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have
secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the
largest tank in a cluster of tanks. (Note: These figures are consistent with U.S. EPA rules for oil pollution
prevention, 40 CFR 112.1.) Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all
federal requirements.
New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within:
A high pollution susceptibility area;
A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet;
A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
69/192
(6)
a.
b.
c.
(7)
a.
b.
c.
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical
hydraulic conductivity of less than 5×10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the state natural resources
conservation service.
New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as
follows, based on the application of Table MT-1 of the state department of human resources manual
(hereinafter "DHR Table MT-1"). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on
consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A-F) of the DHR manual.
150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on the application of DHR Table MT-1 if
they are within a high pollution susceptibility area;
125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on the application of DHR Table MT-1 if
they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and
110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on the application of DHR Table MT-1 if
they are within a low pollution susceptibility area.
New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having the
following size limitation as identified on Table MT-2 of the Georgia Department of Human Resources' Manual
for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (hereinafter "DHR Table MT-2").
150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high
pollution susceptibility area;
125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high
pollution susceptibility area; and
110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low
pollution susceptibility area.
No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the county
health department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the
DHR manual, this subsection and subsections (6) and (7) of this section.
Lots of record approved prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived are hereby
exempted from the requirements of subsections (6) and (7) of this section.
New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on
any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable
federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements.
The state department of natural resources shall require conservative design in any new permits for the spray
irrigation of wastewaters or the land spreading of wastewater sludge in areas having high pollution
susceptibility. This shall be accomplished by comparing the department's Criteria For Slow Rate Land
Treatment (February 1986 or latest edition) with amendments and other technical publications to site specific
information submitted by a registered professional engineer for each project.
Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in area having high pollution susceptibility.
Exclusive of mining settling basins, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner in areas
having high pollution susceptibility.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(1), § 4)
Secs. 12-58—12-87. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - WETLAND PROTECTION
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
70/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
Sec. 12-88. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Functions means the beneficial roles that wetlands serve, including:
Storage, conveyance, and attenuation of floodwater and stormwater;
Protection of water quality and reduction of erosion;
Habitat for wildlife, including rare, threatened and endangered species;
Food chain support for a wide variety of wildlife and fisheries;
Educational, historical, and archeological value protection; and
Scenic, aesthetic, and recreational amenities.
General wetland map means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city as indicated on the National Wetlands Inventory
Map.
Hydric soils means soils that form as a result of saturated soil conditions. A list of these soils is maintained by the state soil
conservation service.
Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plants tolerant of or dependent on saturated soil conditions.
Jurisdictional wetland means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers.
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or
fill material into waters of the United States exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
Silviculture means the art of producing, reproducing and growing a forest of distinctive stands of trees.
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and under normal circumstances does support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophilic vegetation. The term "wetlands" includes swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
or any authority designated by the Corps.
Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city which are indicated on the generalized
wetland map as "wetlands providing significant wildlife habitat and/or which may be subject to extensive mitigation."
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(2), § 2)
Sec. 12-89. - Findings of fact; purpose.
The wetlands within the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development
constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature.
Wetlands provide:
Habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation;
Water quality maintenance and pollution control;
Flood control;
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
71/192
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
(2)
(3)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
Erosion control;
Natural resource education;
Scientific study;
Open space; and
Recreational opportunities.
In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many
communities within the state.
Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by
draining, dredging, filling, excavation, building, pollution, and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will,
over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the
general welfare.
The state department of natural resources and the state department of community affairs have determined
that each local government with classified wetlands located in its jurisdiction must adopt a wetlands protection
ordinance under the requirements of 1989 Georgia Laws page 1317, Georgia's 1989 Growth Strategies
Legislation and the rules promulgated thereunder.
The purposes of this article are to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect wetlands, while taking into account
varying ecological, economic development, recreational, and aesthetic values. The objective of this article is to make
the public aware of state and federal laws that protect wetlands from alterations which will significantly affect or
reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic
nature, and wildlife.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(2), § 1)
Sec. 12-90. - Wetland protection district established.
This article shall apply to all wetlands within the wetland protection district as defined in this section and located
within the jurisdiction of the city. The generalized wetland map, adopted as part of the ordinance from which this
article is derived, shows the general location of wetlands and of the wetland protection district and should be
consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands before engaging in a regulated activity. The
generalized wetland map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this article. The generalized wetland map shall be on file in the office
of the city.
The generalized wetland map is a general reference document and wetland boundaries indicated on the map are
approximations. The purpose of the generalized wetland map is to alert developers/landowners if they are within
proximity to a wetland, which means that there is a high likelihood of the presence of a jurisdiction wetland and a
need for the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers guidance as to whether a section 404
permit will be required prior to any activity. The generalized wetland map does not necessarily represent the exact
boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a
delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean
Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal
or state permitting requirements.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(2), § 3)
Sec. 12-91. - Local development permitting.
Requirements. No regulated activity will be conducted within the wetland protection district without prior review by
the city zoning administrator. Proposed activities shall be reviewed to compare proposals for land disturbance or
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
72/192
(1)
a.
b.
(2)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
a.
b.
development with the generalized wetlands map to determine whether local permitting should proceed or be
deferred pending a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination. All activities that are not exempted in subsection
(b) of this section shall be prohibited without the prior issuance of a local permit.
Issuance of local permit. A local permit shall be issued without a jurisdictional wetlands determination by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers if either one of the following two conditions exist:
It is not the type of activity that would cause the alteration of wetlands; or
The proposed location of the activity is not near or within a protected wetland boundary as shown on the
generalized wetlands map adopted by the city as a part of this article.
Deferment of local permit. Issuance of a local permit shall be deferred pending a jurisdictional wetlands
determination by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. This determination is required when a proposed activity is of a
type that would cause alteration of wetlands and the proposed location of the activity is near or within a
wetland boundary. A deferred local permit will be issued after a letter of permission or section 404 permit is
obtained from U.S. Army Corps of Engineers by the applicant.
Permissible uses (use as a right). The following uses shall be allowed as a right within the wetland protection district
to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require
structures, grading, fill, drainage, or dredging except as provided in this article:
Operations conducted during normal silvicultural activities, including minor dredge and fill associated with
road construction, harvesting, and reforestation practices provided they meet the performance standards and
road construction best management practices required under section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, and other wildlife, provided they do not affect
waters of the state or United States in such a way that would require an individual section 404 permit.
Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and
canoeing.
Forestry practices applied in accordance with the best management practices approved by the state forestry
commission.
The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to the best management practices
approved by the state department of agriculture.
The pasturing of livestock provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed
and that the approved best management practices are followed.
Education, scientific research, and nature trails.
Emergency repair of critical facilities. Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of
facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph,
telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures, or facilities are not materially
changed or enlarged and that, prior to the commencement of work, written notice has been given to the city or
its designee and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow
and circulation patterns, and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland, are not impaired and that
any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized.
Temporary water level stabilization measures associated with silvicultural operations, provide that they
are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the
conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected.
Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating, or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or
repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided that the
maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration, or loss of wetlands not
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
73/192
c.
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provisions of this subsection
(b).
Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails,
observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses, or other similar water-related structures;
provided that they are built on pilings to allow the unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural
contour of the wetland.
Site plans. Applications for registration within the generalized wetland protection district shall include a site plan,
drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information:
A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, crosssectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale, vertical scale must be
shown on the cross-sectional drawings.
Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent
to the site for a distance of 200 feet.
The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected
perennial stream or water body.
Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two
feet.
Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing
accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials.
All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology.
Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan
shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. The site plan may be amended by prior written notice to the
city or its designee.
Filing fee. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee of $50.00.
Enforcement authority. The city zoning administrator is hereby established as the administrator of this article.
Review procedures. An application for registration shall be made to the zoning administrator with a copy to such
parties which may be designated by the city.
Duration of permit validity.
If the construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date
of issuance the registration shall be renewed before construction may begin.
If the construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has
commenced, the registration shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(2), § 4)
Sec. 12-92. - Penalties.
Any person who commits, takes part in, or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
If the city council or its designee discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of the provisions
of the Clean Water Act, the city council or its designee shall issue a written notification of the violation to the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner.
The city council or its designee may suspend or revoke a registration if it finds that the applicant has not complied
with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the
permit. The city council or its designee may cause notice of its denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation, or
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
74/192
(a)
(b)
suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the
wetland is located.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(2), § 5)
Sec. 12-93. - Judicial review.
Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city council or its designee shall be reviewable in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the city council or its designee may,
within the time specified by the court, elect to institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall
within the jurisdiction of the city council.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(2), § 6)
Sec. 12-94. - Amendments.
These regulations and the generalized wetland map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and
requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding, or botanical
species peculiar to wetlands become available.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(2), § 7)
Sec. 12-95. - Assessment relief.
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner
of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation restriction with the government or a
nonprofit organization to permanently control some or all regulated activities in the wetland shall have that portion of land
assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from a special assessment on the controlled
wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water mains.
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(2), § 8)
Sec. 12-96. - Wetlands map illustration.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
75/192
(Ord. of 2-12-2001(2))
Chapter 14 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
76/192
State Law reference— Fire prevention and protection, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.
Sec. 14-1. - Election of re chief; appointment of subordinates; responsibility for re apparatus.
The chief of the fire department shall be elected annually by the council. The chief shall have the authority to appoint
assistants and employees subject to the approval of the council. Each fire company shall have the care and management of its
respective hoses, ladders, hooks, and apparatus for extinguishing fires.
(Code 1973, § 7-2)
State law reference— Local fire departments, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. §
25-4-1 et seq.
Sec. 14-2. - Authority of chief or acting chief at scene.
The chief of the fire department shall have supreme and absolute control and command of the fire department at all fires, and
in his absence the assistant chief shall be vested with his authority, and in the absence of both named officers, the same authority
shall devolve upon the senior firefighter present.
(Code 1973, § 7-3)
Sec. 14-3. - Obstructing re house or vehicle prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully put any trash or other obstructions in front of any fire house or other
appurtenance of or belonging to the fire department.
(Code 1973, § 7-4)
Sec. 14-4. - Persons allowed at re scene.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except firefighters, fire wardens, members of the police force, owners or agents of the
property endangered by fire, and interested insurance company representatives, to be within the immediate limits of operation
during the progress of any fire in the city, unless ordered there by the officers in command of the fire department or officers of the
city.
(Code 1973, § 7-5)
Sec. 14-5. - Fires and combustible material to be used in safe manner.
No person shall use fire or combustible material without due precaution.
(Code 1973, § 10-2(14))
Chapter 16 - FLOODS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
77/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Sec. 16-19. - Denitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning
they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such
as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like.
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition
is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall
or is separated by an independent perimeter loadbearing wall, shall be considered new construction.
Appeal means a request for a review of the zoning board's or its designee's interpretation of any provision of this article.
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood
depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special
flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 16-25.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR,
AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a
one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would
increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include:
Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive
materials;
Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not
be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events;
Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost
or inoperative during flood and storm events; and
Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment.
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the
ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as
not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
78/192
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced
before September 2, 2009.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 2, 2009.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration,
where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration,
delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and
containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding.
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. The
term "freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological
effect of urbanization of the watershed.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the
proposed foundation of a building.
Historic structure means any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of
Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
79/192
(4)
a.
b.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic p
programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a
building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this
Code.
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and
intended to be improved property.
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various
elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing
varying elevations within the floodplain.
New construction, for purposes of determining insurance rates, means structures for which the start of construction
commenced after September 2, 2009, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after September 2, 2009,
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after September 2,
2009.
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA
flood modernization maps.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is:
Built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The term "actual start of construction" means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure
such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
80/192
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(3)
(1)
a.
1.
2.
b.
c.
(2)
a.
b.
stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
The term "permanent construction" does not include:
The initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
The installation of streets and/or walkways;
The excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; or
The installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure.
Note—Accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements.
For a substantial improvement, the term "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid
storage tank.
Subdivision the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement.
The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement
of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50
percent of the market value of the structure prior to the start of construction of the improvement.
Note that the market value of the structure should be:
The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or
In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
The term "substantial improvement" includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed.
For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" occurs when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
The term "substantial improvement" does not include:
Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and
which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement
or repair project; or
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure.
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means where the repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and
pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise
prohibited by this article.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
81/192
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 6, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-20. - Authorization.
Article IX, section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to
local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the city does ordain this article.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 1, § A, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-21. - Findings of fact.
The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in the loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures
for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety
and general welfare.
These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are
inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of
the obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 1, § B, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-22. - Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards,
or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion;
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands; and
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are
involved in the accommodation of floodwaters.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 1, § C, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-23. - Objectives.
The objectives of this article are to:
Protect human life and health;
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a
manner as to minimize flood blight areas,
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
82/192
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the
expense of the general public;
Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and
Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 1, § D, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-24. - Applicability of article.
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 2, § A, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-25. - Basis for area of special ood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance
study (FIS), dated September 2, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto,
are adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this article.
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 2,
2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county are hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this article.
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through
standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS.
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting
data is located in the city administration building, 19437 Hartford Street, Edison, Georgia.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 2, § B, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-26. - Compliance with this article required.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
article and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 2, § D, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-27. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 2, § E, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-28. - Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
Considered as minimum requirements;
Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 2, § F, 8-10-2009)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
83/192
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Sec. 16-29. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural
causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this
article.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 2, § G, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-30. - Penalties.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 2, § H, 8-10-2009)
Secs. 16-31—16-48. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 16-49. - Zoning board—Designated.
The city zoning board or its designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 3, § A, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-50. - Same—Duties and responsibilities.
The duties of the zoning board or its designee shall include, but not be limited to:
The review of proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been
satisfied.
The review of proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from
governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (33 USC 1334). Require that copies of such permits
be provided and maintained on file.
Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest
floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 16-52(2)b.
Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or substantially
improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 16-52(2)b.
Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to
structures in flood hazard areas.
Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).
For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
84/192
(9)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
d.
(2)
a.
b.
ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure the floodcarrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained.
Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the
areas of special flood hazard (i.e., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the zoning board or its designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in this article.
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 16-25, then the
city clerk shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article.
When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the city clerk shall obtain a certification of design criteria from a
registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with this article.
All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the city clerk's office and shall be open
for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 3, § C, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-51. - Development permit—Established.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any
development activities.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 2, § C, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-52. - Same—Procedures.
An application for a development permit shall be made to the city clerk on forms furnished by the city prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement,
storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required:
Application stage.
Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement,
of all proposed structures;
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;
Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential
floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 16-81(2);
Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed
development; and
Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to
the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately
after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea
level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by
same.
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk.
The zoning board or its designee shall review the certification data submitted according to subsection (1)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
85/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
a.
b.
c.
(2)
(3)
(4)
(i)
of this section and this subsection (2). Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to
submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop
work order for the project.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 3, § B, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-53. - Appeals; variances.
The zoning board as established by city shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variances from the
requirements of this article.
The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
is made by the zoning board or its designee in the enforcement or administration of this article.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board or its designee may appeal such decision to the county
superior court as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the
criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
In reviewing such requests, the zoning board or its designee shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors,
and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article.
The following conditions shall apply to the issuance of variances:
A variance shall be issued only when there is:
A finding of good and sufficient cause;
A determination that the failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
The provisions of this article are the minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation
from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an
historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic
character and design of the building.
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between
the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor, and stating that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
The city clerk shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsection (h)(1) of this section and the purposes of this article, the
zoning board or its designee may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
86/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
a.
1.
2.
3.
b.
c.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
further the purposes of this article.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 5, 8-10-2009)
Secs. 16-54—16-79. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 16-80. - Minimum standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required:
New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area
located below the lowest floor formed by the foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be
an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater, as follows:
Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or
architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they
permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction;
So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall
only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with
the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and
The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms;
All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), and all electrical, ventilation,
plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces;
New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system;
New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters;
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding; and
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
87/192
(10)
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
1.
2.
3.
4.
b.
1.
2.
c.
d.
1.
2.
(i)
(ii)
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions o
shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 4, § A, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-81. - Specic standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required:
New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new
construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid
foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood
hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section
16-80(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical,
ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood
elevation.
Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in
an A1-30, AE, or AH zone may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this article, and shall provide such certification to the
official as set forth in this section and section 16-50(c).
Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles (Where base flood elevation data are available).
All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on:
Individual lots or parcels;
In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or
On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has
incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation.
Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision may be elevated so that either:
The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of
the base flood elevation; or
The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation
elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade.
All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Refer to section 16-80(6).)
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it:
Is licensed;
On its wheels or jacking system;
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
88/192
(iii)
(iv)
3.
(4)
a.
b.
(1)
(2)
(3)
Attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices; and
Has no permanently attached structures or additions; or
Meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements
of section 16-81(3)a.3.
Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-25 are areas designated as
floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion
potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the
base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or
other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it
is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway
widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting
technical data and certification thereof.
Only if section 16-81(4)a. is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply
with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 4, § B, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-82. - Building standards for streams without established base ood elevations and/or oodway (A zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-25, where streams exist but no base flood data have
been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following
provisions apply:
When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 16-25,
then the zoning board or its designee shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of this division. Only if data are not available from these sources, then subsections (2) and (3) of this
section shall apply.
No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of
the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by
a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more
than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial
improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note:
Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A zone areas
where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements
of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 16-80(4)a. All heating and air
conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other
service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site.
The zoning board or its designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent
part of the permit file.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 4, § C, 8-10-2009)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
89/192
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Sec. 16-83. - Standards for areas of special ood hazard (AE zones) with established base ood elevations without designated oodways.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-25, where streams with base flood elevations are
provided but no floodways have been designated (AE zones), the following provisions apply:
No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within
areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data
that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations
established in accordance with section 16-81
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 4, § D, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-84. - Standards for areas of shallow ooding (AO zones).
The areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-25 may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas
have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply:
All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including
basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section
16-80(4)a. The zoning board or its designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall
become a permanent part of the permit file.
New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of
elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be
watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, and shall provide such
certification to the official as set forth in this subsection and as required in sections 16-52(1)c. and (2)b.
Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 4, § E, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-85. - Standards for subdivisions.
All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data
shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
90/192
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted
to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment
(CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the
as-built data to FEMA in order to obtain the final letter of map revision (LOMR).
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 4, § F, 8-10-2009)
Sec. 16-86. - Standards for critical facilities.
Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain.
All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation.
(Ord. No. 2009:0902, art. 4, § G, 8-10-2009)
Chapter 18 - HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 18-19. - Denitions.
As used in this article, the term "food service establishment" includes establishments for the preparation or serving of meals,
lunches, short order, sandwiches and all other edible products or merchandise for human consumption. The term "food service
establishment" also includes, but is not be limited to, restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, lunchrooms, and all
places manufacturing, wholesaling or retailing food or produce for human consumption, both public and private.
(Code 1973, § 9-31)
Sec. 18-20. - Permit required.
No business license will be issued for the operation of a food service establishment until the applicant presents a
valid permit issued by the responsible county health department personnel.
It shall be unlawful for any person to work in or about or handle or serve any food or other produce for human
consumption within the city without first having received a permit from the responsible county health department
personnel.
It shall be unlawful for any person to employ any employee, or allow any person to work about any food service
establishment, whose duties are the preparation, handling, or serving of food or other produce for human
consumption, without such employee first having received a permit from the county health department.
(Code 1973, § 9-32)
Sec. 18-21. - County board of health designated agent for city.
The county board of health is designated as the agent of the city for the purpose of making such tests and examinations as
provided in this article.
(Code 1973, § 9-33)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
91/192
(1)
Chapter 20 - LAW ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.
Sec. 20-19. - Composition; applicability of rules and regulations; compensation.
The police force of the city shall consist of the chief of police, and such police officers, and night watchmen as the city council
may elect or appoint. The same rules, regulations, powers and penalties that apply to the chief of police for preserving peace and
order and preventing violations of the ordinances, are made applicable to all police officers. All police shall be under the control of
the chief of police, and their compensation shall be such as the city council may prescribe.
(Code 1973, § 12-1)
Sec. 20-20. - Oath of oce.
After election, and before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all police personnel shall make the following
oath or affirmation: "I do solemnly swear that I will and truly perform all duties incumbent upon me as Chief of Police (or Assistant
Chief or Police Officer); that I will execute and return all processes issued by the Municipal Court, or by the City Clerk, and to the
best of my ability preserve the peace of the City and arrest and report to the Municipal Court all violations, so help me God."
(Code 1973, § 12-2)
Sec. 20-21. - Bond required for chief and assistant chief.
The chief of police may be required to give good and sufficient bond, to be approved by the city council, conditioned for the
due performance of his duties as such, in a sum conditioned for the faithful discharge of his duties and the proper application of
all funds coming into his hands as such officers.
(Code 1973, § 12-3)
Sec. 20-22. - Ocers required to wear badges.
The police officers shall be required to wear badges indicative of their office.
(Code 1973, § 12-4)
Sec. 20-23. - Duties.
The duties of the chief of police, assistant chief, and other police officers, as indicated, are as follows:
To enforce and carry into effect to the uttermost of their power the ordinances of the city, to obey and execute
all commands and orders of the city council, in relation to any matter or thing affecting the interest of the city.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
92/192
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
They shall also have such special police officers as may be designated by the city council to assist them when
necessary in the discharge of their duties.
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to attend all meetings of the council and preserve order.
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to arrest and bring before the municipal court or other
proper authority all violators, of the laws of the state, or the Charter or ordinances of the city which may come
to their knowledge, when such violations shall be within the city.
To arrest and carry before the proper officer for examination all offenders against the state laws committed in
their presence. To arrest and confine in the county jail any offender against the ordinances in the city or take
bond with good security. When such arrest and confinement is necessary to secure the appearance of such
offender before the municipal court, he may arrest without warrant.
To preserve order in the city, to take up all drunken, disorderly or riotous persons who are disturbing the
peace and quiet of the city, and to commit them to the county jail, there to remain until sufficient bond is given
and shall then bring said offender before the next session of the municipal court to be dealt with as evidence
produced shall warrant. In case of his inability to suppress such disorders, or to disperse riotous assemblages,
he shall have the power to call to his assistance a sufficient number of persons to aid him in so doing.
To call upon the mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro-tem, to ascertain if there are any commands to
execute, and he shall at the same time report all infractions of city ordinances within his knowledge, for the
information and action of the mayor. To guard the city from fire, and on the appearance of fire, to give a fire
alarm. He shall protect persons and property.
To keep sober and free from intoxication or the influence of liquor.
To make out a complete list of all business houses, professions, and occupations subject to licenses and to
return the same to the city clerk.
To make weekly settlements with the city clerk and to pay over to the clerk upon each settlement the amount
of money in his hands.
To perform such other duties as may be required of him by the city council.
(Code 1973, § 12-5)
Chapter 22 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. - Tax ordinances passed each year.
The city council shall pass, each year, such tax ordinances, not contrary to law, as it may deem proper.
(Code 1973, § 14-1)
Sec. 22-2. - All property taxable.
Each person owning or having control in his own right or as agent or otherwise of any real property in the city, or owning or
having control of any money, solvent notes or accounts, as the property of any citizen of the city, shall pay a tax upon the full value
thereof, at such a percentage as may be fixed by the city council in each year.
(Code 1973, § 14-2)
Sec. 22-3. - Return—Date.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
93/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Each person subject to taxation in the city, owning or having possession or control in his own right or for the use of any person
as parent, guardian, trustee, executor, administrator or agent, or in any other manner whatever, shall make to the assessors on or
before March 31 in each year a full, true and complete return of all property taxable by the city, including all trades, businesses,
occupations and professions in the city. Such property shall embrace all property owned or controlled by him on January 1 of the
same year, except such property as is required to be returned at some other time or in some other manner than to provided in
this section.
(Code 1973, § 14-3)
Sec. 22-4. - Same—Oath or armation.
The person making a tax return, either for himself or in any representative capacity, shall be required, on making the same, to
take the following oath or affirmation: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that the return which I have now made is a just, full and
complete return of all property, businesses, trades, professions and occupations, in my own right and as parent, guardian,
executor, administrator, agent or trustee, or in any other manner, whatever, subject to taxation under the Ordinances of the City of
Edison, which I owned, had possession of or controlled in my own right, or the right of any other person or company whosoever,
on the first day of January last past, and the value of the same is not more than I have affixed to the best of my knowledge and
belief, so help me God."
(Code 1973, § 14-4)
Sec. 22-5. - False or incomplete return prohibited; penalty.
Any person who shall knowingly make a false or incomplete city tax return shall, on conviction be punished as prescribed in
general penalty section 1-7.
(Code 1973, § 14-5)
Sec. 22-6. - Double tax assessment for failing to make return.
Any person failing to make his city tax return shall be liable for a double tax to be assessed by the assessors upon the basis of
the tax paid by such defaulter for the preceding year, or upon the best estimate the assessors are able to make of the taxable
property of the defaulter. The city clerk shall report to the assessors all defaulters.
(Code 1973, § 14-6)
Sec. 22-7. - Taxes paid to city clerk.
All city taxes shall be paid to the city clerk, and by him paid to the treasurer, at such time as shall be called for by the city
council in each year.
(Code 1973, § 14-7)
Sec. 22-8. - Tax digest.
Duty of clerk to maintain. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep a correct and proper digest of all taxable
property in the city.
Contents. The digest shall contain the description, valuation and class of property returned and the names of
person returning the same.
Deadline for renewal and completion. The digest is to be renewed and completed by September 1 in each year.
Examination by city council. Upon completion of the digest, the city clerk shall turn the same over to the city council,
whose duty it shall be to examine the same, and if found correct, to return the same to the clerk.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
94/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(g)
(Code 1973, § 14-8)
Secs. 22-9—22-34. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PROTECTION SPECIAL TAX DISTRICT
Sec. 22-35. - Created.
There is hereby created pursuant to article IX, section II, paragraph VI of the state constitution a special tax district which shall
be known as "City of Edison Fire Protection Tax District," hereinafter referred to as "the district."
(Ord. of 4-12-2010, § 1)
Sec. 22-36. - Boundaries.
The district boundaries shall be all the property situate, lying and being in the incorporated areas of the city.
(Ord. of 4-12-2010, § 2)
Sec. 22-37. - Imposition and collection of taxes.
The minimum fee for each active residential unit and commercial unit located in the district provided city water
services shall be $2.00 per month. Fees in excess of the minimum shall be based on a schedule for services
provided as adopted by the city council. Fees for subsequent years shall be set annually by the city council at its first
regular meeting of each fiscal year.
The owner of the active residential or commercial unit as determined from the published tax digest for the city or
water service recipient shall be billed for the fee to be collected. Said fee shall be collected for the entire tax year
against the listed owner or recipient of water services unless and council is provided with the name, address and
copy of the deed of conveyance. The fee shall be collected from the new owner or recipient of water services
commencing upon the first month following the conveyance, provided the information contained in this section is
received on or before the 20th of the month of the conveyance or on the first of the second month next that if
received after the 20th of the month of conveyance.
All active units shall be defined as all occupied single-family or multifamily dwelling units including mobile homes
and modular units receiving billable water services. Multifamily structures such as duplexes and apartment
buildings shall be billed as to each individual unit contained therein. All commercial units shall be defined as any
hotel, motel, restaurant, business, public or semi-public establishment of any kind receiving water services.
Said fee shall be due and payable by the 20th of each month. A late payment penalty and an assessment of interest
shall be imposed upon each account for which a payment is not made within the prescribed time limits.
The fees for collection of residential or commercial fire protection levied pursuant to the terms of this article, and all
late charges and interest accruing thereon are hereby deemed and constituted a tax and are hereby levied severally
against the owner and occupant of each residential unit, including all residential units located in mobile home
courts and/or trailer courts. The fees, late charges and interest prescribed in this section shall be determined and
treated in all respects as provided by law with respect to ad valorem and state taxes.
Uncollected fees, late charges and interest shall constitute a continuing lien:
Against the real property upon which each residential unit is located;
Upon the personal property composing a residential unit; and
Upon the personal property of the occupant of each residential unit, until paid.
Writs of fi. fas. may be issued by the city for fees which are past due and collection may be effected as provided by
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
95/192
law for ad valorem or other state taxes, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.
(Ord. of 4-12-2010, § 3)
Sec. 22-38. - Disposition of proceeds.
All taxes and fees imposed by this article shall be used and appropriated to pay for fire protection in the district. Said taxes
and fees shall be deposited in a special account set up by the city specifically for this purpose.
(Ord. of 4-12-2010, § 4)
Secs. 22-39—22-64. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESS LICENSE TAXES AND FEES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 22-65. - Engaging in business without paying license fee or tax prohibited; penalty.
It shall not be lawful for any person of whom a tax or license is required to commence or engage in the business, trade,
profession, occupation or pursuit that may be taxed, or license required, until registering, as required, paying the tax or license and
complying with the requirements imposed in this Code. Anyone offending shall be punished as prescribed in general penalty
section 1-7.
(Code 1973, § 14-9)
Sec. 22-66. - License to be signed by mayor; recordkeeping; transferable with city council's consent.
No license shall be valid until signed by the city clerk. The city clerk shall keep in a book a record of all licenses issued. No
license shall be issued for a period to extend beyond the next December 31. Each license is valid and good only to the person to
whom issued and shall not be transferred without the consent of the city council.
(Code 1973, § 14-26)
Secs. 22-67—22-90. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - INSURANCE COMPANIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees on insurance companies and agents, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq.
Sec. 22-91. - License fees levied on life insurers—Generally.
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each life insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $25.00. For
each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 22-92, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within
the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $25.00. For the purposes of this division, the term "insurer" means a
company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1).
(Ord. of 11-14-1983, § 1)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
96/192
State law reference— Authority for above fee, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.
Sec. 22-92. - Same—Insuring certain risks at additional business locations.
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this division, operated and maintained by a
business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in
connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of a life insurer for
life insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $10.00 per location each year.
(Ord. of 11-14-1983, § 2)
State law reference— Authority for above fee, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.
Sec. 22-93. - Life insurance agency license fees; independent life insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed.
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from
which a life insurance business is conducted, and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 22-91, in the
amount of $15.00 for each such location within the city.
(Ord. of 11-14-1983, § 3)
State law reference— Authority for above fee, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.
Sec. 22-94. - Gross premiums tax—Imposed on life insurers.
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and
sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar
year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1, except that such tax shall not apply to the gross direct premiums of an insurance
company which qualifies, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-5, for the reduction to one-half percent of the state tax imposed by O.C.G.A. §
33-8-4. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to annuity considerations. As used in this section, the term "gross direct
premiums" means the definition used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees
imposed by section 22-91.
(Ord. of 11-14-1983, § 4)
Sec. 22-95. - Same—Levied upon all other insurers.
There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance
designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums
received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. As used in this section, the term "gross direct premiums"
means the definition used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a).
(Ord. of 11-14-1983, § 5)
Sec. 22-96. - Due date for license fees.
The license fees imposed in sections 22-91, 22-92 and 22-93 shall be due and payable on the first day of 1984 and on the first
of each subsequent year.
(Ord. of 11-14-1983, § 6)
Secs. 22-97—22-120. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - OTHER LICENSE TAXES
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
97/192
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Business license taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq.
Sec. 22-121. - License and payment of fees required; penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or attempt to engage in any business specified in this article without first
having obtained from the city clerk a license and paid the fees as set forth in section 22-122; provided, however, that businesses
that are residents of the city shall have until March 1 of each year in which to pay the current year's license tax. The failure of a
person to pay the assessed license or occupational tax by March 31 of each year, will result in the assessment of a ten percent
penalty of the license or occupational tax.
(Ord. of 12-8-1980, ¶ 3; Ord. of 1-4-2010)
Sec. 22-122. - Fee schedule.
The fees to engage in businesses specified in this Code are as follows:
Business Amount
(in dollars)
General contractors 200.00
Ground-up construction:
Electricians and electrical contractors 100.00
Plumbers and plumbing contractors 100.00
HVAC technicians and HVAC contractors 100.00
Gas technicians or gastters 100.00
Other subcontractors and general repair 75.00
Peddlers 100.00
Carnivals/circus 1,000.00
With council approval three months prior to show date:
Taxicab and limousine operators 75.00
Scrap metal processors 75.00
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
98/192
Pawnbrokers 300.00
Firearms dealers 200.00
Sale of hand guns in an establishment TBD
Business other than rearm dealers 50.00
Bonding companies/personal appearance 300.00
Hotels and motels 250.00
Hypnotists 7,500.00
With council approval:
Fortunetellers 7,500.00
Burglar and re alarm installers 100.00
Junk dealers and ea markets 75.00
Billiard and pool rooms 150.00, plus $15.00 each table
Pool table in established business Other than a billiard room is $15.00 per table, plus
$15.00 based on number of employees
Malt beverages (o-premises consumption) 200.00
Malt beverages (on-premises consumption) 275.00
Wine 200.00
Liquor 2,900.00
All nonregulated businesses will be assessed an occupational tax as follows:
Professionals:
Lawyers 200.00
Physicians 200.00
Osteopaths 200.00
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
99/192
Chiropractors 200.00
Podiatrists 200.00
Dentists 200.00
Optometrists 200.00
Psychologists 200.00
Veterinarians 200.00
Landscape architects 200.00
Land surveyors 200.00
Public accountants 200.00
Embalmers 200.00
Funeral directors 200.00
Engineers 200.00
Architects 200.00
Professional counselors and therapists 200.00
Nonprofessionals:
Each qualied nonprofessional or nonregulated business doing business within the corporate limits of the city will
be assessed a base occupational tax in the amount of $60.00, plus $15.00 for each full time equivalent employee
(FTE). FTE will be computed taking into consideration the hours worked in the case of part-time workers and also
seasonal workers. The fee assessed will be based on the number of annual average FTEs for the prior year. Proof
of the number of employees shall be given by requested payroll reports. A ceiling of $500.00 is placed on all
businesses taxed on the employee rate.
(Ord. of 12-8-1980, ¶ 1; Ord. of 1-4-2010)
Sec. 22-123. - Compliance with city rules and regulations required.
All persons licensed to do business shall comply fully with all ordinances, rules, regulations, and requirements of the city made
in reference thereto. Upon failure to do so; and if their manner of conduct in connection with the operation of said occupation,
trade, profession, or business becomes a nuisance, unwholesome, offensive or unlawful, the mayor may revoke such license
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
100/192
without rebate.
(Ord. of 12-8-1980, ¶ 4)
Secs. 22-124—22-144. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) ---
State Law reference— Peddlers, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 22-145. - Business hours.
No peddler shall peddle or solicit door-to-door between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
Secs. 22-146—22-173. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT
Sec. 22-174. - Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any magazine, periodical, book or newspaper, or to solicit or sell subscriptions
thereto, within the city without having first obtained from the city a permit therefor, except that this requirement shall not be
imposed upon any person duly enrolled in a public or private school located in the county when such a person is engaged in a
school approved project, or a project sponsored by a recognized civic, charitable, or fraternal organization.
(Code 1973, § 11-1)
Sec. 22-175. - Application; investigation and recommendation by chief of police required.
Any person desiring to sell, or solicit subscription to, any magazine, periodical, book or newspaper, within the city shall apply to
the city clerk for a permit to do so. The city clerk shall thereupon file the application and refer it to the chief of police, who shall
investigate the applicant and the type of periodical, magazine, newspaper or book, and recommend to the city clerk whether the
permit should be granted or refused.
(Code 1973, § 11-2)
Sec. 22-176. - Council action.
The city clerk shall, within five days after the recommendation of the chief of police on the granting or refusing a permit
required in section 22-174 has been submitted, submit such recommendation to the council, which shall act thereon. The council
shall consider such recommendation, and all the facts pertaining thereto, and shall either grant the permit or refuse same.
(Code 1973, § 11-3)
Secs. 22-177—22-205. - Reserved.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
101/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
ARTICLE V. - POOL OR BILLIARD ROOMS
Sec. 22-206. - Conditions for issuance of license; fee.
A pool or billiard room may be licensed to do business in the city upon the payment of the annual specific business license as
provided for in this article; provided that this license shall be issued under and subject to the following conditions:
The licensee or operator shall not permit or allow any conduct that is in violation of any ordinance in said pool
or billiard room.
The licensee or operator shall not permit or allow any gambling in any form, whether the same be betting on
the games played therein, craps, poker, or any game of chance for money or other thing or things of value.
The licensee or operator shall not permit any person under the influence of intoxicating drink, beverage or
drug to remain in said place of business, but if and in the event any person under the influence of intoxicating
drink, beverage or drug shall come into said pool or billiard room the operator or person in charge thereof,
shall immediately evict said person or call the city police and have him evicted. The term "under the influence
of intoxicating drink, beverage or drug" means to any degree, the state courts having defined a person that has
taken one drink as being under the influence of said beverage to that extent.
No person shall be allowed or permitted to bring into said pool or billiard room any intoxicating drink of any
kind, or any beer or wine of any percent alcohol content.
No pool or billiard room shall be open for business between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday night
and 6:00 a.m. on Monday morning. The opening of said place of business between said hours shall be prima
facie evidence that said pool or billiard room is open for the conduct of business.
No person shall be permitted or allowed to violate any city ordinance or state law in said pool or billiard room.
(Ord. of 12-8-1980, ¶ 5)
Sec. 22-207. - Prima facie evidence of violation.
The fact that any city ordinance, condition stated in section 22-206 under which the license is granted, or state law is violated
in said pool room shall be prima facie evidence that the same was allowed by the operator or licensee and is in violation of the
conditions under which said license is granted. The pool room or billiard room license as issued under and subject to the
conditions stated in section 22-206, regulations and ordinances of the city or state law, is valid so long as none of the above are
violated, and said license is purchased and accepted by the licensee under said conditions.
(Ord. of 12-8-1980, ¶ 5)
Sec. 22-208. - Suspension and revocation.
In the event any of the conditions, regulations, or ordinances are violated in said pool room or billiard room, or any disorderly
conduct shall take place therein, it shall be the duty of the mayor to suspend said license and order the city police to close said
place of business until the next regular meeting of the city council, and at said meeting if the council shall find that any of the
conditions mentioned in section 22-206, regulations and ordinances of the city have been violated therein, said license shall be
revoked instanter, and none of the license money refunded to said licensee or operator.
(Ord. of 12-8-1980, ¶ 5)
Sec. 22-209. - Acceptance of conditions and terms; copies of article; display of license.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
102/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
The purchase of any license to operate a pool room or billiard room shall be conclusive evidence that the purchaser thereof
accepts and purchases the license under the terms and conditions heretofore set forth in this article, and it shall be the duty of the
city clerk to furnish every person buying such license with a copy of this article and the purchaser shall keep same posted in a
conspicuous place in said pool or billiard room at all times.
(Ord. of 12-8-1980, ¶ 5)
Chapter 24 - MUNICIPAL COURT
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.
Sec. 24-1. - Time of holding court; strict rules of criminal procedure used; accusations; appearance.
It shall be the duty of the judge, or in his absence the judge pro-tem, to hold court whenever it becomes necessary for the trial
and punishment of violators of city ordinances. Strict rules of criminal procedure as enforced in the courts of law shall not be
necessary in the municipal court. Defendants shall be tried upon written or printed accusations. Every defendant shall have the
right of appearing and pleading by counsel or by himself, or by both.
(Code 1973, § 6-1; Ord. of 12-13-1982(1))
Sec. 24-2. - Indigent defense services.
Application required; contents. Each person lacking the financial ability to provide, for themselves, representation in
his defense in criminal proceedings in the municipal court, and desiring that the city provide such services to him,
shall submit an application to the city requesting indigent defense representation and setting forth the specifics
supporting their need for such indigent representation.
Public defender. The application shall be submitted to the public defender upon first appearance on a form
approved by the city council.
Application fee—Required. Each applicant for indigent defense service shall pay an application fee in an amount as
established from time to time by the city to the public defender of municipal court. Such fee must be paid either at
the time the application is submitted or at the time the representation is provided.
Same—Waiver. The fee required by subsection (c) of this section may be waived only upon order of the presiding
judge scheduled to hear the case in which the applicant is seeking a waiver of the application fee. The judge may
order a waiver of the fee only upon a finding by the court that the defendant is unable to pay the fee or that paying
the fee would cause hardship to the defendant.
(Ord. of 3-28-2005(2), §§ 1—3)
State law reference— Authority for above fee, O.C.G.A. § 15-21A-6(e).
Sec. 24-3. - Contents, issuance and service—Summons.
It shall be the duty of the chief of police, in all cases, when a complaint is made or information given of any violation of the
laws or ordinances of the city, whether the party be confined or not, to issue a summons directed to the accused, requiring said
offender to appear before the municipal court to answer said charge, which summons shall contain the offense and time and place
of trial, bear teste in the name of the judge, be signed officially by the chief of police and directed to any public officer of the city to
be executed, which officer shall execute the same by serving a copy upon the accused, or leaving it at his place of residence.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
103/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(Code 1973, § 6-3; Ord. of 12-13-1982(1))
Sec. 24-4. - Same—Witness subpoena.
Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any fact, the chief of police
shall issue a subpoena, as directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, which shall bear
teste in the name of the judge and be served as other summons by any member of the city police force.
(Code 1973, § 6-5; Ord. of 12-13-1982(1))
Sec. 24-5. - Penalty for contempt.
Any person who, during the sitting of the municipal court, shall be guilty of a contempt of court or refuse to abide by any
sentence or order of said court, shall be fined in the sum not exceeding $25.00 and costs, or confinement in the county jail not
exceeding 24 hours for each offense.
(Code 1973, § 6-9)
Sec. 24-6. - Execution for nes.
The chief of police shall issue an execution instanter when any fine is imposed by the municipal court, to be levied upon the
goods, chattels, lands and tenements of the person so fined, if the sum is not immediately paid, which execution shall bear teste in
the name of the mayor and be signed officially by the chief of police and be directed to the chief of police, to all and singular the
sheriffs and their deputies of this state.
(Code 1973, § 6-10)
Sec. 24-7. - Duties of municipal court clerk.
The duties of the municipal court clerk are as follows:
To keep a docket wherein shall be entered the names of all persons tried and fined by the municipal court, the
nature of the offense, date of trial, amount of the fine, and return of the police officer thereon, the same to be
laid before the city council at each regular meeting.
To attend all sessions of the municipal court, and any other business of the municipal court as required.
To keep a book of minutes and a docket of the municipal court.
(Code 1973, § 2-29(3), (5), (9)f.)
Chapter 26 - NUISANCES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Nuisance generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; nuisance abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - MISCELLANEOUS NUISANCES
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
104/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(e)
Sec. 26-19. - Prohibited odors.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or individual in control of any property within the boundaries of the city to:
Allow the accumulation of animal body wastes;
Boil offal, bone, fat, tallow;
Manufacture glue, varnish or oil;
Make lamp black, turpentine or tar;
Distill alcoholic spirits;
Render or dry out dead animals; or
Conduct any other activity, business or trade not specifically enumerated in this Code whereby noisome
stenches and odors arise, or noxious gases are generated or circulated within the city.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Sec. 26-20. - Obstructions to cross visibility.
In order to promote and conserve the public health and safety and pursuant to the police powers of the city and the
power to prevent and abate public nuisances as conferred upon the city by the laws of the state, it is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance for a person owning and/or having the legal control of any land within the
corporate limits of the city to maintain or permit upon any such land any fence, sign, billboard, shrubbery, bush,
tree, mailbox or other object, or any combination thereof which obstructs the view of motorists using any street or
approach to any street intersection so as to constitute a traffic hazard or a condition dangerous to the public safety.
The restrictions set forth in this section shall apply to both of the following triangles of land:
The triangle bounded by the curb edged (or edges of pavement where there is no curb), measured along the
curb edge (or edge of the pavement where there is no curb) 20 feet from the midpoint of the radius of the curb
edge (or edge of pavement where there is no curb) in each direction and the diagonal line connecting the
further ends of such 20-foot lengths; and
The triangle bounded by the right-of-way lines measured 15 feet from the point of their intersection in each
direction and the diagonal line connecting the further ends of such 15-foot lengths.
Within said triangles, and except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, it shall be unlawful to install, set out or
maintain, or allow the installation, setting out, or maintenance of, any sign, hedge, shrubbery, tree, natural growth,
earthen berm, or other object of any kind which obstructs cross-visibility at a level between 30 inches and 72 inches
above the level or the center of the adjacent intersection which obstructs the view of motorist using any street or
approach to any street intersection so as to constitute a traffic hazard or a condition dangerous to the public safety.
The provision of subsections (c) of this section shall not apply to:
Permanent buildings and permanent additions thereto.
Existing natural grades which, by reason of natural topography, rise 30 or more inches above the level of the
center of the adjacent intersection.
Trees having limbs and foliage trimmed in such manner that no limbs or foliage extends into the area between
30 inches and 72 inches above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection.
Fire hydrants, public utility poles, street markers, government signs, and traffic control devices.
Where compliance with this section described triangles or at the heights described alone is insufficient to prevent a
dangerous condition, the city public works superintendent may designate further measure which must be taken by
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
105/192
(f)
(g)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
the owner or other responsible person to eliminate such dangerous condition. Such measures shall be designed to
provide an adequate sight and stopping distance for person approaching the intersection at prevailing speeds and
may include the removal of obstruction at different heights or in area outside the triangles established in subsection
(b) of this section.
The administration of this section shall be under the direction of the city public works superintendent who shall
investigate violations, issue such notices and orders as are required in this article, and perform such other duties as
may be necessary to the enforcement thereof.
Any obstruction to cross visibility maintained in violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance
inconsistent with and detrimental to the public safety and shall be abated in accordance with the following
procedure:
The city public works superintendent shall cause to be served by certified mail a written notice and order of
abatement upon the owner, tenant and/or person having legal control of the premises upon which such
obstruction exists.
Such obstruction shall be removed within ten days from the date of receipt of such notice and order.
Any person receiving such notice and order may, within ten days from receipt thereof, request, in writing, a
hearing before the municipal court judge hearing housing code violations. The city traffic engineer shall notify
the person upon whom the notice and order have been served of the time and place of such hearing. If, after
such hearing, the municipal court judge finds that the obstruction in question does in fact constitute a public
nuisance, the judge shall order that such nuisance be abated within ten days from the date of such order.
Upon failure by any person to comply with such order of the judge, the traffic engineer shall cause the removal
of such obstruction by city forces and/or an independent contractor. The cost of such removal shall be billed to
the owner and/or person having legal control of the land. If unpaid for more than 30 days, such cost shall
become a lien against the property from which such obstruction is removed. The city clerk shall have authority
to file the lien on the public records of the county and to cancel the lien when paid.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Secs. 26-21—26-43. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROHIBITION AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES
Sec. 26-44. - Nuisances declared.
The following conditions may be declared to be a nuisance when any one of them endangers the health, welfare or good order
of the community:
Stagnant water on premises;
Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation, or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises,
which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city;
The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the
city;
The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewerage system which would be damaging
thereto;
Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl;
Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit;
Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limiting the
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
106/192
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
foregoing, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music
and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas;
Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such manner as to
reasonable suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities
and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent such activities;
Any walls, trees, and buildings that may endanger persons or property;
Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed;
All rubbish, litter, or debris, including, but not limited to, combustible and noncombustible waste materials,
garbage, wood, coal, coke, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and the residue from burning such items that may endanger the
health, welfare, good order, or beauty of the community;
It shall be unlawful to allow shrubbery or tree limbs on private property to protrude or hang so as to obstruct
the safe passage of pedestrians or motor vehicles. This subsection shall not apply to the removal of fallen
trees, dead trees, shrubbery, bushes, etc., on private property where such do not protrude into the
pedestrian/motor vehicle passageway;
Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Sec. 26-45. - Maintaining nuisance prohibited.
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent, or tenant to maintain a nuisance. Each day a nuisance is
constituted shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Sec. 26-46. - Complaints.
Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of a nuisance to the police department, which shall
investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the
investigation. The municipal court, after five days' notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon, and
upon finding that a nuisance does exist shall issue an order to the owner, an agent in control of, or tenant in
possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many
hours or days as the judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect
on the public.
Animal control officers, building and license inspectors, health inspectors, public works inspectors, the fire
department officer, or other designees of the city may also receive complaints, investigate the same and place on
the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Sec. 26-47. - Abatement—Generally.
In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner,
agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the
judge, that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the chief or police directing the nuisance
to be abated. The chief of police, in such case, shall keep a record of the expenses and cost of abating such
nuisance, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues.
Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances under this chapter.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
107/192
(1)
(2)
Sec. 26-48. - Same—Authority of mayor.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or
abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public
or a portion thereof is in imminent danger.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Secs. 26-49—26-69. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - WEEDS, DEBRIS AND INOPERABLE OR ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 26-70. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Building means any structure that encloses a space used for sheltering any occupancy.
Debris, for the purpose of this article, includes the residue from the burning of wood, coal, or other combustible material, as
well as paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, rubber, leather, fallen, broken or destroyed trees or tree limbs or other material or
objects not a part of the land and constituting a health or safety hazard.
Inoperable motor vehicles means any motor vehicles as defined in this section which is in a state of disrepair, wrecked,
dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. The term "inoperable motor vehicles" includes a motor vehicle that is incapable
of being moved under its own power.
Lot, for the purpose of this article, means one or any one or more of several contiguous parcels of land making up a block,
measured and set apart for use or occupancy.
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designated to travel along the ground and includes, but is not be
limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers.
Weeds.
The term "weeds" means all objectionable growth, including weeds and grasses which serve as a breeding
place for mosquitoes and other unhealthy or undesirable insects, or as a refuge for snakes, rats or other
rodents, or that creates a fire or traffic hazard or provide a hiding place for persons.
The term "weeds" does not include flowers, shrubbery, trees and other growth used as a part of landscaping.
Wooded areas means those portions of lots consisting of a dense growth of trees, which exceed three inches in diameter.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Secs. 26-71—26-98. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - WEEDS AND DEBRIS
Subdivision I. - In General
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
108/192
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Sec. 26-99. - Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot of land or premises in the city, or the owner of any lot of land or
premises in the city, or any agent or representative of such owners or occupant, to permit or maintain on such lot
the growth thereon of objectionable weeds, the accumulation of debris, which distracts from the community
aesthetics, and endangers the public health, safety or welfare.
The following conditions shall constitute a nuisance as it relates to the growth of objectionable weeds:
Any lot on which a residential structure is built shall be deemed a nuisance if the growth of weeds as defined in
this article is 12 inches or more in height.
Any vacant lot located within a residential district or area shall be deemed a nuisance if the growth of weeds as
defined in this article exceeds 18 inches in height.
For the purpose of this section, wooded areas as defined in this article shall be exempt from the requirements of this
section.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Sec. 26-100. - Notice procedure.
When any objectionable condition as defined in this section is being permitted or maintained on any lot of land or
premises in the city in violation of section 26-99, the building inspector or chief of police, as applicable, or the
council's designee (the "official") shall notify in writing the occupant of such lot, or the owner thereof or their agents
or representatives, that the conditions existing upon their property constitute a nuisance, and setting forth the
actions to be taken to eliminate the objectionable conditions within 15 days, or within 30 days if the property is
zoned industrial or exceeds two acres in size. Failure of the owner or occupant to eliminate the conditions
constituting a nuisance within the allotted time period shall constitute an offense of this Code. An official may grant
a written extension upon a showing of reasonable cause, not to exceed an additional 15 days. Upon the expiration
of 15 days plus any extension, if any, the official shall issue a summons so changing the party notified and requiring
such party to appear in the municipal court for a hearing at a given time, place and date.
Notices shall be in writing and delivered in person or by certified mail to the occupant and/or owner or its agents or
representatives. If the official, following due diligence, is unable to serve such notice, the official shall cause such
notice to be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the legal organ or general distribution of the court,
prior to taking any steps to abate said nuisance and prior to the running of the 15-day period for abatement of the
nuisance.
Any department, agency or individual charged with the enforcement of these regulations shall establish procedures
for the tracking, monitoring and the enforcement thereof consistent with these regulations.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Secs. 26-101—26-128. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Abatement
Sec. 26-129. - Authority.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
109/192
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
In all cases where the owner, occupant or agent of a lot cannot be found, or if found and notified, neglects or refuses to abate
said nuisance within the time specified, it shall be lawful for the city to abate the same and remove the objectionable conditions
from the property. In such cases, the official shall notify the public works director who shall cause the nuisance to be abated and
the objectionable conditions to be removed from the property and shall assess the costs associated with said removal and charge
all costs thereof to the owner or representative. Said costs may constitute a lien against the property and be collected pursuant to
this Code; provided, however, that this shall not preclude other remedies available to the official for abating said nuisance or the
city's use of other legal means of collecting the costs therefor.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Sec. 26-130. - Procedure.
Complaint; contents; fine. When it becomes necessary to summons an owner or occupant of lands subject to the
provisions of this section, said summons shall be in the form of a written complaint setting forth, particularly, the
nature and location of the nuisance and the identity of the person complained against. If the court determined that
the conditions do in fact constitute a nuisance, the court shall issue an order specifying the time within which such
nuisance must be abated. In addition, the court may impose a fine not to exceed $500.00 for the offense of failure
to abate the nuisance within the period provided for in the section 26-100(a) if the court determines that the owner
or occupant unreasonably failed to abate the nuisance during that time period or prior to the court hearing.
Failure to comply; penalties. The failure of the owner or occupant to comply with the court's order to abate the
nuisance shall constitute an offense and shall subject the person to prosecution and penalties as provided in this
Code, including:
Community service to be performed with any private, nonprofit community service organization or any public
agency willing to participate and approved by municipal court. Violators shall not be used for any purpose
resulting in private gain to any person, except in accordance with state law. The role of the city in the
supervision of violators performing community service shall be a governmental function.
Any or all of these penalties within the discretion of the judge.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Secs. 26-131—26-158. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - ABANDONED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES
Subdivision I. - In General
Sec. 26-159. - Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to abandon any vehicle of any type within the city, nor shall any vehicle be left at any place within the city
for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Sec. 26-160. - Unlawful to leave wrecked, nonoperating vehicle on street.
It shall be unlawful to leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street, lane or highway
within the city.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
110/192
Sec. 26-161. - Keeping or storing nonoperating vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within the city whether as owner, tenant, occupant,
lessee or agent thereof, to permit or allow any partially dismantled nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle an any kind
or character to remain on the property within the city longer than 15 days unless the vehicle is stored in an enclosed building or
located on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place or manner, when necessary to the operation of the
business enterprise.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Secs. 26-162—26-190. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Removal
Sec. 26-191. - Notice.
When any vehicle is thus abandoned, stored, parked or left on any vacant lot, property or premises within the city for a period
of more than 15 days, notice shall be served personally by the police department, or other authorized official designated by the
mayor, to the owner or person in charge of the property or premises if occupied, or if unoccupied by certified U.S. mail to the
owner or person in charge of the property or premises, with an additional notice posted on the vehicle to remove, store or dispose
of the vehicle within ten days from the date of the notice. The notice shall set forth the fact that the vehicle is abandoned, stored or
parked in violation of this division and that upon failure to remove, properly store, house or otherwise dispose of such vehicle, that
it will be removed, sold or disposed of by the city purchasing agent and that any proceeds arising from the sale thereof will be
applied first to payment of expenses incurred in connection with the removal and sale of the vehicles and any remaining balance
paid to the owner thereof.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Sec. 26-192. - Authority.
Upon violation of any provision of this division, the police department or other appropriate official designated by the mayor
shall be authorized to have any vehicle thus abandoned on the streets or lanes of the city removed, impounded and stored
immediately pending the sale or other disposition thereof as provided in this article.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Sec. 26-193. - Advertisement; sale of impounded vehicle.
Upon failure of the owner to claim the vehicle within 30 days after it has been impounded by the police department or other
authorized official, it shall be advertised and sold by the city clerk. The advertisement shall be published on three consecutive
weeks in the official newspaper of the city wherein all legal advertisements are published and shall describe and identify the
vehicle to be sold, the fact that it has been impounded by the police department as an abandoned vehicle and will be sold at the
place where stored to the highest bidder for cash on a date certain ten days after the publication of the last notice unless the
vehicle shall have been claimed by the owner and all costs incurred in connection with the removal, storage and advertisement
thereof are paid prior thereto.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Sec. 26-194. - Posting notice on removed vehicle; redemption by owner.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
111/192
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Any vehicle removed from the street or lanes of the city pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be similarly posted
with the notice as provided in this division and a copy thereof sent by certified mail to the owner of the vehicle if known or capable
of ascertainment. Any owner claiming a vehicle removed and stored prior to the disposition thereof by the city purchasing agent
shall present proof of ownership and pay all charges and costs incurred in connection with removal and storage thereof before the
vehicle shall be returned to the owner.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 28-1. - Disobeying police ocer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer of the
city.
(Code 1973, § 10-5)
Sec. 28-2. - Curfew for underage persons.
For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply:
Public place means:
Any street, highway, alley, or right-of-way, to include sidewalks, any park, playground, mall, or other place or
building open to the public;
Any cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse;
Any privately or publicly owned place of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation including
parking lots, and other areas adjacent thereto; and
Any vacant lot or land.
It shall be unlawful for any minor between four years of age and 18 years of age to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in or
upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public
buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, or any place unsupervised by an adult 21 years of age or
older having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on any school
day; provided, however, that the provision of this section shall not apply in the following incidents:
When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having
the lawful care and custody of the minor;
When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years
of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor;
When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places
referenced in this subsection during the prescribed period of time;
When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel with interstate and intrastate
travel through the city being excepted in all cases from this section;
When the minor is enrolled in a valid home study program as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690;
When the minor has completed all course study requirements for high school graduation;
When the minor is married in accordance with applicable law;
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
112/192
(8)
(9)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
(g)
(h)
(i)
When the minor has written proof from school authorities that he is excused from school attendance at that
particular time; or
When the minor is participating in an approved school or study activity, which requires the minor to be off
school property.
No parent or legal guardian of a minor between four years of age and 18 years of age shall negligently allow a minor
to violate subsection (b) of this section.
Upon the conviction of negligently allowing a minor to violate subsection (b) of this section, a person shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and be punished in accordance with the city Charter. Each citation of this section shall constitute
a separate offense. It shall be an affirmative defense if the parent or legal guardian has initiated the jurisdiction of
the juvenile court against the minor prior to the time that the minor was found in violation of subsection (b) of this
section. Any minor who violates subsection (b) of this section is subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court.
A police officer shall transport any minor found in violation of subsection (b) of this section to a designated school
district facility. A minor transported to the school district facility will be released to the custody of the school officials
or to the custody of his parent or legal guardian.
If a minor is suspended or expelled from school, that minor's parent or legal guardian, for the duration of the
suspension or expulsion, shall:
Personally supervise the minor or arrange for a responsible adult 21 years of age or older to supervise the
minor required to be in attendance at school had he not been expelled or suspended; and
Prohibit the minor from being in any public place at the times the minor would have been required to be in
attendance at school had he not been suspended or expelled unless:
The minor is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian or responsible adult, 21 years of age or older,
selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor; or
The minor is employed pursuant to an age or schooling certificate during the actual working hours or
traveling directly to or from the job site.
Upon conviction of a violation of subsection (b) of this section, a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Any minor who violates subsection (b) of this section is subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court.
It shall be an affirmative defense if the parent or legal guardian has initiated the jurisdiction of the juvenile court
against the minor prior to the time that he violated subsection (b) of this section.
(Ord. of 12-9-2002, §§ 1—9)
Secs. 28-3—28-22. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS
Sec. 28-23. - Billposting without permission or on utility poles.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to put any bill or placard upon any wall, fence, building, post or other property of another
without permission of the owner. It shall be unlawful for any person to put any bill or placard on any telephone pole or electric
light pole in the city.
(Code 1973, § 10-11)
Secs. 28-24—28-49. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
113/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Sec. 28-50. - Discharging rearms; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot firearms in the city. This section does not apply to:
Persons exercising their legal right of self-defense or defense or others.
Members or the Armed Forces of the United States or the National Guard while engaged in official duties as
such.
Law enforcement officers engaged in official duties as such.
Persons authorized by the council.
(Code 1973, § 10-9)
State law reference— Local firearms ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-173.
Sec. 28-51. - Fireworks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to set off, light, explode, or shoot any firecracker, Roman candle, sparkler, or pyrotechnic of
any type whatsoever, within the city except upon written permission of the council which may permit their use as public
entertainment by licensed bonded festival operators.
(Code 1973, § 10-7)
State law reference— Fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.
Sec. 28-52. - Explosives.
Explosives may be used in the city for construction and demolition purposes only by qualified personnel and then only upon
written consent of the council.
(Code 1973, § 10-8)
State law reference— Blasting, O.C.G.A. § 25-8-1 et seq.
Sec. 28-53. - Slings.
No person shall possess or use any Alabama or rubber sling.
(Code 1973, § 10-2(25))
Sec. 28-54. - Ball playing in streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball by throwing, tossing or catching the same for amusement of pastime, or
otherwise, on the streets of the city.
(Code 1973, § 10-10)
Secs. 28-55—28-81. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER
Sec. 28-82. - Disorderly conduct.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
114/192
(a)
(b)
(1)
No person shall engage in any disorderly conduct in the city.
(Code 1973, § 10-2(3))
State law reference— Local disorderly conduct ordinances authorized, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39.
Sec. 28-83. - Disorderly meetings or assemblages.
No person shall conduct or engage or participate in any disorderly meetings or assemblages.
(Code 1973, § 10-2(15))
State law reference— Unlawful assembly, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-33.
Sec. 28-84. - Keeping disorderly houses.
Any person who shall permit parties of disorderly character or acting in any disorderly manner to assemble upon his premises,
either owned or occupied by him, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Code 1973, § 10-2(37))
State law reference— Maintaining a disorderly house, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44.
Sec. 28-85. - Public intoxication.
A person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private
residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by
boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Code 1973, § 10-2(21))
State law reference— Public intoxication, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41.
Sec. 28-86. - Disturbing the peace.
No person shall engage in any conduct that manifestly tends to the disturbance of the public peace or the annoyance of the
citizens.
(Code 1973, § 10-2(31))
Sec. 28-87. - Unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise.
General prohibition. The creating of any unreasonable loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the limits of
the city is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any
individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare is prohibited. In addition, at any time between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday and 9:00 a.m.
Saturday and Sunday, it shall be deemed a violation of this section if any noise regulated or prohibited under the
provisions of this section is readily audible in another home, residence, apartment or building in which the usual
openings such as windows and doors are closed. The person causing the noise, or the owner, lessee or other person
in control of the property from which the noise is emanating shall be deemed to be in violation of this section.
Certain acts declared offensive. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive,
namely:
Horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle, while
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
115/192
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
not in motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if in
motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any such signal device for any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound or the sounding of such device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time;
Musical instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or
with such volume, as to annoy or disturb the quiet comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or in
any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity, except this section shall not apply
to schools of music between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
Voices. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the
vicinity. The provisions of this section shall apply to voices or other noise originating within a building or
residence and to noise produced by animals such as dogs, cats or others, whether housed in a building or an
open enclosure, and if the noise continues steadily or intermittently during a period in excess of ten minutes in
anyone day or night. In the case of animals, the owner or person in immediate control of the property on
which the animal is housed shall be deemed responsible. In the case of noise emanating from a residence or
apartment, the owner, lessee, renter or other person deemed to be in immediate control of the home,
apartment or building shall be deemed responsible. It shall be deemed a violation if the noise, caused by
persons or animals is readily audible in any nearby home, apartment, building or other structure when its
natural opening such as doors and windows are closed;
Noisy vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner
as to create loud and unnecessary granting, grinding, or rattling, or other noise;
Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the
time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authority;
Exhausts. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine, except though a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;
Construction work. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any
residential district or section, or the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section,
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in the cases of urgent necessity
and then only with a permit from the city engineer, building inspector, chief of police or designee of the
council, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 60 days while the emergency continues. If the
city engineer, building inspector, or chief of police or designee of the council, or the director of inspections and
fees should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest,
the city engineer or the director of inspections and fees may grant permission for such work to be done within
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for work is awarded
or during the progress of the work;
Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, church or court while they are in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof;
Loudspeakers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or
standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes; and
Garbage dumpsters. The loading, unloading, opening, closing, lifting or otherwise handling of dumpsters or
other garbage containers between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. when the sound therefrom disturbs
the quiet comfort or repose of persons on any house, apartment, hotel or other type of property used for
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
116/192
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(d)
(e)
human habitation.
Exceptions. None of the foregoing terms or prohibitions shall apply to or be enforced against:
Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon necessary public business;
Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on behalf of the city, county, state, during the
night season, when the public welfare and convenience render it impossible to perform such work during the
day; nor shall such prohibitions apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and
circumstances, or when there is urgent necessity therefor; and
The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial
in character.
Parades, celebrations permitted by clerk. The prohibitions shall not be applicable to any parade, celebration, or
performance for which a written permit has been obtained prior thereto from the city clerk.
Unlawful to use loudspeakers, amplifiers, and other mechanical/electrical devices. It shall be unlawful to use,
maintain or operate loudspeakers, sound trucks, amplifiers or other mechanical or electrical device for increasing
the volume of sound, upon the street, sidewalks, parks or other public places of the city; provided that nothing in
this section shall apply to the United States of America, the state, the county, the city, or to public agencies.
(Ord. of 11-14-2005)
Sec. 28-88. - Fighting.
No person shall engage in any fighting in the city.
(Code 1973, § 10-2(1))
State law reference— Affrays, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-32.
Secs. 28-89—28-119. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS
Sec. 28-120. - Public drinking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink spirituous or malt beverages, or intoxicating liquors upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, or public property within the city. This section shall not apply to conduct prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253 or prohibit
conduct exempted from such section.
(Code 1973, § 10-12)
Secs. 28-121—28-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC INDECENCY
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Res. of Dec. 19, 2011, § 1, set out provisions intended for use as ch. 5, §§ 1x.10—1x.12. For purposes of
classification, and at the city's direction, these provisions have been included as art. VI, §§ 28-131—28-133.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
117/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Sec. 28-131. - Denitions and prohibitions.
A person commits the offense of public indecency when he or she performs any of the following acts in a place where a person
should reasonably expect to be in view of the public:
An actual or simulated act of sexual intercourse or masturbation;
Exposure of the genitals;
A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity;
A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person;
A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the sexual organs of any person, including oneself;
Urination or defecation; or
Appears wearing pants or skirts more than three inches below the top of the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing
the skin or undergarments.
(Res. of 12-19-2011, § 1)
Sec. 28-132. - Enforcement.
The City of Edison Police Department shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The mayor and council may
also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement.
Any violation of this article may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the recorder's court or by
any other legal means as set forth in this Code.
A violation of this article shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.
A fine of not less than $25.00 on the first offense and not more than $200.00 for each subsequent offense may be
imposed. In addition to or in lieu of a fine, the court may order such person to participate in up to 40 hours of court
approved community service activities.
(Res. of 12-19-2011, § 1)
Sec. 28-133. - Defenses.
It is a defense under this article if it is determined, after a hearing or trial, that the person was exercising rights protected by
the federal or state constitution. Any defense under this article must be asserted prior to any hearing or trial in the matter.
(Res. of 12-19-2011, § 1)
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; litter control, O.C.G.A. §
16-7-42 et seq.; unlawful dumping, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
118/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; litter control, O.C.G.A. §
16-7-42 et seq.; unlawful dumping, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51 et seq.
Sec. 30-19. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Agent means any person who receives the rent in whole or in part from another party for that person's use of any premises.
Commercial wastes means all water products from manufacturing or commercial establishments, cinders, and ashes from
commercial boilers, cardboard and wooden boxes, crates and barrels.
Garbage means domestic wastes composed of meat, vegetable and fruit scraps, cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, rags, ashes
and other such waste matter normally to be disposed of from residences, churches, schools, small business establishments and
similar places.
Occupant means any person living or doing business on any premises, or any premises where construction of any kind is in
progress and where employees or workmen are engaged in their regular employment. The term "occupant" includes the
contractor, foreman or other person in charge over such workmen. The term "occupant" also includes the person in charge of any
market or stall in any market.
Premises means land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, or parts thereof, upon or in which refuse is stored.
Trash includes yard wastes, such as, weeds, grass and hedge trimmings, leaves, brush, tree limbs and similar items.
(Code 1973, § 8-1)
Sec. 30-20. - Place for disposal.
Every person who disposes of any garbage, trash or commercial wastes, whether required to do so by this article or otherwise,
shall make such disposal at a place designated by the city.
(Code 1973, § 8-2)
Sec. 30-21. - Garbage container standards.
All containers used for the temporary storage of garbage by occupants shall:
Be of metal or plastic;
Be of less than 41-gallon capacity;
Have adequate handles for the handling of the lid as well as container; and
Be used only so long as it is maintained in a watertight condition in its usual location and orientation.
(Code 1973, § 8-3)
Sec. 30-22. - Containers meeting proper standards required.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
119/192
(1)
(2)
No garbage shall be stored or placed outside for pickup by collectors except in containers meeting the standards established
in section 30-21.
(Code 1973, § 8-4)
Sec. 30-23. - Disturbing container contents prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to pick from or disturb the contents of any garbage container or vessel or other containers
provided for in this article.
(Code 1973, § 8-5)
Sec. 30-24. - Containers to be covered.
Garbage containers shall be tightly covered at all times except when momentarily opened to receive the garbage or to have
the contents therefrom removed.
(Code 1973, § 8-6)
Sec. 30-25. - Removing container cover prohibited except when done by authorized person.
When a garbage container is placed outside of any premises, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for any person
engaged in the removal of garbage or for any other person to remove the cover from such garbage container except for the
purpose of emptying its contents into a duly authorized garbage collector. It shall also be a violation of this Code to throw such
garbage container on the street or sidewalk, and all persons engaged in the removal of garbage shall after emptying said container
replace said cover tightly on said container.
(Code 1973, § 8-7)
Sec. 30-26. - Littering streets or lots with carcasses, vegetables, etc., prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or allow to remain on any street, alley, or on the lot of another any
discarded flesh or vegetable, fruit or dead carcass or other offensive matter calculated to annoy the citizens of the neighborhood,
or endanger their health.
(Code 1973, § 8-10)
Chapter 32 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 32-1. - Duties and responsibilities of mayor.
The mayor, or a person designated by the mayor, shall:
Supervise the streets, roads, alleys, lanes and highways of the city;
Keep the streets, roads, alleys, lanes and highways in good repair;
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
120/192
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
Supervise all street work and direct the same;
Have control of and provide for shade trees, tree boxes, and bridges; and
Have cognizance of all matters related thereto.
(Code 1973, § 13-2)
Sec. 32-2. - Throwing rubbish, trash, etc., on streets or sidewalks prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or cause to be thrown in or upon any of the streets, sidewalks, or public property,
or upon any private property, without the consent of the owner, any rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, trash, garbage, or
litter of any kind or description
(Code 1973, § 13-7; Ord. of 8-12-1986)
State law reference— Litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; unlawful dumping, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51 et seq.
Sec. 32-3. - Building materials.
Permitted on thoroughfares when necessary; night lighting. It shall be unlawful for any mechanic or builder, in the
exercise of his trade in the city, to place his lumber or material in such a position as to obstruct the streets,
sidewalks or public squares with such material, except when it becomes necessary for building purposes, and then
only so much as is absolutely required at such place. During the time the streets, sidewalks, or public squares are
obstructed, the owners or builders shall cause a lamp or lantern, with good light, from dark until daylight to be hung
on both sides of such obstruction.
Removal as soon as practicable. All mechanics or builders who may place any lumber or other building material on
the streets, sidewalks or public squares, shall remove the same, with all rubbish or trash which may accumulate in
consequence thereof, as soon as practicable, and in no case shall they be allowed to leave such material or rubbish
thereon for longer than 48 hours after the completion of the work upon which they may be engaged.
Liability of owner. Any owner of property, where mechanics or builders are engaged at work, who shall allow such
lumber, material or rubbish as is prohibited in subsections (a) and (b) of this section to remain upon the street,
sidewalk or public square, shall be punished in the same manner as the mechanic himself.
(Code 1973, §§ 13-8—13-10)
Sec. 32-4. - Removing sand, gravel, etc., from public roadways prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or scrape up or carry away sand, gravel, dirt, rock or earth from any public way in the
city.
(Code 1973, § 13-13)
Sec. 32-5. - Driveway, curb cut installation.
Permit required; fee. No curb cuts shall be made, and no driveway culverts shall be installed, until a permit in
writing is obtained from the city council and payment is made to the city treasurer of monies in the amount
estimated by the council as being necessary to finance the costs of repairs to the streets, curbs, drainageways, or
sidewalks.
City clerk's duty. It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk, upon the issuance of the permit to install said
driveways or curb cuts, to issue a work order to appropriate city personnel for the attendant repairs to city property.
(Code 1973, § 13-14)
Sec. 32-6. - Obstructing drains prohibited.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
121/192
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any trash or other thing whatever into, or obstruct in any way whatever, any ditch,
gutter or drain, or in any way impede or prevent the free flow of water through such drain, ditch or gutter.
(Code 1973, § 9-3)
Sec. 32-7. - Street numbering system.
Owner responsible for costs. The numbering of stores, residences and buildings shall be done at the cost and
expense of the owners.
City council to supervise installation. The installation of the system of street numbering is to be under the
supervision of the city council.
(Code 1973, § 13-1)
Sec. 32-8. - Obstructing streets.
Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for anyone to obstruct any street, lane, alley, sidewalk or public square by any porch
steps, fence or other obstruction or nuisance whatever.
Removal; penalty. The city shall have all such obstructions or nuisances removed by serving written notice upon the
owner or occupant of the premises, and the party so obstructing, and upon failure to comply with such notice, after
24 hours, the parties shall be punished as prescribed in general penalty section 1-7, and the city council shall have
the same removed at the expense of such owner, occupant or party obstructing, and an execution shall issue
therefor.
(Code 1973, § 13-3)
Sec. 32-9. - Obstructing intersections.
Prohibited; exception. No structure, wall, fence, sign, shrubbery, or trees shall be erected, planted or maintained on
any lot which will obstruct the view of a driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection, excepting that shade trees
will be permitted when all branches are not less than eight feet above the street level.
Corner lots. In the case of corner lots, subsection (a) of this section means there shall be provided an unobstructed
triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from the
intersection of said street lines or, in cases of a rounded corner, from the intersection of the street property lines
extended.
(Code 1973, § 13-4)
Sec. 32-10. - Allowing animals and vehicles to cause inconvenience prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hitch or fasten any horse, mule or other animal to any tree, fence, house or paling along
the city streets or on a public square, or to allow his horses or mules to run at large on the public streets or squares, or to drive any
truck, cart, or other vehicle, or ride any horse or other animal upon the sidewalks, to the inconvenience of persons passing (except
in the case of trucks and for the purpose of loading and unloading), or permit the same to obstruct the sidewalks.
(Code 1973, § 13-4)
Sec. 32-11. - Assembling for purpose of vending or showing wares prohibited when obstruction created.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any street, sidewalk or public square for the purpose of selling, vending, or
showing wares or merchandise, nor persons assembled for any purpose to obstruct the same.
(Code 1973, § 13-6)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
122/192
(1)
(2)
Sec. 32-12. - Closing street by private person prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to close up any public street or alley by a fence or other obstruction.
(Code 1973, § 13-12)
Secs. 32-13—32-42. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY USE
Sec. 32-43. - Denitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Construct means, but is not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install wires, install conduit, install pipes,
install transmission lines, install poles, install signs, or install facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental planting, in, on,
above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. The term "construct" also includes the act of opening
and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way.
Construction means, but is not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating,
obstructing, installing wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles, installing signs, or
installing facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of
the right-of-way. The term "construction" also includes the opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the rightof-way.
Director means the city council or its designee.
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety, or of a significant loss of real
or personal property.
Excavation means:
Any work in the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way including, but not limited to, opening the
public right-of-way;
Installing, servicing, repairing, or modifying a facility in or under the surface or subsurface of the public rightof-way, and restoring the surface and subsurface of the public right-of-way.
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing including, but not limited to, a utility's poles, wires, optical fibers, cables, electrical
conductors, conduits, ducts, innerducts, pipes, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances, appurtenances and future technology
authorized in a permit or written service agreement.
Facilities representative means the specifically identified agent/employee of a utility who is authorized to direct field activities
of that utility and serve as the official notice agent for facilities related information. The utility shall be required to make sure at
least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities
related emergencies or situations.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
123/192
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
Registration means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or
within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written service agreement with the city or in a
related provision of this Code.
Right-of-way.
The term "right-of-way" means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any
real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest,
or as a trustee for the public including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or
equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purpose for which it was dedicated,
may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing, or replacing facilities.
The term "right-of-way" does not include:
Buildings, parks, bridges, rivers, tunnels, viaducts, conduits or other public property or easements that
have not been dedicated to compatible uses, except to the extent the use or occupation of such property
is specifically granted in a permit or by law.
Private easements or public property, except to the extent the use or occupation of public property is
specifically in a written approval of registration.
Service agreement means a valid license agreement. The service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement is
issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility, and allows such utility to operate or provide service within the
geographic limits of the city.
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges,
tunnels, and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or
altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof.
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly of indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise,
of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or more than 50 percent cumulatively
over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests.
Underground facilities means all lines, cables, conduits, pipes, posts, tanks, vaults, wires and any other facilities which are
located wholly or partially underneath the rights-of-way.
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the
utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such
facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchases or user of the facilities who will be actively using the
facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently
operate its facilities.
Utility or utilities means any privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned system for producing, transmitting, or distributing
communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude
products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and streetlighting systems, and housing or conduit for
any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof, The term "utility" may also be used to refer to
the owner, operator, utility, servicer, contractor, subcontractor or any agent thereof, of any utility or utility facility described in this
definition.
Working day means any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday, excluding legal holidays observed by the city.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. I, § 3), 12-8-2008)
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
124/192
Sec. 32-44. - Purpose.
The city is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-ofway are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, and economic
development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and
constitution of the state, including, but not limited to, article IX, section I, paragraph I of the state constitution (O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-2
and 32-4-92), has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. I, § 1), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-45. - Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. I, § 2), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-46. - Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional
by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. IX, § 1), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-47. - Codication.
This article shall be codified in a manner consistent with state law.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. IX, § 5), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-48. - Article headings.
The article headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this article.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. IX, § 6), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-49. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers.
The city, by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, or
lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or which may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and laws
of the United States, state, and under the provisions of this Code, to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility, by applying
for and being issued a written approval of registration, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory
power or police power, or otherwise as are or the same, may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full
force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are
subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and
welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such
powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and
specifications of facilities.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. IX, § 2), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-50. - Compliance with article required.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
125/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
No utility shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of the city
to enforce prompt compliance.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. IX, § 3), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-51. - Appeals.
All appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via
certified mail to the director of public service as specified in this article.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. IX, § 4), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-52. - Penalties.
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per
violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition to the penalty prescribed in this section, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive
relief and revocation of license or permits.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. VIII), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-53. - Administration.
The city council or its designee shall be the city official responsible for the administration of this article except as otherwise
provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. II, § 1), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-54. - Right-of-way construction.
Registration required. Each utility which occupies, uses or has facilities in the right-of-way at the time of passage of
the ordinance from which this article is derived, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate the facilities
located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a registration
statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is
derived.
Notice. Following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, each utility which seeks to
have facilities located in any rights-of-way under the control of the city, unless specifically exempted by state,
federal law or this Code, shall file a notification of construction with the department.
Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city
and include, but not be limited to:
The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the permit registration statement (the "registrant"). If the
registrant is not the owner of the facility to be installed, maintained or repaired in the right-of-way, the
registration shall include the name, street address, email address if, applicable, and telephone and facsimile
number of the owner.
The name, street address, email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more
facilities representatives. Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representatives in an
emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to ensure
accurate contact information is available to the city at all times.
A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
126/192
(4)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(b)
(1)
(2)
operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or
agreements.
A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable, or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility
to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration.
Issuance of written acceptance of registration.
If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of
time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in
writing.
Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the right-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only
the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the
acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining the permits required by city
ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of
others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of
construction as required in this article.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. II, §§ 2—4), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-55. - Termination of registration.
The registration statement shall remain in place for one year and renew each subsequent year automatically unless
the utility is in default. The director shall give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has:
Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a registration application or any law of
the city, state, or federal government;
Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article;
Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or
Made a material misrepresentation of fact in its application for registration.
If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, such
default shall be a material breach and the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to
terminate the approval of registration. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following
procedure shall be followed:
The city shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall
allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach.
If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the registration terminated.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. VII), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-56. - Notication to city of construction.
Required. Written notification to the director from the utility is required prior to any of the following activities:
Before any utility does any work to construct, install, maintain, remove or relocate facilities on, along, over or
under the right-of-way in the city; or
Construction adjacent to the rights-of-way in the city that require tree trimming within the rights-of-way.
Procedure. The written notification shall be submitted on a form provided by the director and shall specifically
include:
The name and address of the utility;
The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done along with satisfactory plans as attachments
showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
127/192
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed, their relationship to street features such as
right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structure, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the
roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and it operation;
The name and address of the person who is to do such work;
The name, street address, email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more
facilities representatives;
The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; and
An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any
part of the city road system or to any member of the public caused by work of the utility performed under
authority of the permit issued.
Locate requests required. As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 and other applicable state law currently in place or as
amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or excavating with mechanized excavating
facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a
locate requests to the utility protection center, beginning the next day after such notice is provided, excluding the
hours during days other than business days.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. III, §§ 1—3), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-57. - Construction of street occupancy.
Failure to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in this section may result in the revocation of the registration and
removal of the facilities from the rights-of-way.
State manual adopted. The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references
contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B
(Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this
section, subject to the amendments and modifications contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be
maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between
the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state
personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city municipal equivalents.
Protection of traffic and roadway. In conformance with city policy, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way
unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations
are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining
the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that the
maintenance and operation of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the
right-of-way, or the right-of-way itself.
Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time during the term
of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, the utility shall, at its
own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or
relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the
utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right
to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility, and
the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration,
or relocation.
Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid
service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
128/192
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
a.
b.
c.
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or
modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be
enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the
rights and convenience of property owners.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. IV), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-58. - Restoration of property.
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair any street, facility or property or structure thereon,
thereunder or thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation,
operation, upgrade, repair or removal of the facility to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work
performed by the utility caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20
working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such
replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. V), 12-8-2008)
Sec. 32-59. - Discontinuance of operations; abandoned and unused facilities.
A utility which has discontinued or is discontinuing operation of any facilities in the city shall:
Provide information satisfactory to the city that the utility's obligations for its facilities in the rights-of-way
under this article and any other provision in this Code or other laws have been lawfully assumed by another
utility;
Submit a written proposal to reuse its facilities;
Submit a written proposal for abandonment of the facilities. Said proposal must be approved by the director;
Remove its entire facilities within a reasonable amount of time and in a manner acceptable to the city; or
Submit to the city, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership
of its facilities to the city. If a utility proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option, do one or more of
the following:
Purchase the facilities;
Accept donation of some or all facilities; or
Require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably
anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities.
Facilities of a utility which fails to comply with this section shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities
are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but
not limited to:
Abating the nuisance;
Taking possession of the facilities and evicting the utility from the right-of-way;
Prosecuting the violator; or
Any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity.
(Ord. No. 0003, § 1(art. VI), 12-8-2008)
Secs. 32-60—32-76. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
129/192
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Secs. 32-77—32-95. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT
Sec. 32-96. - Required for parades and processions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in any parade, demonstration or public address on the city streets
without a permit issued by the city clerk upon direction of the mayor.
This section shall not apply to:
Funeral processions;
Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is
under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities;
A governmental agency, acting within the scope of its functions.
(Code 1973, § 10-3)
Sec. 32-97. - Application.
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the city on forms provided by the city.
An application for a parade permit shall be filed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:
The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the parade;
If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and
telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of
that organization;
The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade leader and who will be
responsible for its conduct;
The date when the parade is to be conducted;
The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point;
The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute the parade, the type
of animals, and description of the vehicles;
The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to
be traversed;
The location, by streets, of any assembly areas for the parade;
The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly area;
The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade;
If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of, or for, any person other than the applicant, the
applicant for the permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person
proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf;
Any additional information which the mayor shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
130/192
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
whether a permit should issue.
The mayor, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application under this
article which is filed less than two days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted.
Sec. 32-98. - Issuance.
The mayor shall order the issuance of a permit as provided for under this article when, from a consideration of the application
and from any other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that the:
Conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic
contiguous to its route;
Conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of city police officers to properly
police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
city;
Conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal
ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and
areas contiguous thereto;
Concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with
proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
Conduct of the parade will not unreasonably interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route
to a fire;
Conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property;
Parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without
unreasonable delays en route.
Sec. 32-99. - Notice of rejection.
The mayor shall act upon the application for a parade permit within two days after the filing thereof. If the mayor disapproves
the application, he shall mail to the applicant, within two days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of the
action stating the reasons for the denial of the permit, or communicate sooner if the date for the parade requires a quicker
response.
Sec. 32-100. - Appeals.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the council. The appeal shall be taken
within two days after notice. The council shall act upon the appeal within two days after its receipt.
Sec. 32-101. - Alternative permit.
The mayor, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a
date, at a time, or over a route, different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit
shall, within two days after notice of the action of the mayor, file a written notice of acceptance with the mayor. An alternate
parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under, this article.
Sec. 32-102. - Notice to city and other ocials.
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the city clerk shall send a copy thereof to the:
Chief of police; and
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
131/192
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
City attorney.
Sec. 32-103. - Contents of permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
Starting time;
Minimum speed;
Maximum speed;
Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade;
Portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
Maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
Any other information as the mayor shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article.
Sec. 32-104. - Duties of permittee.
A permittee shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and all applicable laws and ordinances of the
state and city.
The parade leader or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person
during the conduct of the parade.
Sec. 32-105. - Revocation.
The mayor shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this article upon a violation of the conditions and
directions attached to the permit.
Chapter 34 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 34-1. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city.
The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of the actual recurring local service revenues, as
defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (b)(9); however, any company which pays in excess of three percent of the
actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in
accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever
occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of the actual recurring local service revenues in
accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment
schedule until December 31, 2012.
Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail end user customers located within the city's municipal
boundaries, the payment by such to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by the regulations
promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment
of due compensation.
(Ord. No. 0609, § 1(609), 6-9-2009)
Sec. 34-2. - Mayor or city clerk to administer chapter; duties.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
132/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
The mayor or city clerk shall, on behalf of the city, exercise the day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the
regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 and perform the following duties:
Review the application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is
incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such
application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies.
Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such
completed application.
Review the payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the
provisions of the amended law and this chapter.
Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating
to the amended law and this chapter.
Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the record of a company which is
reasonably related to the calculation and payment due compensation.
Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of examinations
and changes in municipal corporate boundaries.
(Ord. No. 0609, § 1(6091), 6-9-2009)
Secs. 34-3—34-12. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Consumer Choice for Television Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-77-1 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 34-13. - Denitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this
section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended:
Cable services means the term as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications
Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as may be further amended
from time to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that the term "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition
in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, the term "cable services" means the term "cable services" as defined in the Cable
Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable.
Cable system means any cable system as defined in the Cable Act.
City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto.
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a
franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the
streets to provide telecommunications services.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
133/192
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and
maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable or telecommunications services, or both, to
inhabitants within the franchise area.
Person.
The term "person" means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or
other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit.
The term "person" does not mean the city.
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways,
boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or
belonging to the city.
Telecommunications services means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial
cable, optical fiber, or satellite or microwave transmission, of one or more audio, voice or data signals. The term
"telecommunications services" includes both cable services and noncable telecommunications services.
(Ord. of 10-9-1995, § I(art. 1))
Sec. 34-14. - Delegation.
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such
delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official.
Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this article or
to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or franchisee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more
advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the
matters which are the subject of this article.
(Ord. of 10-9-1995, § I(3.2))
Sec. 34-15. - Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this article is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole
or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. of 10-9-1995, § I(3.1))
Secs. 34-16—34-28. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE
Sec. 34-29. - Grounds for granting franchises.
No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a franchise granted in accordance with the
provisions of this article, and no person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications service,
other than cable services, without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article.
The city council may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this article; provided that the city council
reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
134/192
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
(3)
a.
b.
(4)
(5)
The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such t
conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the fran
Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such
additional franchises as it deems appropriate and or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services.
A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city and for all or less than all telecommunications
services, and for telecommunications services for all or less than all purposes.
The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, governing cable television franchises and renewals thereof.
(Ord. of 10-9-1995, § I(2.1))
Sec. 34-30. - Application.
Required. Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions
as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law.
Contents. Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the
proposed franchise and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate:
Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security
number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names
(and registrations) used by applicant;
A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including, but not
limited to, the following, and to whatever extent required by the city:
The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant;
The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the
ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; the installation
of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced;
A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against
subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges,
cable service charges, and any other telecommunications service charges;
A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational
standards proposed by the applicant;
A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into
between the applicant and any subscriber to cable or telecommunications services; and
A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether
formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any
person which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the
franchise;
A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
A description of the cable services and any other telecommunications services proposed to be provided;
A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for completion
of the system;
A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing
for the use of any facilities of the utility, including, but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and
Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of
such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
135/192
(c)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
Nonrefundable fees for new franchises. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by
the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be
deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee
will not be refunded.
Purpose. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred
by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include,
but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses.
Fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application.
Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a
nonrefundable application fee in an amount as established from time to time by the city by certified check or
cashier's check made payable to the city.
(Ord. of 10-9-1995, § I(2.2))
Sec. 34-31. - Responsibilities of applicants.
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules,
regulations and other city directives and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction.
(Ord. of 10-9-1995, § I(2.3))
Sec. 34-32. - Public inspection of applications.
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or
amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours.
(Ord. of 10-9-1995, § I(2.4))
Sec. 34-33. - Evaluation criteria.
In making any determination under this article as to any application for a franchise, the city council may consider such factors
as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including without limitation:
The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and
telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city;
The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant;
The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the
franchise;
The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications
services to be provided, including the type of telecommunications services to be provided, as well as
alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise;
The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all
purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and
Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests
of the city and the public.
(Ord. of 10-9-1995, § I(2.5))
Sec. 34-34. - Procedure for city council action.
The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
136/192
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise
should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this
purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such
other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the
preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with
respect to such applications.
If the city council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider
one or more applications, the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application,
fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or
objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice
of such public hearing in accordance with applicable law.
The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and
such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise.
Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the franchise, and
may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all
applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an
exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also
reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be
served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals.
(Ord. of 10-9-1995, § I(2.6))
Sec. 34-35. - Terms and conditions of franchise.
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate
ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other
things, shall address the following subjects:
The term of the franchise;
The franchise area and the cable services and other telecommunications services and purposes of such other
telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of the franchise;
The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or
services, or both;
The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or canceled;
The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure
the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise;
The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee;
Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee;
The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of the account and records, and the
city's inspection rights with respect thereto;
Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods;
Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations,
rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations;
Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the franchisee by the city;
Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the
city;
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
137/192
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
a.
b.
c.
d.
Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with te
conditions of the franchise;
Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with,
all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee,
including the Federal Communications Commission;
Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services
from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or
removal of improvements related to the franchise;
Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in
connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise;
Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest;
The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning
or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a
statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including, but not limited to,
telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the
areas served thereby;
A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public
accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application under this article, or a letter
or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to
both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or
funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide
whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications
or cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the
applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the
proposed cable or telecommunications system in the city;
A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of
subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income
statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; and
A statement including the following information:
Identifying, by place and date, any other cable system or telecommunication franchise awarded to the
applicant, its parent or subsidiary;
The status of said franchise with respect to the completion thereof;
The total cost of completion of such franchised cable or telecommunication system; and
The amount of the applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion
thereof.
(Ord. of 10-9-1995, § I(2.7))
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.;
powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-470 et seq.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
138/192
(a)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Sec. 36-1. - Denitions.
The following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Curb means the edge of the street, whether built up or marked, or merely the edge of the traveled portion.
Go-cart means any motor-driven vehicle with four wheels under 500 pounds in weight and less than 24 inches in height.
Limit lines means lines on the pavement defining ranking or parking spaces, safety, danger, direction or neutral zones, or
crosswalks.
Rank means to stand vehicles alongside of and parallel to the curb one behind the other.
(Code 1941, § 377; Code 1973, § 15-1)
Sec. 36-2. - Uniform rules of the road adopted.
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.) and the definitions in
O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this chapter and shall be the traffic
regulations of the city.
Sec. 36-3. - Trac signs, signals, devices and markings ratied.
The location and existence of all traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings in place on the adoption date of this Code
are ratified and confirmed.
Sec. 36-4. - Applicability to bicycle and animal riders and drivers.
Every person operating, propelling any pushcart or bicycle or riding any animal upon a roadway, and every person driving an
animal shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions which by
their very nature can have no application.
(Code 1941, § 379; Code 1973, § 15-7)
Sec. 36-5. - Obedience to ocer's directions required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of an authorized officer.
(Code 1973, § 15-6)
Sec. 36-6. - Vehicles or animals on sidewalks prohibited; exceptions.
No person shall ride, drive or park any vehicle or animal on sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for any truck, dray or other vehicle,
loaded or unloaded, to be drawn or driven upon any sidewalk in the business portion of the city, except such places as have been
fixed for vehicle crossings.
(Code 1973, §§ 10-2(11), 13-11)
Sec. 36-7. - Riding in or on other than passenger seat.
Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on the hood, bumper or anywhere on a motor vehicle except
where proper seating is provided.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
139/192
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
Violation by driver. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or cause to be driven any vehicle with any person
riding on the hood, bumper or anywhere except where proper seating is provided.
Exceptions. The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the
necessary discharge of a duty, or within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
(Code 1941, §§ 321, 350, 387; Code 1973, §§ 15-14—15-16; Ord. No. 16-16)
Sec. 36-8. - Rules for pedestrians.
Pedestrians shall comply with the following rules:
Keep to the right at all times.
Cross streets only at designated crosswalks where there are crosswalks, except where safety permits.
Observe and obey directions of traffic officers.
(Code 1973, § 15-19)
Sec. 36-9. - Assembling, repairing or washing vehicle on streets prohibited; exception.
No vehicle shall be assembled, repaired, washed or conditioned on the streets of the city. This section shall not prevent
emergency repairs.
(Code 1941, § 357; Code 1973, § 15-23)
Secs. 36-10—36-36. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 36-37. - Police ocers authorized to direct trac.
Authorized police officers shall direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signals, in conformance with
the provisions of this Code; provided, in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, or
to promote public safety, police officers, or officers of the fire department in charge at a fire, may divert or direct traffic, as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this Code.
(Code 1941, § 376; Code 1973, § 15-5)
Secs. 36-38—36-62. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITED VEHICLE OPERATION
Sec. 36-63. - Driving on closed streets.
Closed streets or portions of streets shall be designated by suitable signs or barriers to show that they are closed. It shall be
unlawful for any person to enter upon any street or portion of a street so closed.
(Code 1941, § 383; Code 1973, § 15-2)
Sec. 36-64. - Driving through lling station.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle through any filling station or any public business for the
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
140/192
(1)
(2)
(b)
purpose of:
Effecting a U-turn in the middle of any block; or
Cutting a street corner intersection for the purpose of avoiding the traffic signals or for any other purpose.
In any event the failure of the driver to bring such vehicle to a dead stop in such filling station shall be prima facie
evidence of the intention on the part of the driver of such vehicle to violate this section.
(Code 1973, § 15-41)
Sec. 36-65. - Driving through procession.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession while they are in motion, provided said vehicles are conspicuously so designated. This provision shall not apply at
intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signs or police officers.
(Code 1941, § 394; Code 1973, § 15-45)
Sec. 36-66. - Stopping so as to obstruct trac.
It shall be unlawful for any person without the presence of police officers for traffic control, to drive or stop any vehicle,
conveyance, upon or across any sidewalk, crosswalk or street in such a manner as to prevent the free passage of persons or other
vehicles; provided draymen, taxis, express trucks, etc., shall have a reasonable time in which to use such sidewalks, crosswalks or
streets for discharging passengers, freight or merchandise, whenever necessary.
(Code 1941, § 374; Code 1973, § 15-52)
Sec. 36-67. - Stopping in street to discharge passengers.
No vehicle shall be permitted to stop for the purpose of discharging passengers in the area of any street devoted to traffic, but
shall stop for such purpose only in the area designated for parking or ranking.
(Code 1941, § 340(b); Code 1973, § 15-53)
State law reference— Authority to regulate stopping, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1).
Secs. 36-68—36-92. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
State Law reference— Authority to regulate parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.
Sec. 36-93. - Twenty-four-hour limit; abandonment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave parked or standing on the streets of the city any vehicle for a period of more than
24 hours; and no vehicle shall be abandoned on any street.
(Code 1941, §§ 343, 356, 357; Code 1973, § 15-99)
Sec. 36-94. - Within lines or in a way causing least interference required.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
141/192
(1)
All vehicles shall be ranked or parked within the area designated by the police department for such purpose by lines drawn or
painted upon the pavement of such streets, and where no such lines have been painted on the streets designating such ranking or
parking space, such vehicle shall be ranked or parked in such manner as to least interfere with traffic on and over such street.
(Code 1941, § 340(a); Code 1973, § 15-100)
Sec. 36-95. - Permission required to park long vehicles.
In no event shall a vehicle exceeding 22 feet in length be parked upon the streets of the city without written permission from
the council unless authorized police direct traffic around said vehicle
(Code 1941, §§ 337, 362, 389; Code 1973, § 15-34)
Sec. 36-96. - Parking vehicle carrying poisonous, explosive or inammable materials in residential district prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle whose cargo consists of poisonous, explosive, inflammable or odious materials whether
under pressure or not and whether in the form of liquids, solids or gases, in any residential district in the city, except in the course
of an ordinary business transaction.
(Code 1973, § 15-106)
Chapter 38 - UTILITIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
State Law reference— Water and sewer systems authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL
Secs. 38-1—38-18. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY
Sec. 38-19. - Application for water and sewer service.
The customer shall make an application for water and sewer service, in person, at city hall, and at the time said application is
made shall make a cash security deposit in an amount as established from time to time by the city.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, § 3)
Sec. 38-20. - City's responsibility and liability.
The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the line exists or is to be constructed, and
runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served.
The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon the payment of
reasonable costs for the extensions of its water and/or sewer lines as may be required to render such service.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
142/192
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
a.
1.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
2.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
b.
c.
The city may install its meter at or near the property line or at the city's option, on the consumer's property within
the property line.
The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or piping are installed in such a
manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow.
Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, § 6)
Sec. 38-21. - Consumer's responsibility and liability.
Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only.
The consumer shall not sell water to any person or permit any other person to use said water. Water shall not be used for
irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in quantity without interfering with the regular
domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of
service.
Where meter or meter box is placed on the premises of consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the
consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader.
The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumers' side of the meter.
The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's
expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health
department.
In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants
must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of
the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city's covenant and agree that so long
as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their
property to the city's water system. The consumer shall additionally not discharge any wastewater to the sewer
system not generated by potable water furnished by the city's water system.
The consumer agrees to limit its discharge into the sewerage system that strength of sewage defined by trade
usage as "domestic sewage."
The limits of acceptable discharge shall be as follows:
The following wastes will be strictly inadmissible:
Waste which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewage or sewerage plant;
Waste produces which will impair the hydraulic capacity of the sewer system; and
Wastes which, in any quantity, create a hazard to people, to the sewer system, to the treatment
process or to the receiving waters.
Examples of subsection (5)a.1. of this section are:
Gasoline, fuel line, cleaning solvents, and paint vehicles;
Ashes, sand, cinders, metal, broken glass, wood, metal shavings, rags and unshredded
garbage; and
Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, cyanides, acids and caustics.
The maximum permissible temperature of any discharge shall be 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees
Celsius).
Volatile oils shall not be allowed in any amount. Mineral oil shall be removed to the maximum degree
practical before discharge. Vegetable oils, fats, and grease shall be limited to no more than 15 milligrams
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
143/192
d.
e.
f.
g.
(a)
(b)
per liter (mg/l).
The ph of influent waste shall be between 5.5 and 9.5 mg/l.
Substances toxic to biological wastewater treatment processes such as copper, chromium, lead, arsenic,
and nickel may also be limited if said substances are present in sufficient quantity adversely to affect
treatment. Acceptable amounts of said substances shall be as follows unless otherwise determined be
independent study and accepted by the city:
Nickel Equal or less than 5 mg/l
Zinc Equal or less than 10 mg/l
Chromium (+3) Equal or less than 10 mg/l
Chromium (+6) Equal or less than 0.05 mg/l
Chlorine residual Equal or less than 0.5 mg/l
Cyanides None allowed
Cyanates None allowed
Isocyanates None allowed
All others None allowed without an independent justifying study and tests accepted
by the city.
The maximum allowable five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) that will be accepted without
surcharge payments shall be 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l)
The maximum allowable amount of suspended solids that will be accepted without surcharge payments
shall be 250 mg/l.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, § 7)
Sec. 38-22. - Access to premises and extensions of system.
Duly authorized city agents shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of
installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for other purposes in
connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities.
Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted
or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water or sewer
lines.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, § 9)
Sec. 38-23. - Change of occupancy.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
144/192
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
(a)
(b)
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to
change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time
specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying
the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, § 10)
Sec. 38-24. - Suspension of service.
When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the
city.
Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward
the settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit
is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for
collection of debts.
Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after the bills are paid in full, such security
deposit as may be required by the council is made, and a service charge as quoted in section 38-58(b) is paid
for each meter reconnected.
The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons:
To prevent fraud or abuse.
Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules.
Emergency repairs.
Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control.
Legal processes.
Direction of public authorities.
Strike, riot, fire, flood, or unavoidable accident.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, § 12)
Sec. 38-25. - Mandatory sewer connections.
From and after the passage of this chapter, it shall be required that all residences, business establishments and
other structures having a wastewater discharge within the city limits to connect onto the city's central sewer system
where said structure is within 200 feet of said sewer line. Said connection shall be made within 60 days of
availability of sewer service.
All new construction within the city limits within 200 feet of the city's sewer line shall also be required to connect
onto said system.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, § 14)
Secs. 38-26—38-53. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 38-54. - Connection fee.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
145/192
(a)
(b)
(a)
(1)
Each customer subscribing to use the city water and sewer services shall pay connection fees in an amount as established
from time to time by the city.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, § 4)
Sec. 38-55. - Surcharge assessments.
Users of the city wastewater system may be subject to annual sampling of their wastewater discharge at the
discretion of the council. The purpose of said sampling shall be to determine if the user is in compliance with the
terms of this chapter. Contributors to the system will be charged for any BOD and suspended solids which exceed
the above limits.
Monthly billings for surcharge shall be based on the amount of water used, BOD and suspended solids which
exceed the aforementioned limits and is computed as follows:
BOD × 8.34 × water consumption × $0.12 = $____________
(in mg/l)
Suspended solids × 8.34 × water consumption × $0.12 = $____________
(in mg/l)
Water consumption is expressed in thousands of gallons. Wastewater sampling results shall be used as a basis for the surcharge
for not more than 12 months.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, § 8)
Sec. 38-56. - Minimum charges; no free service.
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such connection subscribed. Water furnished for a
given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any circumstances furnish water free
of charge to any person.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, § 5)
Sec. 38-57. - User charges.
The charges to be paid to the city for water and sewer service shall be in amounts as established from time to time by the city.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, §§ 1, 2; Res. of 4-11-2011, § 1)
Sec. 38-58. - Meter reading; billing; collection.
Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such days each month as may be determined
as desirable by the city. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the
automatic imposition of the following penalties:
Nonpayment within 30 days from the date due will result in the water and sewer service being shut off from
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
146/192
(2)
(3)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
the water user's property. The consumer's current (as well as the past due) water and/or sewer bill becomes
due and payable on that date, and thus all water/sewer bills, including any charges, must be paid in full before
the consumer's water meter will be reconnected. In the case of rental property, the tenant first is responsible
for the water and/or sewer bill or charges but, if the tenant refuses to pay or moves away, the landlord is
responsible for all water and/or sewer bills and related charges.
Vacant or unoccupied property owners may continue to be entitled to receive water and sewer service.
However, minimum bills and charges for gallons used must continue to be paid. Once service is terminated,
any vacant or unoccupied properties shall be treated as new users and shall apply for service and pay fees and
deposits as above outlined. The new user or property owner shall pay any delinquent bills and charges still
outstanding on the property before service is initiated.
As provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section, water and sewer service shall not be reconnected until the
customer's delinquent bill, including any disconnection and reconnection charges, has been paid in full.
Reconnection charges shall be as established from time to time by the city. Bills shall be paid at the city's specified
place of collection, and failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor
relieve the consumer from payment of same. Partial payments will not be accepted for any water or sewer bills.
Disputed bills shall be paid in full, and a request for adjustment shall be filed with the city clerk with consideration
by the council at the next council meeting following receipt of same.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, § 11)
Sec. 38-59. - Complaints; adjustments.
If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at city hall before the bill becomes
delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service
as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim.
The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee of $5.00; provided,
however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was owner-read, no charge will be made.
Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of
making the test (minimum $10.00); provided, however, that if the meter is found to over register beyond three
percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made.
If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly
or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of the previous bills
and/or from other data.
(Ord. of 3-13-1995, § 13)
Secs. 38-60—38-76. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Sec. 38-77. - Denitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called a house
connection or sewer service line.
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
147/192
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Health officer means the county sanitarian or other person designated by the city council.
Industrial waste means the wastewater from industrial processes as distinct from domestic wastes.
Municipality means the governmental body having jurisdiction over the maintenance and operations of the water and sanitary
sewer system within the city and adjacent areas of the county.
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface water or groundwater.
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwaters, stormwaters, and surface waters that are not intentionally
admitted.
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together
with:
A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a
plumbing stub out; and
A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from
the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered.
Sewage means spent water of a community. The equivalent term is wastewater.
Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
Superintendent means the city utilities superintendent or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
Surcharged wastewater means sewage containing greater concentrations of pollutants than are to be found in normal
wastewater.
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. of 3-14-1994, art. 2)
Sec. 38-78. - Violations.
Violations of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable under the laws of the state. Each day of continuing
violation shall be considered a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of violation.
In the event of a violation of this article, the city may verbally instruct the owner as to the necessary corrective
action. If the owner fails to carry out the verbal instructions in a timely manner or if a serious violation or hazard to
public health exists, the city may issue the owner a written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective
action, and the time limit for completing the corrective action. The record of the mailing of said notice or order shall
be prima facie evidence thereof and failure of said owner or owners to receive same shall in no way affect the
validity of any proceedings conducted pursuant to this article.
The failure to comply with any written order duly issued by the city pursuant to this article will constitute a separate
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided by the laws of the state; provided
further that compliance with this article is required notwithstanding the fact that a written order might not have
been issued.
The violation of any provision of this article, as now existing or as may be hereafter amended, may be enjoined by
instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Any public
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
148/192
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
(1)
(2)
(3)
a.
b.
nuisance which is injurious to the public health, safety, or comfort may be abated by instituting appropriate
proceedings for injunction in the court of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained
notwithstanding the fact that such violation also constitutes a crime, and notwithstanding that other adequate
remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city.
Upon the receipt of a notice of violation of this article and/or an order of the city requiring an act or thing to be
done or to cease, the owner of any premises then in question may, in writing, demand a hearing before the city to
present the evidence challenging the validity of the city's order. The owner may appear in person, by agent, or by
attorney. Said demand must be filed with the city clerk and be made within five days from the receipt of the order
being challenged. Upon receipt of a demand for a hearing, the city will set a date, time, and place for said hearing to
be not less than 21 days from the date of filing of said demand. The hearing as provided in this article shall apply to
any customer's complaint, dispute, or challenge of the city's rule, regulations, resolutions, ordinances, or policies.
Upon the customer's written complaint being filed with the clerk, the city shall set a hearing as provided in this
article or at a time agreed upon by the parties.
Evidence before the city of any hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (e) of this section shall be admitted in
accordance with the rules of evidence of the superior courts of the state; provided, however, the city may take
official notice of any order, rule, regulation, or any other document, record, or entry contained in its official record
or minutes for evidentiary purposes.
For the purposes of this article the county sanitarian (health officer) shall be deemed an agent of the city. However,
the decisions of the city will prevail in any instance in which there is a conflict between it and the health officer on
any issue of sanitation, or the lack of it, and its effect on human health or well-being.
(Ord. of 3-14-1994, art. 11)
Sec. 38-79. - Compliance with state and federal regulations required.
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. All
nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in 40 CFR 403.
(Ord. of 3-14-1994, art. 10)
Sec. 38-80. - Right of entry.
Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing the proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the public
sewerage system in accordance with the provision of this article.
(Ord. of 3-14-1994, art. 9)
Sec. 38-81. - Authority to disconnect service.
The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the
system when:
Wastes damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the public sewer;
A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a
quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse; and
The customer:
Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving
authority;
Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
149/192
c.
d.
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
the wastewater treatment process;
Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewerage service when due; or
Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers.
Notification processes for discontinuance of service are presented in section 38-85(k).
(Ord. of 3-14-1994, art. 13)
Sec. 38-82. - Use of public sewers required.
All premises shall be provided, by the owner thereof, with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean and in a
sanitary working condition.
No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city,
any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
All plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer; provided, that where no sewer is
available, septic tanks approved by the health officer may be used.
(Ord. of 3-14-1994, art. 3)
Sec. 38-83. - Private wastewater disposal.
No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tank unless he shall hold a valid permit for such work
issued by the health officer. Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been
constructed, repaired, altered, or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer.
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the state department of natural resources. No permit shall be issued for any private
wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than
20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet or to any well.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days after notice. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and
similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material.
The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at
no expense to the city.
No pit privy shall be installed in the city.
Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be
imposed by the city.
(Ord. of 3-14-1994, art. 4)
Sec. 38-84. - Building sewers and connections.
No authorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
The owner or his agent shall make an application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the city. A permit and inspection fee as specified elsewhere shall be paid at the time the application is filed.
All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
150/192
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(1)
(2)
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and
test by the city, to meet all requirements of this article.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in construction
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of
the city. Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city's
jurisdiction:
The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ductile iron pipe, or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe. All joints
shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service
pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe. Ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints may be required
by the city where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the
building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that PVC pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable bed
or cradle as approved by the city.
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to approval of the city, but in no event shall the
diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth-inch per
foot.
The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform
grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly
curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed until the work has been inspected and approved.
All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made by or under the supervision of the
sewer superintendent.
Every building sewer shall have at least one clean out, installed in accordance with city standards.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the lowest floor. No
building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. In
all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried
by such building drain shall be lifted by a pump or other approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of
surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly
to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the city's
representative.
All excavations of building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect
the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work
shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction.
If any house sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may:
Require the owner to repair the house sewer.
Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the
owner's property.
(Ord. of 3-14-1994, art. 5)
Sec. 38-85. - Restricted use of public sewers.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
151/192
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof run
subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into a storm sewer system.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharge to the public sewers, which waters contain
substances or posses characteristics which in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition before discharge to the public sewers;
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
Require surcharge payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, sand, or other harmful
ingredients.
When required by the city the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessible
and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans. The structure shall be installed by
the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. This
requirement will be imposed on a case-by-case basis.
Industrial users may be required to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment.
All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location times,
durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the city.
Pretreatment of wastes. Persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewerage system may be required to
pretreat such wastes. Plans for all pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the city and the state environmental
protection division prior to construction.
Waiver of requirements. There shall be no provision for the granting of variances for discharge of incompatible
wastes. If a user begins to violate any of the provisions of this section, it shall be his responsibility to apply to the
city, which can issue a temporary permit along with a compliance schedule for planning and construction of
necessary treatment or pretreatment works.
Discontinuance of service for failure to comply. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be cause for
the discontinuance of sewer or water service to the offending person. The procedure shall be as follows: A written
notice from the city shall be delivered personally to the person then responsible for the offending use, outlining the
conditions of the wastes which violate the city ordinances. In the event that the person in charge will not accept the
notice, it shall be conveyed by registered mail to the responsible person. The person notified shall have 24 hours
from the time of receipt of the notice, either personally delivered or received by registered mail, to correct the
offending conditions. If correction is not made or a request for extension is not received by the city within 24 hours,
it shall be mandatory that water or sewer services shall be discontinued to the offending person without further
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
152/192
(l)
(1)
(2)
(3)
notice. If a request for an extension of time is received by the city within 24 hours of the notice required by this
section and if circumstances are such that the best interest of the city would be served by extending the time for
correction of the offending condition, an extension of time up to a maximum limit of 30 days may be granted.
Responsibilities of person discharging waste. It shall be the responsibility of the person discharging industrial waste
into the city sewerage system to:
Build a control structure in the discharging line, suitable for the sampling and measuring of wastes. Plans for
this structure must be approved by the city. This requirement may be waived by the city if deemed
unnecessary.
Contact the city prior to operational changes which will materially alter the characteristics of the wastewater
being produced.
Make timely, periodic payments to the city of surcharges for excessive loadings as detailed in the city's user
charge system.
(Ord. of 3-14-1994, art. 6)
Appendix A - EMPLOYEE PERSONNEL POLICIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix are the city's personnel policies, as adopted on April 13, 1992. Amendments are indicated
by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains
unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system
of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets.
I - - GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.01. - Purpose and Statement of Intent.
These policies are intended to be a general statement of the personnel procedures of the City and are subject to
change at any time without prior notice to employees.
Title 34 Chapter 7 of the Georgia Code [O.C.G.A. § 34-7-1 et seq.] creates employment at will conditions in the State of
Georgia and all employees of the City are "at will" employees. This means that all employees are employed for an
indefinite time period and that the employer and employee are each free to terminate the employment relationship at
any time without notice for any reason.
The City Council or expressly appointed designees are the only City officials authorized to appoint employees.
Statements contrary to these "at will" provisions, regarding employment or conditions of employment, made by any
other unauthorized City Official or employee, should not be construed or interpreted by the employee as modifying or
changing the conditions of employment contained in this handbook. All employees are "at will" employees and serve
at the pleasure of the City Council.
Although the City is declaring as an "at will" employer, the City wants to ensure high morale for its employees and a
high level of productivity for the people of the City. To accomplish these goals, officials feel that fair and equitable
treatment of applicants and employees is desirable. Although all jobs are not identical and, therefore, all conditions of
employment will not be identical, many personnel practices can be the same in various departments. Among those
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
153/192
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
practices are methods of requesting, earning and accumulating annual and sick leave. By including these provisions in
these procedures, City Officials hope to provide equitable treatment to employees and to assure good personnel
practices.
In no case should any provisions of this handbook be interpreted as an act of conveying the expectation of continued
employment to an employee or to any other relaxation of the employment at will doctrine of the City. Neither should
any provision of this handbook be interpreted as creating any subsidiary contractual obligations or privileges or
conditions of employment between the City and the employee except those specifically listed as follows:
An employee may earn, accumulate and take annual leave as specified by these procedures.
An employee may earn, accumulate and take sick leave as specified by these procedures.
An employee may observe holidays (or comparable time off) as specified by these procedures.
Eligible employees may participate in a City wide retirement program only if one is available. Specific
provisions, for eligibility and participation, will be as outlined in any retirement ordinance passed or amended
by the City Council.
Eligible employees may participate in group insurance and group medical coverage if offered by the City.
Specific provisions for eligibility and participation will be in accordance with the terms and specifications as
outlined in the group contract or plan in effect or as amended.
An employee may take military leave with full City pay and, in some cases, leave without pay as specified in
these procedures and as provided by Georgia Law.
An employee may retain full jury pay and full City pay in accordance with these procedures.
An employee may obtain outside employment in accordance with these procedures.
1.02. - Establishment, Applicability and Coverage.
These personnel procedures will apply to all Departments in City government. Specifically, six types of employees may
be covered, in whole or in part, in participating departments or offices. These types of employees are covered in
Section 5.01A, 5.01B, 5.01C, 5.01D, 5.01E and 5.01F, which defines fulltime, temporary, seasonal, acting, substitutes
and parttime employees and also outlines the level of coverage, if any, of each.
Specifically excluded from all provisions of these procedures are: Members of the City Council, members of any
appointed Board of Commission, persons employed to make or conduct a temporary or special inquiry, elected
officials and those persons paid on a retainer or contract basis - such as the City Attorney.
1.03. - Administration.
The City Council is the appointing authority. The City Council may, in turn, appoint other designees, primarily
Department Heads to assist in administering these policies.
II - - JOB CLASSIFICATION PLAN
2.01. - Establishment and Amendment.
The appointing authority may establish an employee pay and classification plan. The nature of content of the plan, if
established, will be at the discretion of the appointing authority and is subject to be changed or be discontinued at any
time without prior notice to employees.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
154/192
A.
B.
C.
2.02. - Interpretation of Job Descriptions.
One element of the classification plan may be job descriptions. The job descriptions are descriptive and not restrictive.
They are intended to indicate the general kinds of duties, responsibilities, and job requirements normally associated
with the position, but are not intended to be exhaustive. Employees may be assigned other duties not included in the
descriptions and also may be required to work across departmental lines.
III - - EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
3.01. - Objectives.
The City Council may utilize a performance appraisal system for evaluation of employees. The type system utilized will
be at the discretion of the employer and is subject to change without prior notice to the employee.
Employee performance evaluation is a management tool that may be used in an attempt to effectuate higher levels of
employee productivity and also may be a factor in determining salary increments. Performance evaluations may also
be used for whatever other purposes the appointing authority deems appropriate.
3.02. - Qualications.
In no case should employees view the evaluations as a right or obligation of the City. Rather, they are a management
tool to be used at the discretion of the City Council.
3.03. - Time of and Period of Evaluation.
If the appointing authorities elect to utilize an evaluation system in any given year, they will determine the time the
evaluation will take place and the period of time to be covered by the evaluation.
3.04. - Procedure for Filing Evaluation Disagreements Other than through the Grievance Process.
If an employee disagrees with any statement in an evaluation, he may submit, within 10 days following the evaluation,
a written statement to the appointing authority and the statement will become a part of the employee's permanent
file. This action does not constitute a grievance or appeal but rather is merely an administrative procedure requiring
no action or response by the appointing authority or designees.
IV - - TRAVEL EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT
4.01. - Reimbursement Procedures.
Mileage Allowance. Employees will be reimbursed at a rate to be set by the City Council when specifically authorized
to use their personal vehicle in lieu of a City vehicle in the performance of official City duties. In the event it is
necessary for an employee to put fuel in a City vehicle at the employee's personal expense, the employee will be
reimbursed for the cost of the fuel provided a valid receipt is submitted along with the expense voucher.
Common Carrier. If common carrier is used for official travel, reimbursement will be at the tourist rate. Receipts
must be submitted. Department Head or higher authority must approve use of common carrier prior to travel.
Meals. Reimbursement will be made for actual reasonable cost of meals while on official travel not to exceed the
following:
Breakfast - $ 8.00
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
155/192
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Lunch - $10.00
Dinner - $20.00
Receipts are required.
Lodging. Reimbursement will be made for the cost of lodging while on official travel normally not to exceed $100.00
per night. In special cases where it is not feasible to obtain a room within this limit prior approval must be given by
the Mayor. Copies of hotel or motel receipts shall be attached to expense voucher for payment.
Other Expenses. Employees may be reimbursed for other expenses incidental to official travel and normally will be
limited to taxi fees, baggage handling fees, official phone calls, parking fees, registration fees for conventions,
seminars of workshops. Any other expenses will be reimbursed at the discretion of the City Council.
V - - EMPLOYMENT
5.01. - Types of Employment.
There may be several categories of employees as follows:
Fulltime. This includes employees who work 40 hours per week or more in positions which have been created
with the anticipation that it will be necessary to maintain the existence of such positions indefinitely on a
continuous year-round basis. This, in no way, implies that the incumbent can expect continued employment as
a "property right". This definition refers to the position, not the incumbent.
As fulltime employees, these workers are subject to all rules and regulations contained in this handbook and
receive all fringe benefits as provided by these personnel procedures, including vacation and sick leave.
Acting. Normally, this occurs when an existing employee is placed in a higher level position (usually fulltime),
until an eligible replacement can be hired. Normally, a position of this type would not exceed six months but
may be extended if the need occurs. (If acting employees are not existing employees, then, by definition, they
are temporary employees.)
Employees in these positions are subject to all the rules and regulations contained in these procedures. Also,
since it involves existing employees and fulltime positions, employees are eligible for all fringe benefits as
provided by these personnel procedures including vacation and sick leave provided they meet the fulltime
requirement.
Substitutes. This includes employees who are hired to temporarily fill existing positions-usually on an
intermittent and as "needed basis". These are essentially the same as temporary employees except that they
involve substitutes for existing employees. These positions also may be fulltime or parttime, but the substitute
employee in the position is a temporary employee. Duration of position may vary but normally will not be in
excess of six months.
As a substitute employee, the worker is subject to all the rules and regulations contained in these procedures.
However, a substitute employee is not eligible for fringe benefits such as sick leave and vacation leave.
Halftime. This includes employees who work at least 20 hours per week. As halftime employees, these workers
are subject to all rules and regulations contained in these procedures. A halftime employee is eligible for fringe
benefits such as sick leave and vacation leave on a prorated basis (half time).
Parttime. This includes employees who work less than 20 hours per week.
As parttime employees, these workers are subject to all rules and regulations contained in these procedures.
However, a parttime employee is not eligible for fringe benefits such as sick leave and vacation leave.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
156/192
F.
G.
Temporary. This includes employees who are working in positions which have been created for a period of six mo
which shall remain in existence only as long as the temporary work situation requires it.
A temporary position may also be either fulltime or parttime.
As temporary employees, these workers are subject to all rules and regulations contained in these policies.
However, a temporary employee is not eligible for fringe benefits such as sick leave and vacation leave.
Seasonal. This includes employees who are working in positions that have been created for a seasonal period
i.e., summer work program, summer recreational program etc. These positions also may be either fulltime of
parttime. Duration of the position may vary but normally will not be in excess of six months.
As seasonal employees, these workers are subject to all rules and regulations contained in these procedures.
However, a seasonal employee is not eligible for fringe benefits such as sick leave and vacation leave.
5.02. - Method of Filling Promotional Positions.
The City has developed a recruitment plan that does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, national
origin, age, mental or physical handicap and political affiliation.
In general, the City attempts to promote from within providing such promotions are consistent with nondiscrimination
laws and fair employment practices.
Existing employees desiring to apply for position vacancies that are promotional in nature must complete an
application for the position in the same manner as prescribed for all other applicants.
5.03. - Minimum Age for Employment.
The minimum age for employment of fulltime and acting employees shall be eighteen years of age unless otherwise
established by State law. The minimum age for employment of all other categories shall be sixteen years of age. There
is no mandatory retirement age.
5.04. - Nepotism (Hiring of Relatives).
Two members of an immediate family will not be employed under the same supervisor, neither will two members of
an immediate family be employed at the same time, regardless of the administrative department, if such employment
will result in an employee supervising directly or indirectly, a member of his immediate family. This policy applies to
promotions, demotions, transfers, reinstatements, and new employees. The provisions of this section will not be
retroactive, in that no action is to be taken concerning those members of the same family employed at the time of the
adoption of this section. Immediate family is defined as wife, husband, mother, father, brother, sister, son and
daughter.
VI - - WORKING TEST
6.01. - Working Test Dened.
As a final test of employability, the first six (6) months of employment in positions of original appointment, promotion
or transfer to other positions which have different qualifications shall be a working test to determine if the employee
can be considered as being capable of performing satisfactorily in that position. In cases where a position requires
State certification, the employee will remain on working test until certification is obtained even though it may exceed
six (6) months.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
157/192
A.
1.
2.
B.
1.
2.
3.
4.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
VII - - DISCIPLINE
7.01. - Progressive Discipline.
Progressive discipline is a process in which disciplinary action is taken in degrees of increasing severity. City officials
advocate progressive discipline when applicable. The action taken will depend on the degree and the circumstances of
the violation. An employee who fails to satisfactorily perform assigned duties or who violates established procedures
will be disciplined. The officials recognize six (6) degrees of progressive disciplinary actions that fall into two general
categories:
Reprimands
Oral
Written
Adverse Actions
Suspension without pay
Disciplinary salary reduction
Disciplinary demotion
Dismissal
As an "at will" employer, the City is not required to give causes of disciplinary action either in these policies nor at the
time of the adverse personnel action, nor is the City required to dismiss only for any so-called "just cause". On the
other hand, the City officials feel that effective communications can enhance the efficiency and morale of the
organization. Therefore, the following list of possible reasons for disciplinary actions is intended to communicate to
the employee several general reasons that are universally accepted as causes in public sector employers. These
reasons are neither mutually exclusive nor collectively exhaustive. The City Council may discipline for any combination
of reasons, for reasons not listed below, or for uncommunicated reasons at any time as long as the employee's
constitutionally protected liberty interests are not violated.
7.02. - [Possible Causes of Disciplinary Actions.]
Some causes - possible causes of disciplinary actions are:
chronic tardiness or absenteeism,
negligence in performing assigned duties,
inefficiency in performing assigned duties,
inability or unfitness to perform assigned duties,
insubordination,
misconduct,
conviction of a felony or a crime involving morale turpitude,
conduct reflecting discredit on the City or department,
failure to report to work without justifiable cause,
political activity that is prohibited by federal, state or local laws.
7.03. - Disciplinary Actions.
The six disciplinary actions are defined as follows:
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
158/192
A.
1.
2.
B.
1.
2.
3.
4.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Reprimands. A reprimand is a formal means of communicating to the employee a warning that a problem exists a
be corrected. There are two (2) degrees of formality, the oral reprimand and the written reprimand.
Oral Reprimand. In an oral reprimand, the supervisor should verbally and privately explain to the
employee that he or she is being reprimanded and describe the problem and what must be done to
correct the problem.
Written Reprimand. In the written reprimand, the employee should receive a written statement
describing the problem and what must be done to correct the problem. If the employee is at work, the
written statement should be given to the employee during a private interview.
Adverse Actions. An adverse action is an action taken for any reason by the City Council or designees that
results in a disciplinary suspension without pay, disciplinary salary reduction, disciplinary demotion, or
disciplinary dismissal.
Suspension Without Pay. An employee may be suspended without pay by the City Council or its designee.
The suspension without pay should not exceed (30) days.
Disciplinary Salary Reduction. An employee's salary may be reduced from one pay step to a lower step for
disciplinary purposes. The salary reduction does not constitute a demotion in pay grade.
Disciplinary Demotion. An employee may be demoted from one pay grade to a lower grade for
disciplinary reasons if a lower position is open and if the employee is qualified to perform the work at the
lower position. A disciplinary demotion should include a decrease in salary.
Dismissal. An employee may be dismissed for disciplinary reasons when all other alternatives have failed
to solve the problem or, in the judgment of the City Council, dismissal is the only appropriate action.
7.04. - Notice of Proposed Adverse Action.
The Department Head or Supervisor should give the employee a notification of the proposed adverse action prior to
the effective date of the action. (The specific timetable depends on the type adverse action and is outlined in Section
7.08A and 7.08B.) The notice should contain:
the effective date of the action, and that it is only a proposed action and will become final only if the employee
does not respond or if it is later upheld in an appeal process,
the charges or reasons for the action, (see Section 7.01 and 7.02
a statement informing the employee that he or she may respond to the City Council.
a warning that a failure to respond to the City Council or other named official will result in the loss of an
opportunity to appeal the adverse action any further and that the proposed action will be implemented as
proposed.
7.05. - Employee Response to Proposal of Adverse Action.
The employee must respond in writing to the City Council or other official named in the notice within the time period
outlined in Sections 7.08A or 7.08B, depending upon the nature of the proposed action.
7.06. - Named Ocial Response to Employee.
The City Council, (or other official named in the notice), after considering the employee's response, should arrange for
a hearing and notify the employee within the time frames outlined in Section 7.08A or 7.08B, hold the hearing and
notify the employee of the results.
7.07. - Postponement of Deadlines.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
159/192
A.
B.
If the employee responds to the City Council (or other official named in the notice), the City Council (or other official
named in the notice) may postpone the deadline for his response by a specific number of days to conduct further
investigation. If his/her deadline for response is postponed, the effective date of the proposed action should be
postponed by as many days.
7.08. - Procedures for Administering Adverse Actions.
These procedures are divided into two categories - disciplinary action involving dismissal and disciplinary action
involving adverse actions other than dismissal.
Cases where the discipline involves disciplinary suspension without pay, disciplinary salary reduction or
disciplinary demotion.
In these three types of adverse actions, the employee should be notified fifteen (fifteen (15) days prior to the
proposed effective date by the Department Head or Supervisor of the type disciplinary action that is being
proposed, the reasons therefore and the effective date(s) of the action. The notice should include a statement
that indicates to the employee that he may request a hearing before the City Council provided that the
employee files a written request within five (5) days of receiving his/her notice of adverse action.
The City Council should then schedule a hearing within ten (10) days of receiving the request and so notify the
employee. No action should be implemented before the employee receives a hearing before the City Council
or designee if a hearing is requested.
The employee may bring witnesses and have legal counsel. If witnesses are brought in, the City Council and/or
its designee may cross examine or otherwise question the witnesses. Under no circumstances, however,
should this hearing be allowed to deteriorate to an adversal hearing. The hearing is designed to obtain facts.
The City Council may elect to dismiss, uphold or modify the proposed adverse action and should notify the
employee in writing, within five (5) working days of its decision.
The notification should also include a statement to the employee that indicates that the employee may appeal
the City Council's decision providing he/she responds in writing to the City Council within five (5) days of
receipt of the City Council's notification. If the employee does not respond in five (5) days, he/she waives the
possibility of further appeal. If an appeal is requested, the City Council should arrange for a hearing and notify
the employee of the date.
An impartial attorney should serve as hearing officer. The hearing process may be less formal than a court
hearing. The hearing officer should compile evidence, prepare findings of facts, conclusions of law and issue a
recommendation to the City Council which the Council should consider in determining if the earlier decision
should stand or if it should be modified and so notify the employee.
Any hearings or appeals provided to employees should not be interpreted as an exercise of judicial power.
Such hearings are merely voluntary compliance of forms of judicial procedure.
Cases where the Disciplinary Action Involves Dismissal.
In this type of adverse action, the employee should be notified by the Department Head/Supervisor that
he/she is being suspended with pay pending termination. The notification should contain the reasons for the
action and the effective date (which should be 10 days from date of notification of proposed action) and
should contain a statement that the employee may request a hearing before the City Council provided that the
employee files a written request within three (3) days of receiving his/her notice of proposed dismissal.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
160/192
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
The City Council should then schedule a hearing within five (5) days of receiving the request and so notify the
employee. The employee should not be terminated before the employee receives a hearing before the City
Council if a hearing is requested.
The employee may bring witnesses and may have legal counsel. If witnesses are brought in, the City Council or
its designee may cross examine and otherwise question the witness. Under no circumstances, however, should
this hearing be allowed to deteriorate to an adverseral hearing. The hearing is designed to obtain facts.
The City Council may elect to dismiss, uphold or modify the proposed dismissal and should notify the
employee in writing within two (2) days of their decision.
The notification should also include a statement to the employee that indicates that the employee may appeal
the City Council's decision provided he/she responds in writing to the City Council within five (5) days of receipt
of the City Council's notification. If the employee does not respond in five (5) days, he/she waives the possibility
of further appeal. If an appeal is requested, the City Council should arrange for a hearing and notify the
employee of the date.
An impartial attorney should serve as hearing officer. The hearing process may be less formal than a court
hearing. The hearing officer should compile evidence, prepare findings of facts, conclusions of law and issue a
recommendation to the City Council who should make the final decision.
Any hearings or appeals provided to employees should not be interpreted an exercise of judicial power. Such
hearings are merely voluntary compliance of forms of judicial procedure.
VIII - - GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS NOT INVOLVING ADVERSE ACTIONS
8.01. - Purpose.
The purpose of the employee grievance procedure is to provide an orderly process for hearing the grievable claims of
both regular and working test employees. The object of the process if to reach a fair and equitable decision in a timely
manner. The employee and supervisor should make an effort to resolve any grievance informally before initiating a
formal procedure.
8.02. - Denition.
A grievance is a claim initiated by an employee alleging:
that his or her employment or productivity has been adversely affected by unfair treatment,
unsafe or unhealthy working conditions,
erroneous or capricious application of City policies and procedures, or
unlawful discrimination
8.03. - Steps.
Normally a grievance procedure will provide for a minimum of two steps. When practical, an attempt will be made to
provide at least two steps to grievants. However, the organizational structure of the City may, as a practical matter,
prevent all grievants from receiving two steps. The following represents the order of the maximum grievance levels for
employees:
Department Head
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
161/192
(2)
1.
2.
3.
4.
C.
1.
2.
3.
A.
B.
C.
City Council
In cases where a grievable claim is not resolved to the employee's satisfaction at the highest applicable available
grievance level (and if it is an appealable matter). (See Section 8.05 and 8.06) the employee may request another
hearing which will be conducted by an impartial attorney (or alternate hearing officer) who may further determine the
facts in the case and present his/her findings to the City Council which then may elect to modify its decision or may
elect to let the original decision stand. This decision should be final.
8.04. - Grievance Filing Process.
An employee may file a written grievance with his or her Department Head or Supervisor within fifteen (15) days
after the occurrence of the event being grieved, or within fifteen (15) days after becoming aware of the event. The
grievance statement must be submitted to the Department Head/Supervisor in writing, and it should state the
specific claim and the specific relief desired.
Scheduling and Notification. If the claim is determined to be grievable, a hearing by the Department Head should be
held within twenty (20) days after the grievance is filed. The hearing officer (Department Head/Supervisor) should
notify the grievant of his or her decision in writing within fifteen (15) days after the initial decision and inform the
employee that he/she may request a further hearing before the City Council.
The employee must, within five (5) days of the decision of the first hearing officer, (Department Head/Supervisor)
request a grievance consultation with the City Council.
If a second hearing is requested, the City Council should schedule and notify the employee of the date of the second
hearing and render its decision within ten (10) days of the date of the hearing. If the decision is not in favor of the
employee, (and if it is an appealable matter) the notification should include a statement, that the employee may be
allowed to request a hearing before an impartial attorney who will hold a further hearing. (See Section 8.06).
Grievance Hearings.
First (and Second Level - if available).
Grievance hearings at these two levels are semiformal in nature. The hearing officer should listen to the
grievant's presentation and question the grievant to obtain pertinent facts about the claim and the situation
relevant to the claim. The employee may represent himself/herself or may bring witnesses to the hearing to
testify. Both the grievant and the hearing officers may question the witnesses. (These are information sessions
and under no circumstances should they be allowed to become adverseral in nature).
Appeal Hearing by the Impartial Attorney.
If a hearing before an attorney is held on appealable grievances, both the grievant and the City Council may
represent themselves or may choose to have an attorney. The hearing officer should compile evidence,
prepare findings of fact, conclusions of law, and issue a recommendation to the City Council who will make the
final decision.
Any hearings or appeals provided to employees should not be interpreted as an exercise of judicial power.
They are merely voluntary compliance of forms of judicial process.
8.05. - Non-Grievable Areas.
The following areas are not grievable:
Issues which are pending or have been concluded by other administrative or judicial procedures.
Work assignments which do not result in a demotion or salary reduction.
Budget allocations and expenditures, and organizational structure, including the persons or number of
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
162/192
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
1.
2.
3.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
persons assigned to particular jobs or unit.
The content or rating of a performance appraisal except when the employee can show that he or she has been
adversely affected by the appraisal.
The selection of an individual by the appointing authority or designee to fill a position through appointment,
promotion or transfer except when the employee can show that he or she has been adversely affected
because of unlawful discrimination.
Any matter which is not within the jurisdiction or control of the appointing authority.
Internal security practices established by the appointing authority.
Decisions, policies, practices, resolutions, or ordinances made or passed by the governing authority or the
appointing authority which are not job or work related and which do not contradict these policies.
Disciplinary actions other than reprimands.
8.06. - Appeals.
As stated in Section VII, an employee may appeal an adverse action. Additionally, employees may appeal certain other
personnel actions that adversely affect an employee provided that the claim must be grieved before it is appealed.
These include:
unlawful discrimination against an employee,
unlawful or unjust coercion or reprisal,
other unlawful or unjust practices that adversely affect an employee.
Any appeals or hearings provided to employees should not be interpreted as an exercise of judicial power. Such
hearings are merely voluntary compliance of forms of judicial procedures.
IX - - HOLIDAYS
9.01. - Holidays Allowed.
The following are the official holidays that will be observed by eligible employees:
New Year's Day
Independence Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
Labor Day
Martin Luther King Day
Memorial Day
9.02. - Observation of Holidays.
Employees may be required to work during the above holidays. Those employees who are required to work on these
holidays will receive, in addition to receiving holiday pay, regular pay for the hours worked including any appropriate
overtime or may elect to take an equivalent amount of time off at another time as determined by the employee and
the City Council.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
163/192
A.
B.
(1)
Employees not working on a holiday will receive straight time for the holiday. It will be computed on the regular
amount for a normal shift.
If a holiday falls on a Saturday, it will generally be observed on the preceding Friday. If a holiday falls on Sunday, it will
generally be observed on the following Monday.
X - - WORK HOURS, OVERTIME AND COMPENSATORY TIME
10.01. - Workhours.
Because of differences in job requirements, the required work hours or work period may vary from job to job and
department to department.
10.02. - Overtime.
Non-exempt employees whose work period is one week will be paid at the rate of one and one-half the normal rate
for all hours worked over forty (40) hours per week. Public safety departments will establish work period and overtime
policies separately as a part of the departmental operating policies. Exempt employees will receive their normal
salaries for any work period.
10.03. - Compensatory Time.
Compensatory time for overtime hours may be given in lieu of overtime. The appointing authority and the employee
will determine the positions that will receive compensatory time and the method of administering compensatory time.
Employees must sign a written agreement if they wish to take 1½ compensatory time in lieu of 1½ overtime pay. Other
aspects of FLSA compensatory time laws will be observed including maximums allowed on compensatory time.
10.04. - Time Sheets.
Employees are required to keep accurate time sheets on forms provided by the appointing authority in accordance
with City and FLSA requirements.
XI - - LEAVE
11.01. - Types of Leave.
The City recognizes five types of leave that are available to employees. They are: annual leave, sick leave, military
leave, court leave and leave-of-absence.
11.02. - Annual Leave.
Annual leave is leave that is earned to be used for vacations, personal business activities and other personal activities.
Eligibility. All fulltime employees, acting fulltime employees and halftime employees will be eligible. Parttime,
seasonal, substitute and temporary workers are not eligible. Half-time employees will earn leave at a half-time
rate.
Method of Earning Annual Leave.
Employees with less than (1) one year of service will earn no annual leave.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
164/192
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
Employees with one (1) to three (3) years of service will earn 3.333 hours per month or 40 hours per year.
Employees with three (3) years or more of service will earn 6.667 hours per month or 80 hours per year.
Employees with ten (10) to fifteen (15) years of service will earn 10 hours per month or 120 hours per
year.
Employees with fifteen (15) or more years of service will earn 13.333 hours per month or 160 hours per
year.
Method of Accumulating Annual Leave.
Employees regardless of length of service, may accumulate up to 240 hours of annual leave. All hours in excess
of this amount will be forfeited. Computations will be made monthly.
Method of Taking Annual Leave.
Employees may take annual leave in increments or in blocks subject to departmental and Council approval.
Terminal Annual Leave.
Upon termination for any reason, an employee may be paid up to 240 hours of accumulated leave.
If an employee dies while in the City service, his/her beneficiary will be paid any accumulated leave up to
240 hours.
Other Annual Leave Factors.
Cash payment will not be paid in lieu of annual leave except at termination.
Employees will not be granted annual leave in excess of that accumulated.
Requests for annual leave will be on the form provided by the City Clerk with Department Head approval
prior to the effective day of annual leave. The City Clerk must receive a copy of the request to determine
if sufficient accrued leave is available.
11.03. - Sick Leave.
Sick leave is leave accumulated to be taken for bona fide illness and injury and other medical related necessities such
as physician appointments, medical examinations, dental appointments and funerals in the immediate family. Sick
leave is available for the employee's personal health care as well as for the care of members of the immediate family.
Eligibility. All fulltime, halftime and acting fulltime employees are eligible. Temporary, seasonal, parttime and
substitute employees are not eligible for sick leave.
Method of Earning Sick Leave. Eligible employees, regardless of length of service may earn sick leave at the
rate of 8.0 hours per month. Halftime employees will earn sick leave at a halftime rate.
Accumulating Sick Leave. Eligible employees regardless of length of service may accumulate up to 480 hours
sick leave. Any accumulation over these amounts will be forfeited. Computations will be made monthly.
Reporting. The employee should report any sick leave absence prior to his or her scheduled work time, if
possible, and if not, the employee should see that his/her absence is reported within one (1) hour after the
scheduled time for the employee to begin work.
Approval. Sick leave requires the approval of the Department Head.
Physicians Certificate. A medical statement signed by a licensed physician may be required to substantiate sick
leave for:
Absences of three (3) or more consecutive work days.
To support a request for sick leave during annual leave.
At any time when absence recurs frequently or habitually provided the employee is forewarned.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
165/192
G.
H.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Advance of Sick Leave. The appointing authority may advance sick leave to eligible employees. All accumulated an
have been used before the employee is eligible for consideration for advance sick leave. If an employee is indebte
paid sick leave at the time of termination of service, the amount due will be deducted from his termination pay.
Sick Leave on Termination of Employment. Accrued sick leave is forfeited on termination of employment.
There will be no payment of accumulated sick leave.
11.04. - Military Leave (Also see 11.06A).
Georgia law requires that paid leave be granted to members of the Reserve and National Guard under certain
conditions.
Ordered Duty. In compliance with Georgia Code 38-2-279 [O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279], any employee ordered to
military duty shall be placed on military leave with pay for a period of time not exceeding a total of eighteen
(18) days in any one calendar year and not exceeding eighteen (18) days in any one continuous period of
absence.
Declared Emergency. According to Georgia Code 38-2-279 [O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279] in the event the Governor
declares an emergency and orders any employee to State Active duty as a member of the National Guard, the
employee shall receive pay for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days in any one calendar year and not
exceeding thirty (30) days in any one continuous period of active duty service.
11.05. - Court Leave.
An employee performing jury duty will be granted leave with pay. The employee will be permitted to retain all fees and
allowances as well as retaining full City pay.
11.06. - Leave of Absence.
For Military Purposes. According to Georgia Code 38-2-279 [O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279] any voluntary member of the
Reserve or National Guard shall be entitled to absent himself and shall be deemed to have a leave of absence as any
employee while in attendance at any service school conducted by the Armed Forces of the United States for a period
up to six months during any four (4) year period.
For Temporary Disability and Other Reasons. A disabled employee may exhaust all accrued sick and annual leave.
When paid leave is exhausted, the employee may be placed on leave of absence, depending on the duration and the
need to fill the position. A doctor's statement will be requested to determine the length of leave necessary.
Maternity and other temporarily disabling conditions associated with pregnancy will be treated as any other
disability.
Benefits During Leave of Absence. A leave of absence prevents a break in service but no benefits such as leave or
time toward retirement shall accrue during leave of absence.
XII - - WORKER'S COMPENSATION PROCEDURES
12.01. - Non-emergency Occupational; Accidents or Disease.
[Accidents] must be reported to Department Head within 24 hours.
Department Head investigates accident and fills out report of injury or disease in full detail and forwards
immediately to City Clerk's Office.
If medical attention of physician is needed, the City Clerk's Office makes appointment for employee with physician
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
166/192
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
of his choice, selected from the 3 physicians appointed by the City for Worker's Compensation Treatment.
Employee is given Treatment Authorization form to submit to doctor's office at the time of first treatment.
Employee returns Treatment Authorization form to Department Head immediately after treatment is received.
Department Head forwards copies of complete Treatment Authorization form to City Clerk's Office.
Department Head should direct any problem or questions concerning claim to City Clerk's office for discussion.
City Clerk's Office must be informed of date employee returns to work.
12.02. - Emergency Accidents.
If a work-related accident occurs that requires immediate emergency treatment, the supervisor should be notified
immediately and treatment received at the emergency room.
After treatment is received, the Report of Occupational Injury or Disease should be filled out in detail and submitted
to the City Clerk's office.
Subsequent treatment must be directed to one of the City's Workers Compensation Insurance physicians, unless the
injury requires specialized treatment and emergency doctor refers the employee to a physician who specializes in
the type injury incurred.
NOTE: If a Non-emergency Occupational Disease or Accident should occur at night or on weekends that requires medical attention
before regular office hours, procedures for emergency accidents should be followed.
XIII - - NON DISCIPLINARY DEMOTIONS
13.01. - Non Disciplinary Demotions.
Employees may request that they be demoted to open positions at lower pay grades if they are qualified for the
position. If such a request is granted, the employee's salary will be reduced to an appropriate step within the pay
grade of the new job.
XIV - - TRANSFERS
14.01. - Initiation and Authority for Transfers.
The appointing authority may initiate a transfer or an employee may request a transfer.
If a position is open at an equivalent pay grade, an employee may request transfer to that position. If the
knowledge, skills and abilities required for that job are not the same as for the present job, the employee will
be tested and interviewed for the new position and will be on working test for the new job if transferred. The
discretion to grant a transfer, if requested, rests with the appointing authorities.
The appointing authority may transfer an employee to any position, at any pay grade, if the employee is
qualified to do the work and if the salary is not changed. A temporary transfer to a higher position may be
made for up to ninety (90) days without giving a salary increase.
XV - - JOB ABANDONMENT
Employees who are absent from work for three (3) or more consecutive days without having received leave approval
or without having called in to report the absence will be considered as having voluntarily abandoned their jobs. The
separation will not be in good standing and may affect the opportunities for re-employment.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
167/192
XVI - - REDUCTION IN FORCE
A reduction in force may be necessary when a position or group of positions must be closed because of lack of work
or lack of funds. Employees who are separated in a reduction-in-force, may at the discretion of the appointing
authority, receive preference in rehiring should a position, for which they are qualified, open within that year.
XVII - - PROMOTIONS
17.01. - Promotional Goals.
Promotional vacancies may be filled with applicants external to the City's work force at the discretion of the
appointing authority. Normally, however, an attempt will be made to fill the vacancy from within if there is a qualified
applicant already working with the City and such action would not be in conflict with the City's anti-discrimination or
unfair employment practices.
17.02. - Eect of a Promotion.
If a formal job classification plan is in effect, a promoted employee will be placed in the step in his new job class that
the appointing authority deems appropriate under the circumstances. If no formal plan is in effect, the employee will
be paid a salary deemed appropriate by the appointing authority.
17.03. - Relationship of Promotions to Performance Pay Increases.
If the City, at the time of promotion, has a system for performance pay in effect, the promotion will not interfere with
the employee's consideration for a performance pay increase at the next scheduled performance evaluation date.
17.04. - Eective Date.
The effective date of any promotion, for compensation purposes, will be the first day of the next pay period following
the date the appointing authority approves the promotion.
XVIII - - RESIGNATION
18.01. - Resignation Dened.
Resignation is the separation of an employee from the City through the submittal of a notice that he wishes to resign.
18.02. - Resignation in Good Standing.
Employees are expected to provide a minimum of two weeks notice in order to resign in good standing. This may be in
written form or given verbally. Failure to provide such notice may adversely affect the employee's chances of reemployment with the City should a re-employment application be submitted at a later date.
18.03. - Refusal to Accept Resignation.
Under certain circumstances, the appointing authority may choose not to accept an employee's resignation, and may
instead choose to dismiss the employee.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
168/192
XIX - - EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT
19.01. - In-Service Training.
The City is interested in promoting in-service training of employees for the purpose of improving the quality of
personal service rendered to the City and to assist employees to equip themselves for advancement in the City. The
appointing authorities may establish standards for training programs; see that training is carried out as approved;
prepare certificates or other forms of recognition to persons who satisfactorily complete approved courses and
programs; and develop supervisory and management training and other types of training programs common to all
departments.
19.02. - Reserved.
XX - - UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT
Some Uniforms for the Police and such other employees as the appointing authority may authorize, may be furnished
by the City. Such other equipment as the appointing authorities may deem essential to job performance may also be
furnished. Upon termination of employment, an employee is expected to return all such equipment and uniforms to
his/her supervisor. Specific current rules and cost-sharing plans relative to uniforms and equipment will be provided
by a memo to employees.
XXI - - OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT
All City employees must receive permission from the appointing authority before accepting outside employment.
XXII - - GARNISHMENTS
Employee indebtedness is a personal concern of the employee but multiple garnishments of an employee's salary
creates administrative difficulties that may lead to disciplinary action.
XXIII - - ABUSE AND MISUSE OF EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES
Employees are entrusted with the use of public equipment and supplies. The abuse or misuse of City equipment and
supplies can lead to appropriate disciplinary action. Although there are other misuses or abuses, the use of City
vehicles for personal use is considered to be significant misuse or abuse.
XXIV - - SUSPENSION PENDING A FELONY CRIMINAL COURT HEARING/ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
Not to be confused with a disciplinary suspension, an employee may be charged with a crime pending a court
appearance or an internal investigation.
In these cases, the appointing authorities will determine, on a case by case basis, whether the employee will be
dismissed, suspended with or without pay, or will be allowed to continue to work.
The nature of the alleged crime, the length of time before the matter is resolved, whether the accused is free on bail
and other factors will be the determining factors.
If the employee is suspended without pay and is exonerated, the appointing authority may elect to reinstate the
employee with full back pay or may elect to dismiss him depending on the circumstances.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
169/192
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
1.
2.
II.
A.
B.
C.
XXV - - ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE POLICIES
It is the position of the City that alcohol and controlled substance abuse is the number one health problem in the
United States today. The costs involved with this problem include human costs such as lost jobs, morale problems,
injuries, illnesses, and deaths, as well as economic costs such as property damage, tardiness, absenteeism, lost
productivity, increased health insurance costs, and the costs involved in replacing and retraining new employees. It is
a problem of epic proportion, reaching every community in the United States.
The use of alcohol or controlled substances by City employees while on the job constitutes a direct threat to property
and the safety of others. The work involved in many positions is inherently dangerous, and the safety of citizens and
employees depends upon the ability of fellow employees to think clearly with unimpaired faculties.
It is the objective of the City to provide safe and effective public service. To meet this objective, the problem of alcohol
and controlled substance abuse must be identified, confronted and defeated.
To this end, the following regulations will prevail:
Regulations.
The use or possession of alcohol or any controlled substance 1/while on work time or work premises
shall be prohibited.
1/As used in this policy, the term "controlled substance" shall have the meaning and include the
substances defined as "controlled substances" in the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, as said section
and said Act shall appear from time to time.
The sale, distribution or provision of alcohol or any controlled substance while on work time or work
premises shall be prohibited.
Reporting to work, or working, while intoxicated or otherwise impaired by alcohol or controlled substance
use shall be prohibited. A point .02 BAC shall be considered, for purpose of these policies, as impaired.
Individuals shall submit to alcohol and/or controlled substance testing:
When, in the opinion of supervisory personnel, there is a reasonable suspicion that an employee of
the City has violated any provision of the Alcohol and Controlled Substance Policy dealing with the
use of alcohol of any controlled substance.
When involved in an accident while operating a city vehicle or equipment which results in property
damage or personal injury.
Violations of Alcohol and Controlled Substance Policy.
If, in the opinion of the supervisor, a reasonable suspicion exists that the employee is reporting to work, or is
working, while under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances, or while impaired from the use of
same, the following procedures shall be followed:
(A reasonable suspicion must be based on objective indications of substance abuse and some of the more
obvious indications include repeated unauthorized absences, repeated illnesses, bloodshot eyes, slurred
speech, lethargic behavior inappropriate or inconsistent with circumstances.)
The supervisor shall arrange, if possible, for at least one other supervisor to observe the conduct of the
employee. The observing supervisor shall make a written report of the incident, which report shall
include a description of the conduct of the employee upon which such reasonable suspicion is based.
The employee, if still suspected, shall be asked to explain why it appears that he or she is under the
influence of or impaired by the use of alcohol or controlled substances.
If the employee fails to explain his or her condition to the satisfaction of the employee's supervisor an
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
170/192
D.
E.
F.
1.
2.
G.
H.
alcohol and/or controlled substance screening test shall be administered to the suspected employee.
Refusal to submit to such tests shall constitute insubordination, and the employee may be terminated.
If the confirmed results of such tests indicate the presence of alcohol (.02 BAC or more) or any controlled
substance in the system of the employee, it will be assumed that the employee is impaired. This
assumption of impairment will result in the suspension with pay of the employee, pending further
investigation.
During the period the employee is suspended with pay, an investigation shall take place. This
investigation will be completed within three (3) working days. During this investigation, the employee may
through his/her own effort, attempt to rebut the assumption of impairment. For example, the employee
may submit to a blood test for the presence of alcohol and controlled substances. If such blood test
produces a negative result, the assumption of impairment may be considered rebutted, depending upon
such factors as the timing of the blood test and other circumstances surrounding the impairment. The
opportunity for the employee to attempt to rebut the charges during this investigative period constitutes
the final hearing before the City Council while the employee is suspended with pay.
If after the investigation is completed, and if it has been determined that a violation of the Alcohol and
Controlled Substance Policy has occurred, it shall be within the discretion of supervisory personnel to:
Terminate or otherwise discipline the employee under provisions of Section 7.01 and 7.02 of this
handbook. As with any termination or disciplinary action, the employee may be given the
opportunity for an appeal as outlined in Section 7.08A or 7.08B and Section 8.06 of these policies.
Refer the employee to a rehabilitation program to determine if there is a significant chance that the
employee can be rehabilitated and the employee has not committed an act or omission which
presented an immediate danger to the public or fellow workers. This referral would be the
employee's "last chance". After successful completion of an alcohol and/or controlled substance
rehabilitation program, the employee may return to work subject to random alcohol and controlled
substance screening tests for a period of 12 months. If at any time during this "last chance" testing
period, a screening test indicates the presence of alcohol or any controlled substances in the
employee's system, the employee shall be immediately terminated.
Violation of Regulation I, B-(sale or distribution of alcohol or controlled substance) will ordinarily result in
termination.
At all times during an investigation of violations of the Alcohol and Controlled Substances Policy, the
confidentiality of the case will be protected.
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) ---
NOTE: These policies apply to all City of Edison employees. In addition, employees of the Natural Gas Department are also subject
to additional drug testing policies as required by DOT.
XXVI - - CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
No employee should accept gifts or gratuities from anyone who might expect to receive return favors from the City.
Neither shall an employee have any financial interests in the profits of any contract service or other work performed
by the City, nor shall he/she personally profit directly or indirectly from any contract, purchase, sale of service
between the City, any person or company, nor shall he/she personally or as an agent, provide any surety, bail or bond
required by law or by the appointing authority.
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
171/192
XXVII - - POLITICAL ACTIVITIES
With regard to political activities, employees are expected to conduct themselves in a manner that is in conformance
with all federal laws (Hatch Act), state laws, and local laws. Employees are not to use city time or equipment for
partisan political activities.
XXVIII - - SECURITY CLEARANCES
In employment areas such as public safety and finance where the public has a compelling interest in the security of
property and life, applicants for employment, promotion and transfer may be asked to supply personal information
that would not be needed in other employment areas.
XXIX - - OFFICIAL COPY
28.01 [29.01]. - General.
Official copies of these policies will be attested by, and placed upon file in the City Clerk's Office as well as posted on
various bulletin boards in various departments which will be readily accessible to all employees.
APPENDIX (DEFINITIONS)
Adverse Action - An action taken that results in a disciplinary suspension without pay, disciplinary salary reduction,
disciplinary demotion or disciplinary dismissal.
Adverse Affect - The results of an action or decision that is not an adverse action but which deprives the employee of
income or the opportunity to earn more income.
Appointing Authority - The person or persons who have, among other authorities, the authority to appoint and
discharge all employees. The City Council is the appointing authority for the City.
City Council - The governing authority and financial authority of the City also the appointing authority.
The Impartial Attorney - The attorney who may be retained by the City to conduct hearings.
Days - When the word "days" is used as a method of counting, it means calendar days unless stated otherwise.
Department - This term refers to (1) the different departments under the Mayor and Council.
Designee - The person or persons to whom the appointing authority delegates certain authorities for the
administration of their offices. The Mayor is hereby designated to administer these policies. He/she may further
designate department heads to assist in administering these policies.
Handicapped - Any person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life
activities, who has a record of such an impairment, or who is regarded as having such an impairment.
Unlawful Discrimination - Employment practices which are prohibited by Stated and Federal laws, and which include
discrimination because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, age, mental or physical handicap and political
affiliation.
Working Test - A period of time, during which a new employee or an employee who has been transferred or promoted
to a higher position is being tested on job capability and performance.
APPENDIX ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ABUSE STANDARD FORMS
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
172/192
EMPLOYEE CONSENT AND NOTICE:
ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE TESTING
UPON REASONABLE SUSPICION THAT VIOLATION OF
ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE POLICY HAS OCCURRED
It is the opinion of the City that there is reasonable suspicion to believe that you have been involved in a violation of
the Alcohol and Controlled Substance Policy of the City. As provided in that policy, you are required to submit to an
alcohol and controlled substance screening test. In order to retain your position as a City employee, you must
successfully pass this screening test or at the City's discretion, participate in a rehabilitation program.
By signing this form, you are acknowledging that you consent to such a screening test, that you consent to the release
of test results to your supervisors, and that you understand that such a screening test is part of the City's Alcohol and
Controlled Substance Policy.
You will not be admitting that you have violated the Alcohol and Controlled Substance Policy by signing this form.
Date: _____ Signature: _____
Print Name: _____
Soc. Sec. #: _____
Witnessed by Authorized
City of Edison Employee: _____
EMPLOYEE CONSENT AND NOTICE
SUPERVISOR REFERRAL
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
It has been determined that you have violated the City's Alcohol and Controlled Substance Policy. You have been
referred to a rehabilitation program. By signing this form, you acknowledge that you understand this referral is your
"last chance", that you will cooperate with this program and follow directions given by a counselor, and that you
understand you will be subject, upon completion of the program, to random alcohol and controlled substances
screening tests for a period of 12 months.
If you fail to abide by this agreement, you will be terminated consistent with Section 7.01 and 7.02 of the City's
Personnel Handbook.
Date: _____ Signature: _____
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
173/192
Print Name: _____
Soc. Sec. #: _____
Witnessed by Authorized
City of Edison Employee: _____
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1941 CODE
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1941 Code which are included herein.
1941 Code
Section
Section
this Code
321 36-7
337 36-95
340(a) 36-94
340(b) 36-67
343 36-93
350 36-7
356 36-93
357 36-9
36-93
362 36-95
374 36-66
376 36-37
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
174/192
377 36-1
379 36-4
383 36-63
387 36-7
389 36-95
394 36-65
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1973 CODE
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1973 Code, which Code embraced ordinances adopted
through November 11, 1973.
1973 Code
Section
Section
this Code
1-1—1-4 1-1—1-4
1-5 1-8
1-6 1-5
1-8 1-7
2-1 2-25
2-3, 2-4 2-56, 2-57
2-5, 2-6 2-165, 2-166
2-27 2-88
2-29 2-89
2-29(3), (5), (9)f 24-7
2-30 2-89
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
175/192
2-31 2-108
3-1 4-5
3-2 4-33
3-5, 3-6 4-35
3-24 4-2
3-27, 3-28 4-2
3-29 4-32
3-30—3-32 4-56—4-58
3-33 4-34
3-34 4-31
4-1 6-3
4-17 6-4
6-117
6-1 24-1
6-3 24-3
6-5 24-4
6-9, 6-10 24-5, 24-6
7-2—7-5 14-1—14-4
8-1—8-7 30-19—30-25
8-10 30-26
9-3 32-6
9-31—9-33 18-19—18-21
10-2(1) 28-88
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
176/192
10-2(3) 28-82
10-2(11) 36-6
10-2(14) 14-5
10-2(15) 28-83
10-2(21) 28-85
10-2(25) 28-53
10-2(31) 28-86
10-2(37) 28-84
10-3 32-96
10-5 28-1
10-7, 10-8 28-51, 28-52
10-9 28-50
10-10 28-54
10-11 28-23
10-12 28-120
11-1—11-3 22-174
22-176
12-1—12-5 20-19—20-23
13-1 32-7
13-2 32-1
13-3, 13-4 32-8, 32-9
13-4 32-10
13-6 32-11
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
177/192
13-7 32-2
13-8—13-10 32-3
13-11 36-6
13-12 32-12
13-13, 13-14 32-4, 32-5
14-1—14-8 22-1—22-8
14-9 22-65
14-26 22-66
15-1 36-1
15-2 36-63
15-5 36-37
15-6 36-5
15-7 36-4
15-14—15-16 36-7
15-19 36-8
15-23 36-9
15-34 36-95
15-41 36-64
15-45 36-65
15-52, 15-53 36-66, 36-67
15-99, 15-100 36-93, 36-94
15-106 36-96
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
178/192
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES
This table gives the location within the Code of Ordinances adopted after November 11, 1973.
Ordinance
Number
Date Section Section
this
Code
16-16 36-7
 2-19-1975(Ord.) 1—6 2-2
 2-14-1977(Ord.) 1 4-1
2, 3 4-4
3, 4 4-168, 4-
169
5 4-166
6 4-170
7 4-135
8 4-138
9 4-137
10 4-139
13 4-140
14 4-167
15 4-3
4-136
4-171
16, 17 4-4
18 4-167
19 4-172
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
179/192
20, 21 4-133, 4-
134
22 4-167
24 4-141
25, 26 4-173, 4-
174
 7- 1-1979(Ord.) 2-130
17-2 2-131
17-4,
17-5
2-132, 2-
133
12- 8-1980(Ord.) ¶ 1 22-122
¶ 3 22-121
¶ 4 22-123
¶ 5 22-206—
22-209
12-13-1982(1)(Ord.) 24-1
24-3, 24-
4
12-13-1982(2)(Ord.) 1-7
11-14-1983(Ord.) 1—6 22-91—
22-96
 2-13-1984(Ord.) 4-3, 4-4
4-136
4-171
 5-13-1985(Ord.) 1—3 2-1
 8-11-1986(Ord.) 4-139
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
180/192
 8-12-1986(Ord.) 32-2
 5-15-1989(Ord.) 1, 2 2-3
12-10-1990(1)(Ord.) 1, 2 8-2
12-10-1990(2)(Ord.) 1, 2 8-2
 6-10-1991(Ord.) 5 8-1
12-13-1993(Ord.) 1 12-20
2 12-19
3—5 12-22—
12-24
6 12-21
 3-14-1994(Ord.) art. 2 38-77
art. 3 38-82
art. 4—
art. 6
38-83—
38-85
art. 9 38-80
art. 10 38-79
art. 11 38-78
art. 13 38-81
 3-13-1995(Ord.) 1, 2 38-57
3 38-19
4 38-54
5 38-56
6, 7 38-20,
38-21
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
181/192
8 38-55
9, 10 38-22,
38-23
11 38-58
12 38-24
13 38-59
14 38-25
10- 9-1995(Ord.) I(art. 1) 34-13
I(2.1)—
I(2.7)
34-29—
34-35
I(3.1) 34-15
I(3.2) 34-14
 1- 4-1999(Ord.) 1.01 6-1
1.02 6-1
2.03 6-2
2.04 6-34
2.05 6-33
2.06,
2.07
6-35, 6-
36
2.08 6-6
2.09 6-5
2.11 6-7
3.01—
3.05
6-113—
6-117
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
182/192
4.01—
4.07
6-86—6-
92
5.06—
5.13
6-148—
6-155
6.02 6-85
6.03 6-63
7.01—
7.03
6-179—
6-181
8.03,
8.04
6-61, 6-
62
 2-12-2001(1)(Ord.) 1 12-53
2 12-56
3 12-52
4 12-57
5, 6 12-54,
12-55
 2-12-2001(2)(Ord.) 1 12-89
2 12-88
3—8 12-90—
12-95
12-96
 7-17-2001(Ord.) 3A-1 4-75
3A-2 4-93
3A-4,
3A-5
4-95, 4-
96
3A-6 4-4
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
183/192
3A-7,
3A-8
4-97, 4-
98
3A-9 4-100
3A-10 4-94
3A-11 4-99
3A-13 4-94
3A-13,
3A-14
4-101, 4-
102
3A-17 4-76
3A-18 4-93
3A-21 4-99
 9- 4-2001(Ord.) I, II 2-26
12- 9-2002(Ord.) 1—9 28-2
 3-10-2003(Ord.) 8-23—8-
26
 3-28-2005(2)(Ord.) 1—3 24-2
11-14-2005(Ord.) 26-19,
26-20
26-44—
26-48
26-70
26-99,
26-100
26-129,
26-130
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
184/192
26-159—
26-161
26-191—
26-194
28-87
0003 12- 8-2008 1(art. I,
§ 1),
1(art. I,
§ 2)
32-44,
32-45
1(art. I,
§ 3)
32-43
1(art. II,
§ 1)
32-53
1(art. II,
§§ 2—4)
32-54
1(art. III,
§§ 1—3)
32-56
1(art. IV)
—
1(art. VI)
32-57—
32-59
1(art.
VII)
32-55
1(art.
VIII)
32-52
1(art. IX,
§ 1)
32-46
1(art. IX,
§ 2)—
1(art. IX,
§ 4)
32-49—
32-51
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
185/192
1(art. IX,
§ 5),
1(art. IX,
§ 6)
32-47,
32-48
 1- 3-2009(Ord.) I 10-19
II, III 10-44,
10-45
V 10-46
VI 10-20
0609  6- 9-2009 1(609) 34-1
1(6091) 34-2
2009:0902  8-10-2009 art. 1, §
A—
art. 1, §
D
16-20—
16-23
art. 2, §
A,
art. 2, §
B
16-24,
16-25
art. 2, §
C
16-51
art. 2, §
D—
art. 2, §
H
16-26—
16-30
art. 3, §
A
16-49
art. 3, §
B
16-52
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
186/192
art. 3, §
C
16-50
art. 4, §
A—
art. 4, §
G
16-80—
16-86
art. 5 16-53
art. 6 16-19
 1- 4-2010(Ord.) 22-122
 4-12-2010(Ord.) 1—4 22-35—
22-38
 2- 7-2011(Res.) 1(16.10),
1(16.11)
12-1
 4-11-2011(Res.) 1 38-57
12-19-2011(Res.) 1   
 Added
28-131—
28-133
 2-13-2012(Ord.) 1—7 Adopting
ord.
(pg. xi)
12-10-2012(Res.) 1   
 Added
8-51—8-
56
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official
Code of Georgia Annotated.
O.C.G.A.
Section
Section
this Code
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
187/192
1-3-3 12-1
tit. 3 4-94
3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 4
3-1-2 4-1
3-2-1 et seq. Char. § 5.21
3-2-2 4-4
3-3-1 et seq. Ch. 4
3-3-20 4-35
4-76
4-139
3-3-21 4-4
4-169
3-3-26 4-135
3-4-1 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. IV
3-4-80 4-136
3-5-1 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. II,
Ch. 4, Art. III
3-5-40 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. II,
Div. 2
Ch. 4, Art. III,
Div. 2
3-5-80 et seq. 4-2
3-6-1 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. II,
Ch. 4, Art. III
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
188/192
3-6-40 Ch. 4, Art. II,
Div. 2
Ch. 4, Art. III,
Div. 2
3-6-60 4-3
4-1-1 et seq. Ch. 6
4-8-20 Ch. 6, Art. VI
4-8-40 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. VI
5-4-1 16-53
8-2-1 et seq. Ch. 8
8-2-20 et seq. Ch. 8
8-3-2(c) 8-1
12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 30
Ch. 30, Art. II
15-21A-6(e) 24-2
16-7-42 et seq. Ch. 30
Ch. 30, Art. II
32-2
16-7-51 et seq. Ch. 30
Ch. 30, Art. II
32-2
16-11-32 28-88
16-11-33 28-83
16-11-39 28-82
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
189/192
16-11-41 28-85
16-11-44 28-84
16-11-173 28-50
16-12-4 Ch. 6
20-2-690 28-2
21-3-125 2-1
25-1-1 et seq. Ch. 14
25-3-1 et seq. 14-1
25-4-1 et seq. 14-1
25-8-1 et seq. 28-52
25-9-6 32-56
25-10-1 et seq. 28-51
31-3-5.2 12-1
31-19-1 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. V
31-19-5 6-114
32-4-90 et seq. Ch. 32
32-4-92 32-44
33-3-5(1) 22-91
22-95
33-8-4, 33-8-5 22-94
33-8-8 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. III,
Div. 2
33-8-8 22-91—22-93
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
190/192
33-8-8.1,
33-8-8.2
22-94, 22-95
33-8-8.2(a) 22-95
34-7-1 et seq. App. A, § 1.01
35-8-1 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II
36-1-20(a) 16-20
36-3-6 2-131
36-30-1 et seq. Ch. 2
36-32-1 et seq. Ch. 24
36-34-2 32-44
36-34-5 Ch. 38
36-35-4 2-26
36-35-6(a)(2) 1-7
36-77-1 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II
36-80-19 1-1
36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV,
Div. 2
36-81-3 2-130
36-82-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV
36-82-60 et seq. Char. § 6.21
36-83-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV
36-84-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV,
Div. 3
36-91-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV,
Div. 3
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
191/192
38-2-279 App. A, § 11.04
App. A, § 11.06
38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 10
Ch. 10, Art. II
38-3-3 et seq. 10-19
38-3-27 10-44
38-3-35 10-46
40-1-1 et seq. Ch. 36
40-1-1 36-2
tit. 40, ch. 6 36-2
40-6-1 et seq. Ch. 36
36-2
40-6-200 et seq. Ch. 36, Art. IV
40-6-253 28-120
40-6-371(a)(1) Ch. 36, Art. IV
36-67
40-6-372—
40-6-376
36-2
40-6-470 et seq. Ch. 36
41-1-1 et seq. Ch. 26
41-2-1 et seq. Ch. 26
41-2-7—
41-2-17
8-2
41-2-7(a) 8-2
5/9/2019 Edison, GA Code of Ordinances
192/192
41-2-8—
41-2-17
8-2
43-32-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IV
46-5-1 34-2
46-5-1(b)(8), (9) 34-1
48-5-359 22-37
48-13-5 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. III,