THE CODE OF GLASCOCK COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

GLASCOCK COUNTY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Lori T. Boyen 
Chairman 
____________ 
Anthony Griswell 
Jeffery Chalker 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Barry Fleming 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Kim Poss 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Glascock County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Julie Lovelace, Vice President, Code Department, and Rebecca D. Evans, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Chairman Lori Boyen, Adam Nelson with Fleming & Nelson, LLP, and County Clerk Kim Poss for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Glascock County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; pre-chapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Glascock County, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Glascock County, Georgia. 2018. 
PART I - LOCAL ACTS AND LOCAL CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1945 Ga. Laws (Act No. 54), page 569. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the act and the enacting clause have been deleted. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20, the title of the county governing authority has been changed from board of commissioners of road and revenues to board of commissioners. 

Sec. 1. - Created; composition. 
That a board of commissioners for the County of Glascock, Georgia, to consist of three members, is hereby created. Said commissioners shall be citizens and qualified voters of said county, of good moral character, and residing in the district in which they are elected, which districts are defined in this Act. 
Sec. 2. - Road districts; election of members. 
For the purpose of this Act, said County of Glascock shall be divided into three road districts to be constituted as follows: District Number 1 shall be composed of the 1167 District G. M. District Number 2 shall be composed of the 1168 District G. M. District Number 3 shall be composed of the 1169 District and the 1234 District G. M. Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that the three members elected in November 1944 for a four-year term shall be the three commissioners of roads and revenue under this Act and shall hold office until January 1, 1949, or until their successors are elected and qualified. Their successors shall be elected at the general election of 1948 and elections shall be held at the general election each four years thereafter. One member of said board of commissioners shall be elected from each of the three road districts and no member shall be elected from any road district unless he is a bona fide resident of the same and has been for at least one year prior to his election, but each member shall be elected by the voters of the entire county and not by the voters of his district alone. 
Sec. 3. - Filling of vacancies. 
Should a vacancy from death, resignation, removal from the county, district, or otherwise occur on said board of commissioners, the same shall be filled by appointment by the governor of Georgia until the first day of January after the general election held next after such vacancy occurs, and the appointment shall be made from the district in which the vacancy occurs. Each commissioner, before entering into his duties, shall give bond with good security to be approved by the judge of the probate court in the sum of $1,000.00, payable to the judge of the probate court of said county, and his successor in office and shall take and subscribe an oath before the judge of the probate court of said county to well and faithfully perform his duties as such commissioner under this Act, which bond and oath shall be filed with the judge of the probate court and recorded upon his minutes. Said bond shall be for the faithful performance of the duties of the office of commissioner and may be sued upon by the judge of the probate court on his own initiative or by direction of any grand jury of the county, and any commissioner and his surety shall be liable for any breach by way of malfeasance in office or for any neglect of duties. 
(1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 458), page 5281, § 1) 
Sec. 4. - Chairman and vice-chairman. 
The chairman of the board of commissioners shall be elected by the voters of the entire county. In order to be elected chairman of the board of commissioners, a person must announce his candidacy for the position of chairman on or before the date he is required to file his notice of candidacy with the judge of the probate court to be a candidate in the general election. The announcement shall be in the form of a public notice, and it shall be published in the legal organ of the county at least one time prior to the date he is required to file his notice of candidacy. The person who announces his candidacy for the position of chairman of the board of commissioners and who receives the highest number of votes cast in the general election shall be elected chairman of the board of commissioners, and he shall serve for a term of four years and until his successor is duly elected and qualified. It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside at all meetings of the board and to approve and sign the minutes of each meeting. The board shall elect its own vice-chairman from among its members to act in the absence or in the event of a disqualification of the chairman, and the vice-chairman shall exercise all powers of the chairman when presiding or when the chairman is absent from the county. The chairman shall have the right to vote on all questions and perform any duties imposed upon him as a member of the board of commissioners. 
(1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1283), page 3728, § 1) 
Sec. 5. - Compensation. 
The chairman of said board shall receive a salary of $2,400.00 per annum, and the other two commissioners shall each receive a salary of $1,500.00 per annum to cover all services in connection with the regular and special meetings of the board of commissioners. In addition to his salary, the chairman of said board shall also receive an expense allowance of $1,200.00 per annum. Said salaries and expense allowance shall be paid in monthly installments in the discretion of the board from funds in the county treasury, as other expenses of the county are paid. 
(1949 Ga. Laws (Act No. 462), page 1923, § 1; 1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 150), page 2460, § 1; 1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 791), page 2444, § 1; 1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1529), page 3952, § 1; 1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 3730, § 1) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-24, compensation for members of the board of commissioners may be fixed by such board. 
Sec. 6. - Meetings; clerk; bond of clerk; duties of clerk. 
Said commissioners shall meet in regular session at the county site on the first Tuesday in each month for the transaction of county business, but may meet in extraordinary session whenever, in their judgment, public necessity may require it or at any time upon a special call by the chairman; and they shall, at their first meeting after their organization under this Act or at any other time, appoint some suitable person to act as clerk of said board, whose term of office shall be the same as that of the commissioners, unless removed by the commissioners for incompetency or malpractice in office, and whose compensation shall be as set by the board of commissioners and paid out of the county treasury, as other expenses of the county are paid. The clerk shall file with the chairman of the board, subject to his approval, a bond, with good security, in the sum of $5,000.00, payable to the board of commissioners of Glascock County. Said bond shall be for the faithful performance of his duties as clerk and to account for all funds, property, or effects coming into his hands as such clerk and may be enforced by the commissioners by suit whenever malfeasance in office or neglect of duty occurs. It shall be the duty of the clerk to attend all meetings of the commissioners and to keep in well-bound books, to be provided by the commissioners at the expense of the county, full and accurate records and minutes of all their transactions; to file, in the order of their dates, all the original orders and other papers; to arrange and keep in order of their filing all petitions, applications, and other papers addressed to said commissioners and belonging to the board; to sign, as clerk, all orders and warrants issued at the instance of said board and to record in a separate book all orders made or approved by said commissioners for the payment of money by the county treasurer; and all books, fees, and records required by this Act to be used or kept shall be open at the county site for inspection of all taxpayers of the county at all times. 
(1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 458), page 5281, § 2) 
Sec. 7. - Superintendent of roads and bridges. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that the said board of commissioners shall be required to elect a superintendent of the roads and bridges of said county, to be selected on account of his efficiency, knowledge and skill in practical road building. Such superintendent shall have charge of laying out, building, repairing, improving and maintaining the public roads and bridges of the county under the orders of the board of commissioners. He shall be subject to the orders of the board and may be removed from office for inefficiency or neglect of duty in the judgment of the board of commissioners. He shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the board of commissioners, but in no event shall his term of office, service of employment, extend beyond the term of office of the board of commissioners employing him. Said superintendent shall perform the duties of convict warden, without any additional compensation. In addition to his other duties, the superintendent of roads and bridges shall make periodic inspections and investigations and make regular monthly reports to the board of commissioners of roads and revenues. 
(1949 Ga. Laws (Act No. 462), page 1923, § 2) 
Sec. 8. - Employees. 
Said board shall have authority to employ such other servants, agents, and employees and to contract for such material, implements, and road equipment as may be necessary to successfully carry on county business not contrary to this Act or law. 
(1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 458), page 5281, § 3) 
Sec. 9. - General powers. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that said board shall have exclusive jurisdiction when sitting for county purposes, over all matters concerning county property, county taxes, general and special; in establishing and changing militia districts and election precincts; and examining, auditing and settling accounts of all officers having care, management, collection, keeping and distribution of money belonging to the county or appropriated for its use and benefit, except as hereinafter provided; in making rules and regulations for the support of the poor in the county; in establishing, altering, and abolishing roads and bridges and in carrying out any and all of its details and enforcement of the road laws; and it is vested with the jurisdiction and powers that the old inferior court had and which were formerly vested in the ordinary of said county [now probate judge], and ordinaries of said state [now probate judges], when sitting for county purposes, and generally to have and exercise all the powers granted by law, or as may be indispensable and complete to the proper jurisdiction over county finances and county matters. The commissioners, when sitting as a court, in regular or extra session, for the transaction of county business, shall have such power to inflict fines and impose penalties upon all persons subject to its jurisdiction for disobedience to its orders, precepts and processes as the judge of the superior court now has over such delinquent in such cases. Proceedings against such delinquents shall be in the manner and to the extent as now provided by law in such cases. The clerk of the commissioners' court shall act instead of the clerk of the superior court, and a quorum of commissioners, instead of the judge of the superior court. 
Editor's note— To the extent that section 9 confers judicial powers upon the board of commissioners, it is superseded by Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I. 
Sec. 10. - Quorum. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that a majority of the commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any and all business. 
Sec. 11. - Purchases. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that requisition shall be made by all county employees, agents and officers for supplies, equipment and material on the commissioners, and before such supplies, equipment and material shall be purchased, authority must be obtained from the commissioners to order and purchase the same, subject to the provisions hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 12. - Payment of obligations. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that all obligations of the county created under the provisions of this Act shall be paid out of the county treasury in a manner to be prescribed by the board, unless otherwise provided by law, to the party to whom such obligation may be due. The commissioners shall require, at their regular monthly meeting, lists of all employees to be filed, showing the names of the employees, the dates, and amounts due them for services rendered during the preceding month. 
(1991 Ga. Laws (Act No. 144), page 4118, § 1) 
Sec. 13. - Financial reports. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that said commissioners, whenever requested by the grand jury, shall prepare and submit to the grand jury a complete itemized statement, in writing, showing the financial condition of the county, by showing receipts and disbursements, from what source money was received and for what purposes expended; and such further information and reports as the grand jury may call for from time to time and term to term. 
Sec. 14. - Official records. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that all records of said commissioners shall be open to the public for inspection daily, during office hours, and shall be kept at all times in the county courthouse or courthouse vault. 
Sec. 15. - Effective date. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that the provisions of this Act shall take effect immediately upon the passage by the general assembly, and approved by the governor. 
Sec. 16. - Repealer. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that all laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act be and the same are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 278), page 1866. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the act and the enacting clause have been deleted. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20, the title of the county governing authority has been changed from board of commissioners of road and revenues to board of commissioners. 

Sec. 1. - Generally. 
Article VII, section VII, paragraph V of the constitution [Ga. Const. art. VII, § VII, ¶ V] is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
"A.  There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the 'Glascock County Industrial Development Authority,' which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and by that name, style and title, said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. 
B.  The authority shall be composed of seven members, one of whom shall be the member of the House of Representatives of Georgia whose representative district includes Glascock County, and six of whom shall be residents of Glascock County appointed by the governing authority of Glascock County and said member of the House of Representatives of Georgia. The first members of the authority shall take office on January 1, 1969. The members of the authority shall serve for terms of office concurrent with the terms of office of the members of the governing authority of Glascock County, except the member of the House of Representatives, who is a member of said authority, shall serve for a term concurrent with his term in the House of Representatives, and shall serve from term to term as long as he remains a member of the House of Representatives. In the event a vacancy occurs in the membership of the authority by death, resignation or otherwise, the appointing authority shall fill the same, but in the event the vacancy occurs in the member's office who is a member of the House of Representatives, then his successor in office shall fill such vacancy. Before assuming his duties of office, each member shall take an oath, before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths, that he will truly and faithfully perform the duties of a member of the authority. 
C.  As used in this amendment, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  The word 'authority' shall mean the Glascock County Industrial Development Authority. 
(2)  The word 'project' shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition of lands, properties and improvements for development, expansion and promotion of industry, commerce, agriculture, natural resources and vocational training; the construction of buildings and plans for the purpose of selling, leasing or renting such structures to private persons, firms or corporations. 
(3)  The term 'cost of project' shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, easements, rights and franchises acquired, the cost of machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction, [the] cost of engineering, architectural and legal expenses, and plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and placing the same in operation. 
D.  Glascock County is hereby expressly authorized to enter into contracts with the authority as a public corporation. 
E.  A majority of members of the authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the ordinary business of the authority, but any action with respect to any project of the authority shall be approved by not less than a majority vote of the total membership of the authority. 
F.  The authority shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To have a seal, and alter the same at [its] pleasure. 
(2)  To acquire, hold and dispose of personal property, including the stock of other corporations, for its corporate purposes. 
(3)  To enter into contracts with Glascock County. 
(4)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or liens or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or disposal of same in any manner the authority deems to its best advantage. If the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall then be in Glascock County, the governing authority of Glascock County is hereby authorized, in its discretion, to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, to the authority. 
(5)  To appoint and select officers, agents, and employees, including engineers, architects, builders, and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
(6)  To make contracts, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases and rentals and sale of projects, or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it erects or acquires. 
(7)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, self-liquidating or otherwise, located on property owned or leased by the authority, and to pay the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any grant from the County of Glascock, or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms or corporations, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(8)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds and such other instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing. The authority shall further have the power to borrow money from any agency, department, commission, bureau or institution of the State of Georgia or of the United States. 
(9)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public or private corporations, performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. 
(10)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this Act. 
(11)  To adopt, alter or repeal its own bylaws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(12)  To issue revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the authority. Such revenue bonds shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act of the General Assembly of 1937 (Ga. L. 1937, pp. 761-774 [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.]), and as subsequently amended, providing for the issuance of revenue bonds. 
(13)  Through the use and power of eminent domain, the authority shall have the right, power, privilege and authority to condemn real property, rights-of-way or easements for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and welfare industry within Glascock County, any such condemnation to be conducted in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia. 
G.  All lands and improvements and personal property, the title to which is vested in the authority, and all debentures, notes, bonds and revenue bonds issued by the authority, and all income earned therefrom by the holders of said evidences of indebtedness, shall be exempt from state and local taxation. The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not include exemption from sales and use taxes on property purchased by the authority or for use by the authority. 
H.  The authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt against the State of Georgia or Glascock County. 
I.  The books and records of the authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the authority, by a competent auditor. The authority shall furnish copies of said audit to Glascock County. 
J.  Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Glascock County, subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
K.  This amendment, being for the purpose of developing and promoting the public good and the welfare of the County of Glascock and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
L.  This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare industry and trade within the County of Glascock and reducing unemployment to the greatest extent possible, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. 
M.  The general assembly may, by law, further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the authority." 
Sec. 2. - Effective date; referendum. 
When the above proposed amendment to the constitution shall have been agreed to by two-thirds of the members elected to each of the two branches of the general assembly, and the same has been entered on their journals with the "ayes" and "nays" taken thereon, such proposed amendment shall be published and submitted as provided in article XIII, section I, paragraph I of the constitution of Georgia of 1945, as amended [Const. art. XIII, § I, ¶ I]. The ballot submitting the above-proposed amendment shall have written or printed thereon the following: 
"YES ( ) NO ( ) 
Shall the Constitution be amended so as to create the Glascock County Industrial Development Authority?" 
All persons desiring to vote in favor of ratifying the proposed amendment shall vote "yes". All persons desiring to vote against ratifying the proposed amendment shall vote "no". If such amendment shall be ratified as provided in said paragraph of the constitution, it shall become a part of the constitution of this state. The returns of the election shall be made in like manner as returns for elections for members of the general assembly, and it shall be the duty of the secretary of state to ascertain the result and certify the result to the governor, who shall issue his proclamation thereon. 
Editor's note— The above local constitutional amendment was continued in full force and effect by the legislation found at 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 143), page 3809. See also Ga. Const. art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY SHERIFF[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 67), page 2181. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the act and the enacting clause have been deleted. 

Sec. 1. - Fee system abolished. 
The present mode of compensating the sheriff of Glascock County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, an annual salary for such officer is prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
Editor's note— Section 1 is superseded by O.C.G.A. §§ 15-16-19, 15-16-20. 
Sec. 2. - Salary. 
The sheriff shall receive an annual salary of $4,000.00, payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Glascock County. 
Editor's note— Section 2 is superseded by O.C.G.A. § 15-16-20. 
Sec. 3. - Collection of fines, fees, etc. 
After the effective date of this Act, said officer shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, moneys and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed him as compensation for services in any capacity, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public moneys and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the 15th day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, the sheriff shall furnish the governing authority of the county a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the sources thereof. 
State Law reference— General duties of sheriff, O.C.G.A. § 15-16-10. 
Sec. 4. - Deputies. 
The sheriff shall have the authority to appoint such deputies as he shall deem necessary to efficiently and effectively discharge the official duties of his office. The total compensation for such deputies shall be set by the sheriff with the approval of the board of commissioners but in no event shall the total compensation be less than the total compensation being paid to such deputies on February 1, 1987. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the sheriff, during his term of office, to designate and name the person or persons who shall be employed as such deputies, clerks, assistants, or other employees and to prescribe their duties and assignments, and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within his sole discretion. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 339), page 2922, § 1; 1973 Ga. Laws (Act No. 590) page 3329, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 157), page 3550, § 1; 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 421), page 5128, § 1) 
Sec. 5. - Operating expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of the sheriff's office, expressly including the compensation of all personnel and employees, shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture, utilities and equipment, and the repair, replacement and maintenance thereof, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority of Glascock County. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 72), page 2767, § 1) 
Sec. 5A. - Automobiles. 
The governing authority of Glascock County is authorized to purchase automobiles equipped with the necessary communication devices and other special equipment commonly on or in automobiles which are used by law enforcement officers for the use of law enforcement and other purposes in Glascock County in such manner and pursuant to such regulations as said governing authority may determine. The governing authority of Glascock County is also authorized to purchase replacements for said automobiles at such time as it may determine and to dispose of the replaced vehicles in such manner as it deems most advantageous to Glascock County. The governing authority of Glascock County is further authorized to provide for the cost of all repairs, tires, gasoline, oil, grease, antifreeze and other maintenance and supplies necessary for the operation of the automobiles authorized to be purchased herein. The funds for the purchase of the automobiles and for the payment of the supplies, equipment and maintenance as herein provided shall be payable from the funds of Glascock County. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 72), page 2767, § 2(5A); 1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 157), page 3550, § 2) 
Sec. 5B. - Expenses when outside county. 
The sheriff and his deputy, in addition to any other compensation provided, shall receive actual expenses when out of the territorial limits of Glascock County attending official business or on business of the county as may be authorized by the governing authority thereof. The funds for payment of such expenses shall be payable from the funds of Glascock County. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 72), page 2767, § 2(5B)) 
State Law reference— Fees of sheriff for service of process outside of county, O.C.G.A. § 15-16-22. 
Sec. 6. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this Act shall become effective on March 1, 1966. 
Sec. 7. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE IV. - CLERK OF SUPERIOR COURT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 324), page 4487. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the act and the enacting clause have been deleted. 

Sec. 1. - Fee system abolished; salary to be provided. 
The present method of compensating the clerk of the Superior Court of Glascock County, known as the fee system, is abolished. The clerk of the superior court shall receive an annual salary as prescribed by the applicable provisions of article 2 of chapter 6 of title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 15-6-50 et seq.], relating to clerks of the superior courts, as such provisions are now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 2. - Collection of fees, fines, etc. 
After the effective date of this Act, said officer shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, moneys, and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed said officer as compensation for services in any capacity, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public moneys, and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the 15th of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, the clerk of the superior court shall furnish the governing authority of the county a detailed, itemized statement of all such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. 
Sec. 3. - Employees. 
The clerk of the superior court shall have the authority to appoint such deputies, clerks, and assistants, and other personnel as said officer shall deem necessary to discharge the official duties of the clerk's office efficiently and effectively. The clerk shall, from time to time, recommend to the governing authority of said county the number of such personnel needed by the clerk's office, together with the suggested compensation to be paid each employee. However, it shall be within the sole discretion of the governing authority of said county to fix the compensation to be received by each employee in said office. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the clerk of the superior court, during said officer's term of office, to designate and name the person or persons who shall be employed as such deputies, clerks, and assistants and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within said officer's sole discretion. 
Sec. 4. - Office expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of the clerk of the superior court's office, expressly including the compensation of all personnel and employees, shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purposes. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture, utilities, and equipment and the repair, replacement, and maintenance thereof, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office, shall be furnished by the county, and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. 
Sec. 5. - Repealer. 
An Act providing a supplement to the compensation of the clerk of the Superior Court of Glascock County, approved April 6, 1981 (Ga. L. 1981, p. 3993), is repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 6. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective on January 1, 1987. 
ARTICLE V. - TAX COMMISSIONER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1956 Ga. Laws (Act No. 28), page 2058. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the act and the enacting clause have been deleted. 

Sec. 1. - Office created. 
Effective January 1, 1957, the offices of tax receiver and tax collector of Glascock County are hereby consolidated and combined into the one office of tax commissioner of Glascock County. The rights, duties and liabilities of said office of tax commissioner shall be the same as those imposed upon tax receivers and tax collectors by the laws of this state. 
Sec. 2. - Election. 
The first election for the office of tax commissioner created herein shall be held at the same time as the election for other county officers in Glascock County is held in 1956, and the person so elected shall take office on January 1, 1957, for a term of four years and until his successor is elected and qualified. Likewise, all future elections for tax commissioner shall be held at the same time as elections for other county officers, and all future tax commissioners shall likewise have a term of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Through December 31, 1956, the tax receiver and the tax collector of Glascock County shall continue in office. Should any vacancy occur in the office of tax commissioner, the vacancy shall be filled as vacancies are filled in the office of tax collector. 
State Law reference— Election of tax commissioner, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-210; vacancy in office of tax commissioner, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-211. 
Sec. 3. - Existing taxes and fi. fas. 
All taxes due and payable at the time the tax commissioner takes office shall continue to be due and payable until paid. All tax fi. fas theretofore issued shall have full force and effect and be collectible as issued. 
Sec. 4. - Compensation. 
The tax commissioner shall be compensated in the amount of $7,200.00 per annum, to be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Glascock County. All fees, commissions, costs or any other perquisites collected by the tax commissioner shall be the property of Glascock County, and shall be turned over to the fiscal authority of said county with a detailed, itemized statement of the services for which such fees were collected. The tax commissioner, if authorized to do so by the governing authority of Glascock County, may employ personnel to assist him in the performance of the duties of his office, and the compensation for such personnel shall be fixed jointly by the tax commissioner and the governing authority of the county. Such compensation shall be paid from the funds of Glascock County. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 850), page 2626, § 1; 1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1357), page 3463, § 1; 1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1299), page 3565, § 1; 1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1286), page 3734, § 1) 
Editor's note— The salary provided for in section 4 is superseded by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183. 
Sec. 5. - Office. 
The tax commissioner shall be furnished an office in the Glascock County courthouse, and shall keep said office open for the transaction of business as do other county officers. The tax commissioner shall not be required to leave his office or make rounds for the purpose of receiving returns or collecting taxes. 
Sec. 6. - Oath. 
The tax commissioner, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath prescribed by law for the tax collector, and shall give bond as provided by law for the tax collector. 
Sec. 7. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE VI. - SALARY SUPPLEMENT FOR PROBATE JUDGE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1300), page 3567. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the act and the enacting clause have been deleted. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20, the title of the county governing authority has been changed from board of commissioners of road and revenues to board of commissioners. 

Sec. 1. - Authorized. 
In addition to all other fees, commissions, costs or any other perquisites presently being received by the judge of the probate court of Glascock County, the governing authority of Glascock County is hereby authorized and directed to supplement the compensation of the judge of the probate court in the amount of $5,568.00 per annum, and such supplement shall be paid to the judge of the probate court in equal monthly installments out of the funds of Glascock County. 
(1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1285), page 3732, § 1; 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 358), page 3995, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
LOCAL ACTS AND LOCAL CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Local Acts and Local Constitutional Amendments of any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Glascock County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
(b)  Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, when they shall have the signification attached to them by the experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the mayor and commissioners, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(c)  Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the board of commissioners may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all of the circumstances. 
Board of commissioners. The term "board of commissioners" means the board of commissioners of Glascock County, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Glascock County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days are prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided, in appropriate cases, the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Glascock County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a county officer or county employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number includes the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the county. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street and road. The terms "street" and "road" mean and include any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the county, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, means and includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, cross references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code, in the following language: 
"Section ____________ of The Code of Glascock County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: 
"The Code of Glascock County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered ____________ , that reads as follows: …." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the county. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a county officer or county employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section, or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof, and not as new enactments. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
Sec. 1-10. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any of the following ordinances or portions of ordinances, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(6)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(7)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(8)  Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(9)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(10)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(11)  Pertaining to zoning. 
(12)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(13)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(14)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Committees. 
The chairperson, with the concurrence of the board of commissioners, may create committees of members of the board to study any issue before the board. Any such committees may make recommendations to the board of commissioners but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration without express board approval. In addition to board members, committees may include other county officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any limitation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the chairperson, with the concurrence of the board. The chairperson shall serve as an ex officio member of all committees. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-1, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-2. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-2, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-3. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the board. A quorum is a majority of all of the members of the board then in office. It is the duty of the chairperson to enforce this rule. Any commissioner may raise a point of order directed to the chairperson if the commissioner believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a commissioner leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the chairperson, with the approval of the commissioners present. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-3, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-4. - Majority vote required. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of commissioners. If there is a tie vote, the chairperson shall vote to break the tie. The chairperson may vote in circumstances where the chairperson's vote will create or cause a tie vote. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-4, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-5. - Abstentions. 
(a)  A commissioner shall vote on all motions unless the commissioner has a conflict of interest which would prevent the commissioner from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall explain for the record the decision to abstain on any vote. 
(b)  If a commissioner abstains when there is no apparent conflict and the commissioner provides no explanation, then that abstention shall be noted, but shall be recorded as a vote opposing the motion. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-5, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-6. - Chairperson. 
The chairperson of the board of commissioners is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chairperson must enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the board of commissioners. The chairperson shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-6, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-7. - Vice-chairperson. 
(a)  The board may select a vice-chairperson from the board members at the beginning of each calendar year. The vice-chairperson shall fulfill the duties of the chairperson if the chairperson is not in attendance. 
(b)  If the chairperson and vice-chairperson are absent, and a quorum is present, the remaining commissioners shall select a commissioner to serve as temporary chairperson of the meeting until either the chairperson or vice-chairperson is present at the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-7, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-8. - Agenda. 
(a)  The chairperson shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. Members may add items to the agenda by providing notice to the chairperson of the members' intentions to do so by 12:00 noon on the Friday preceding a regularly scheduled meeting or two business days prior to a specially called meeting or work session. The agenda shall be made available to the commissioners at least one business day before every board meeting. 
(b)  Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. To be considered, this request must be submitted in writing to the chairperson and received by 3:00 p.m. on Thursday prior to the Tuesday meeting. 
(c)  The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the board. A new subject that requires urgent attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a two-thirds vote of the board. 
(d)  A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within one business day of the adjournment of any meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-8, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-9. - Minutes. 
(a)  The county clerk shall promptly record the minutes for each board meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the board meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the board, but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the board. The minutes shall specify the names of commissioners present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the commissioner who proposed each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote, the name of each commissioner voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a commissioner has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the board. 
(b)  The board must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the board. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the commissioners at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the board at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chairperson and attested to by the county clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-9, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-10. - Decorum. 
(a)  All commissioners must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chairperson and not to individual commissioners, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A commissioner is not allowed to speak at a meeting until the commissioner has been recognized by the chairperson. All comments made by a commissioner shall address the motion that is being discussed. 
(b)  The chairperson shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a commissioner believes that a rule has been broken, the commissioner can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairperson can rule on the question or the chairperson can allow the board to debate the issue and decide the issue by a majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-10, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-11. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the board of commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Public comments and participation on agenda items. Individuals desiring to address the board of commissioners regarding an agenda item are required to sign in. Agenda item comments shall be allowed as each agenda item is taken up for consideration by the board. The chairperson shall have the right at any time to stop all public comment, when, in the chairperson's discretion, such input violates the provisions of this section, or is otherwise not relevant to the agenda item before the board. Public comment shall be limited to five minutes for any one speaker regarding an agenda item. If the board allows public comment on an agenda item, members of the public, as an alternative to speaking on the item, may submit written materials to the board regarding the agenda item. 
(2)  Public comments and participation on non-agenda items. The board may allow public comments on non-agenda items. Individuals desiring to address the board of commissioners regarding a non-agenda item are required to sign in. Public comments and participation on non-agenda items shall be received at the end of the meeting. Public comment shall be limited to three minutes for any one speaker regarding a non-agenda item. The chairperson shall have the right at any time to stop all public comment, when, in the chairperson's discretion, such input violates the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a board meeting and are expected to comply with rules of decorum that are established for commissioners. Individuals who violate any rules of the board may be ruled out of order by the chairperson or on a point of order made by a commissioner. A majority vote of the board will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairperson. 
(4)  Public hearing; generally. The board may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the board. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the board, or at such other places and times as the board may determine. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-11, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-12. - Parliamentarian. 
The county attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for board meetings. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-12, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-13. - Amendments to rules. 
Any amendments to the rules of order must be submitted by a commissioner in writing to the county manager three business days before a regular meeting of the board. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all board members. All amendments require a two-thirds vote of the board to be adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-13, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-14. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held on the first Tuesday of each month. All regular meetings shall be held in the courtroom of the county courthouse. A notice containing the meeting information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the board. The times and dates of meetings may be changed by giving notice to the legal organ in said county not later than three days prior to the scheduled meeting date. The holding of emergency meetings shall be held in accordance with the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-14, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-15. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the county site by the chairperson for any reason. Other special meetings may be scheduled by the chairperson or at the request of two commissioners. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the county or newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ, and to each member of the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-15, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-16. - Emergency meetings. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the board may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the county or a newspaper with general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ, and to each member of the county board of commissioners as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-16, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-17. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  Executive sessions of the board may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the board is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board of commissioners taken in a public meeting. 
(b)  The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the clerk of the board of commissioners at the direction of the chairperson. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the board may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned, or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-17, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-18. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable, and requires a two-thirds vote of the board. Rules governing quorum, voting methods and requirements, the notification to commissioners of meetings and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-18, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-19. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-19, 12-5-2017) 
Secs. 2-20—2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-41. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by county officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the county; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the county; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-41, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-42. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed county officials. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-42, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-43. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined, does not include county employees but does mean the members of the county commission, county clerk, and all other persons holding positions designated by the County Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the board of commissioners, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the board of commissioners, which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the county. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any county official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a county official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general county fees, county utility charges or a comprehensive land use ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity, or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed: 
a.  $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services; or 
b.  Ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the board of commissioners; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-43, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-44. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No county official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for the county official or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the county. 
(b)  No county official, in any matter before the commission or other county body relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse the county official's self from such discussion or vote as applicable, including that member's position on any other governmental agency or interest in a private entity. 
(c)  No county official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the board of commissioners or other county body. 
(d)  No county official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of the county official's office, except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No county official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the county, except as authorized by state law. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No county official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a county official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of county duties. 
(i)  If a county official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the board of commissioners and shall recuse the county official's self and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No county official shall use county facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent that such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No county official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A county official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A county official shall not use a county official's position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or person within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A county official shall not order any goods and services for the county without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No county official shall attempt to obligate the county nor give the impression of obligating the county without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No county official, unless allowed by state law, may serve on any other public commission, board, council or authority. 
(p)  No county official shall violate any laws of the United States, the state or the county, other than a traffic offense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-44, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-45. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A county official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A county official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose said county official's interest in said entity to the board of commissioners prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the county. 
(c)  Where the interest of a county official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the county official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-45, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-46. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against county officials shall be filed with the county clerk. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the county clerk shall serve a copy of the complaint to the county official or officials charged in the complaint and to the county attorney within three business days. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested, by statutory overnight delivery or by e-mail, confirmed by the recipient. 
(b)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the county attorney shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the county. The county attorney is empowered to dismiss, in writing, complaints that the county attorney determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the county; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the county attorney shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the county official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the county attorney is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of the county attorney's investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of the county attorney's investigation of a complaint, the county attorney shall present findings to the board of commissioners, not to include the member against which the complaint has been filed. 
(e)  The board of commissioners is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)  The board of commissioners is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the board of commissioners has not prescribed such forms. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-46, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-47. - Hearing; decision. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall hold a hearing within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The board of commissioners shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes, but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. 
(b)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be rendered within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the board of commissioners, the county official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The county official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right, but not the obligation, of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of the time deadlines in this section shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the hearing officer to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-47, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-48. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any county official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the hearing officer may obtain further judicial review of such decision, as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Glascock County within 30 days after the decision of the hearing officer. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-48, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 2-49. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)  Public reprimand or censure; or 
(2)  Request for resignation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 2-49, 12-5-2017) 
Chapter 6 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GUN RANGES 

Sec. 6-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial shooting/archery range means an area designated and operated for the sport shooting of firearms or for archery which is not available for such use by the general public without payment of a fee, membership contribution, or dues or by invitation of an authorized person. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 9-28-2017) 
Sec. 6-20. - Regulation of commercial shooting/archery ranges. 
(a)  Any outdoor range shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the guidelines and regulations contained in the Range Source Book, section II, chapter 2, Outdoor range design criteria, published by the National Rifle Association (NRA) in 2012, a copy of which is available at the county sheriff's department, with the exception that any regulation established by the ordinance from which this article is derived that stands in contradiction to the NRA guidelines shall control. 
(b)  In the case of an outdoor range, it shall not be permitted adjacent to or across the right-of-way from any residential dwelling, unless there is a 2,000-foot setback from the property line adjacent to the dwelling, or consent is obtained from any affected owner of the dwelling for a lesser distance. 
(c)  Any outdoor range shall have at least a 300-foot planted or naturally forested buffer or berm from any property line. 
(d)  The down-range direction of an outdoor range shall be in a direction that is the least likely to cause any harm or damage in the case of a gross accident, but in no case shall bear directly upon a street, dwelling or place of business. 
(e)  A berm of at least 20 feet in height shall run down-range and to the outside of the outdoor range and encompass the shooter's discharge point. At the end of the range there shall be some type of bullet trap, whether earthen or of a manufactured/constructed nature, and which shall be of a suitable height, but no less than 20 feet in the case of an outdoor range. 
(f)  There shall be some means of protection between each shooter bench or position, in the case of a lateral discharge. 
(g)  Any exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
(h)  A six-foot minimum fence shall completely encompass at least the physical outdoor shooting range. 
(i)  Adequate ventilation shall be provided for indoor facilities. 
(j)  Operational hours for any outdoor range shall be 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and 1:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Sundays, subject to relief from such restriction as determined and granted by the county sheriff on a temporary basis. 
(k)  In the case of compound bows, recurved bows or other forms of weapon ranges, as well as the above, the sheriff may waive certain conditions, or place additional conditions, as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2, 9-28-2017) 
Chapter 10 - COMMUNICATION TOWERS 

Sec. 10-1. - Authority and purpose. 
(a)  Enactment. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the general police powers granted to the county by the state general statutes, the authority granted by section 704 of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (FTA), and section 47 of the United States Code (USC), and regulates the placement of communication towers within the geographical boundaries of the county for the purpose of providing mobile telephone and other communication services, subject always to the jurisdictional exception hereinafter denoted. 
(b)  Purpose. The county recognizes that it is in its best interest to encourage the orderly development of wireless communication technologies for the benefit of the county and its citizens, and it finds that these regulations are necessary and appropriate in order to accomplish the following ends: 
(1)  To be consistent with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
(2)  To provide a range of locations for wireless communication facilities throughout the county. 
(3)  To regulate the introduction of new technology and services into the county, with provisions reflecting clear requirements for the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, and which are in the best interest of the county. 
(4)  To be consistent with the "Complete FCC U.S. Amateur Part 97 Rules and Regulations" for amateur radio towers. 
(5)  To streamline and expedite the permitting procedures necessary to effect compliance with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
(6)  To encourage the location or placement of communication facilities onto existing structures so as to reduce the number of new communication towers situated within the county. 
(7)  To encourage co-location and site sharing of new and existing communication facilities. 
(8)  To control the type of tower facility constructed where towers are needed and permitted. 
(9)  For the establishment of adequate development in design criteria so as to enhance the ability of telecommunication service providers to afford appropriate service to the county quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
(10)  To protect residential, historic preservation areas, and scenic corridors from the uncontrolled development of wireless communication facilities by requiring reasonable siting conditions and by promoting the use of suitable lands for the location of wireless antennas, towers and/or wireless communication facilities. 
(11)  To ensure harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development of wireless communication facilities within the county. 
(12)  By maintaining the rural character of the county by directing tower types, heights, characteristics and locations. 
(c)  Effective date. This chapter shall become effective upon the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2014, art. I) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions and terms. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antenna array means one or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, which may include omni-directional antennas (rod), directional antennas (panel) and parabolic antennas (disc). The antenna array does not include the support structure of the tower. 
Attached wireless communication facility means an antenna array that is attached to an existing building or structure (attachment structure), which structures shall include, but not be limited to, utility poles, signs, water towers, rooftops, towers with any accompanying pole or device (attachment device) which attaches the antenna array to the existing building or structure and associated connection cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside or outside of the attachment structure. 
Co-location/site sharing means the use of a common wireless communication facility or common site by more than one wireless communication license holder or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of communications technology, and/or placement of an antenna array on a structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity. 
Equipment facility means any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a wireless communication facility which includes cabinets, shelters, build-outs of existing structures, pedestals and other similar structures. 
Fall zone buffer means a land buffer around the tower base to provide for containment of the tower to the site in the event that the tower should fall. 
Freestanding tower means all towers which are placed on an independent base and erected without support from other structures (e.g., monopole towers and lattice/cage towers). Guy wires are not used in freestanding towers. 
Lattice/cage tower means a structure consisting of connected sections of metal supports. Such sections being self-supporting until they reach a height of approximately 250 feet, beyond which they require the addition of supporting guy wires. 
Monopole tower means a single pole structure that supports the telecommunication equipment. These towers are typically less than 200 feet in height. Such towers have been shown to be resistant to wind and ice conditions that could cause tower collapse. 
Pre-existing tower means any tower erected or for which a permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Self-supporting tower. See Freestanding tower. 
Setback means a buffer between the tower structure and adjoining property owners. 
Stealth tower means a hidden tower. The telecommunication equipment is placed in such a way so as not to be obvious. Typically, the equipment is incorporated into the supporting structure and assumes the color, texture and appearance of the supporting structure (e.g., placement in or on church steeples, water towers or tall buildings). 
Support structure means a structure designed and constructed specifically to support an antenna array, and may include a monopole, self-supporting (lattice) tower, guy wire support tower and other similar structures. Any device (attachment device) which is used to attach an attached wireless communication facility to an existing building or structure (attachment structure) shall be excluded from the definition of and regulations applicable to support structures. 
Telecommunications tower means any structure that is designed and built for the purpose of supporting one or more antenna, including self-supporting and guy-lattice/cage towers, or monopole towers used for the support of PCS and cellular mobile services. This definition does not address commercial radio and television towers, nor does it include such things as personal satellite dishes or amateur radio antennas. 
Temporary wireless communication facility means a wireless communication facility to be placed in use for not more than 90 days. 
Tower and antenna use application (TAA) means a form provided to an applicant by the county for the applicant to specify the location, structure, use and compliance with the development standards of a proposed wireless communication facility. 
Tower height means the vertical distance measured from the ground to the uppermost point of the tower, including any antennas and lightning rods. 
Wireless communication facility means any unstaffed facility existing for the transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications services, usually, but not necessarily, consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, an equipment facility, and a support structure to achieve the necessary elevation. 
Wireless communications means any personal wireless services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes FCC-licensed commercial wireless communications services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that currently exist. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2014, art. II) 
Sec. 10-3. - Jurisdiction, etc. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all unincorporated areas of the county, exclusive to the municipalities located therein and the extraterritorial jurisdiction areas of such municipalities. 
(b)  Abrogation. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any provision of any currently existing county ordinance. 
(c)  Severability. Should any section, sentence or clause of this chapter be held invalid or unconstitutional, such result shall not affect, impair or invalidate the validity of the remaining parts of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2014, art. III) 
Sec. 10-4. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or other entity to engage in any development, use, erection or construction, within the jurisdiction of this chapter, of any wireless communication tower without first having obtained a permit from the county as provided herein. 
(b)  Application. All applications for permits shall be submitted by the owner of the property affected or the authorized agent of such owner. The application shall be submitted to the county board of commissioners in such form and format as may be required by the county, together with payment of such fees as may be required. 
(c)  Issuance. The county board of commissioners shall issue the requested permit unless that board shall conclude, based upon the information presented to it, that: 
(1)  The requested permit is not within its jurisdiction; 
(2)  The application is incomplete; or 
(3)  If completed as proposed in the application, the tower facility will not comply with one or more of the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Expiration. If construction authorized or permitted hereunder shall not be initiated within six months from the date of issuance of the permit or shall not be completed within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall be void. 
(e)  Administrative procedures. Before making a decision upon an application for a permit pursuant to this chapter, the county board of commissioners shall call for and hold a hearing on the application. Notice of the public hearing shall be afforded the applicant and all neighboring property owners in the same manner that notice is given by the county in those other administrative matters requiring public notices. The applicant shall have the burden of persuasion that the proposed facility, if completed as proposed, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, applications for limited permits for co-location service providers upon existing towers and stealth towers may be considered without a public hearing. The county board of commissioners may refer applications for permits of any kind required under this chapter to a third party consultant for review and recommendation prior to making a decision. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2014, art. IV) 
Sec. 10-5. - Tower construction standards of the county. 
(a)  Tower antenna use application required. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall install or construct any wireless communication facility unless and until a tower antenna use application (TAA) has been issued pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Pre-existing wireless communication facility. Wireless communication facilities which were installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be considered as nonconforming. 
(c)  Amateur radio exclusion. This chapter shall not govern the installation of any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator. This chapter shall not govern the installation or operations of any tower constructed, owned or operated by a federal, state or local governmental entity and utilized, at least in part, for emergency or law enforcement purposes. 
(d)  Relationship to other ordinances. Except for historic districts, this chapter shall supersede all conflicting requirements of other ordinances regarding the location and permitting of wireless communication facilities. 
(e)  Airport areas. Any wireless communication facility located on or proposed to be located in an airport area governed by the Federal Aviation Administration shall also comply with the provisions of all applicable local, state and federal airport regulations. 
(f)  Building codes. Construction of all wireless communication facilities shall comply with the requirements of the state building codes and permitting process in addition to the requirements of this chapter. 
(g)  New communications towers. No new communications tower shall be permitted when any part of the new proposed tower facility shall be located nearer than one mile from an existing tower facility, either a pre-existing tower facility or a tower facility constructed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Subject to those exclusions set out in subsection (c) of this section. 
(h)  Wildlife areas. No tower facility shall be permitted pursuant to this chapter when that facility, if constructed, would be located within a major wildlife area identified as such in the inventory of governing wildlife protection agencies. It shall be the duty of the applicant to provide proof that the proposed tower facility complies with this requirement. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2014, art. V) 
Sec. 10-6. - Development standards. 
(a)  Height standards. The following height standards shall apply to all wireless communication facility installations: 
(1)  Attached wireless communication facilities shall not add more than 20 feet to the height of the existing building or structure to which it is attached (attachment structure). However, antenna attachments to existing communication towers shall not increase the height of those towers above the maximum original permitted height of any such tower. 
(2)  Wireless communication facilities with support structures shall have as a maximum height that height designated in the permit for that facility. 
(3)  Height for wireless communication facilities shall be consistent with the height standards established for similar properties in similar locations (considering ground elevations, topographical conditions and site development criteria) within the county. 
(b)  Setback standards. The following setback standards shall apply to all wireless communication facility information: 
(1)  Wireless communication facilities with antenna array attached to other structures. Such facilities may extend up to 30 inches horizontally beyond the edge of the attachment structure so long as the antenna array does not encroach upon an adjoining parcel. 
(2)  Wireless communications with support structures. These facilities shall meet all setback requirements for principal structures that may be applicable to the real property upon which they are located at the time of construction. Where setback guidelines have not been established for real property, the following will apply: a setback from the support structure to any adjacent property owner's line shall be a minimum of one foot for every one foot of tower height (the term "tower height" shall include the tower structure itself plus any attachment). All equipment and/or shelters utilized in conjunction with the operation or maintenance of the tower must maintain a minimum setback of 20 feet from any adjacent property owner's line and must be landscaped in accordance with subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(c)  Landscaping. The following landscaping requirements shall be maintained by applicants and the same shall apply to all wireless communication facility installations: 
(1)  New construction. New wireless communication facilities with support structures and attached wireless communication facilities with new building construction shall be landscaped with a minimum landscaped area of ten feet around the perimeter of the security fence, meeting the following standards: 
a.  One row of evergreen trees with a minimum caliper of 1¾ inches shall be installed with a maximum spacing of 25 feet apart. 
b.  All shall be indigenous to this area of the state and shall be drought-resistant. 
(2)  Land form preservation. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the extent feasible; provided, however, that vegetation that causes interference with antennas or inhibits access to the equipment facility may be trimmed or removed. 
(3)  Existing vegetation. Existing vegetation on a wireless communication facility site may be used in lieu of required landscaping where approved by the planning board or its designee. 
(4)  Minimum site disturbance. Grading for the new wireless communication facility shall be minimized and limited only to the area necessary for the new facility. 
(d)  Aesthetics, placement, materials and colors. The following standard shall apply to all new antenna arrays and new wireless communication facilities: 
(1)  Antenna array attachments shall be designed so as to be compatible with the wireless communication facility to which it is to be affixed, including, but not limited to, matching the proposed array with existing structural designs, facades, colors, and camouflage technology. 
(2)  New wireless communication facilities shall be designed to be compatible with existing structures and surroundings to the extent feasible. The proposed wireless communication facility shall be consistent with the tower type and height standards reflected in the facility permit and shall be consistent for similar properties in similar locations in the county, including, but not limited to, considerations of scale and space of the immediate vicinity of the new facility, placement in a location which is consistent with proper functioning of the wireless communication facility, the use of compatible or neutral colors and camouflage technology. 
(e)  Lighting. The following lighting requirements shall apply to all wireless communication facility installations. Wireless communication facilities shall not be artificially illuminated, directly or indirectly, except for the following purposes: 
(1)  Security and safety lighting of equipment buildings, if such lighting is appropriately down-shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the communication facility site. 
(2)  In any event, illumination of the wireless communication facility as may be required by the FAA or other applicable authority shall be installed in a manner to minimize impacts on adjacent residences. 
(3)  Unless otherwise required by the FAA or other applicable authority, the required light shall be red and a type of lens shall be used so as to reduce ground lighting when the site is within 100 feet of a residential dwelling. 
(f)  Signage. Wireless communication facilities shall display E911 address signage as well as logos, decals, symbols or any small message containing provider identification and emergency telephone numbers, and such other information as may be required by local, state or federal regulations (now or hereafter enacted). 
(g)  Fencing. Wireless communication facilities with support structures shall be enclosed by an opaque fence not less than six feet in height. Security features may be incorporated into the buffer and landscaping requirements for the site. Nothing herein shall be constructed to prevent fencing that is necessary to meet requirements of state or federal agencies. 
(h)  Radio frequency emissions/sound. The following radio frequency emissions standards shall apply to all wireless communication facility installations subject to this chapter: 
(1)  Radio frequency impact. The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 gives the FCC jurisdiction of the regulation of radio frequency (RF) emissions, and wireless communication facilities that do not exceed those FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of radio frequency impact. 
(2)  FCC compliance. In order to provide information to citizens, copies of ongoing FCC information concerning wireless communication facilities and radio frequency emissions standards may be requested from time to time. Applicants for wireless communication facilities shall be required to provide information with the application on the measurement of the effective radiated power of the facility and how this meets the FCC standards. 
(3)  Sound prohibited. No unusual sound emissions such as alarms, bells, buzzers or the like are permitted. 
(i)  Structural integrity. Wireless communication facilities with support structures shall be constructed to the Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision F Standard entitled "Structural Standard for Steel Antennas, Towers and Antenna Support Structures" (or equivalent), as it may be updated and amended. Each support structure shall be capable of supporting multiple antenna arrays. 
(j)  Co-location support structure design. All wireless communication facilities with a support structure up to a height of 149 feet or less shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least three antenna arrays. All wireless communication facilities with a support structure up to a height of 150 feet or greater shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least four antenna arrays. 
(k)  Co-location agreement. All applicants for wireless communication facilities are required to submit a statement with the application agreeing to allow and reasonably market co-location opportunities to other wireless communication facility users. The statement shall include the applicant's policy regarding co-location of other providers and the methodology to be used by the applicant in determining reasonable rates to be charged to other providers. The co-location agreement shall be considered a condition of issuance of a tower antenna use application (TAA). Such an application shall not be issued or approved unless the applicant complies with the co-location policy hereinafter set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2014, art. VI) 
Sec. 10-7. - Application submission and review process. 
(a)  Application submission. All tower antenna use applications (TAA), regardless of wireless communication facility type, shall include all of the requirements contained in this section. 
(1)  Application contents. Each applicant requesting a TAA under this chapter shall submit a sealed complete set of drawings prepared by a licensed architect or engineer that will include a site plan, elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations and documentation showing the location and dimensions of the wireless communication facility and all improvements associated therewith, including information concerning specifications, antenna locations, equipment facilities and shelters, landscaping, parking, access, fencing, and, if relevant as determined by the board of commissioners, topography, adjacent uses and existing vegetation. Applicants proposing to co-locate on an existing wireless communication facility shall include a radio frequency intermodulation study with the application. 
(2)  Submission requirements. Application for a TAA shall be submitted to the county, or its designee, on forms prescribed by the county. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan containing the information described in subsection (a)(1) of this section, together with a copy of the appropriate FCC license. The application and site plan must be received 20 working days prior to the next regular county commission meeting to be placed on the agenda. 
(3)  Application fees. A plan review of $2,500.00 and a radio frequency intermodulation study review fee of $500.00 (co-location applicants only) shall accompany each application. These fees may be used by the county to engage an engineer or other qualified consultant to review the technical aspects of the application and radio frequency intermodulation study (if required). 
(4)  Additional technical assistance. In the course of its consideration of an application, the county board may deem it necessary, in complex situations, to employ an engineer or other consultant qualified in the design and installation of wireless communication facilities to assist the county in the technical aspects of the application. In such cases, any additional reasonable costs incurred for the technical review and recommendation shall be reimbursed by the applicant prior to the final hearing on the TAA. 
(b)  Administrative review. The following administrative review process shall apply to all wireless communication facility applications: 
(1)  Review authority. Review of the TAA under this section shall be conducted by the board of commissioners or its designee upon filing a TAA. 
(2)  Review criteria. Each application shall be reviewed for compliance with the development criteria specified in this chapter. 
(3)  Timing of decision. The board, or its designee, shall render a decision on the wireless communication facility application by written response to the applicant within 20 business days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays or holidays) after approval of the complete application, except that an extension may be agreed upon by the applicant. 
(4)  Application denial. If administrative approval is not obtained or is denied due to noncompliance with the development criteria, the applicant may appeal the denial by written appeal for review by the county board of commissioners within 30 days after the denial or after failure of the planning board to act within the time limit set in subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(5)  Application approval. If the TAA application together with all required addenda are in compliance with the development criteria and otherwise meet the requirements of this section, the board, or its designee, may approve the TAA. 
(6)  Notice. Notice of the special use permit and a public hearing by the planning board shall be provided as described below. 
a.  Notice to affected property owners. The applicant shall provide the board, or its designee, with a complete list of the names and addresses of the property owners to be notified pursuant to the prescribed notice requirements detailed herein. The board, or its designee, shall verify the list for completeness and a TAA shall not be processed until the list is considered complete by the board or its designee. The mailing of notices shall follow the requirements listed below: 
1.  The owner of the parcel of land included in the TAA as shown on the county tax listing, and the owners of all parcels of land adjoining and contiguous to that parcel of land as shown on the county tax listing, shall be mailed a notice of the requested special use permit. 
2.  Notice shall be by first class mail to the last addresses listed for property owners on the county tax abstracts. The notice must be deposited in the mail at least ten but not more than 25 days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. 
3.  The person mailing the notice shall certify to the planning board that proper notice has been given and such certification shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud. 
b.  Newspaper notice. Notice of the requested special use permit shall also be published as a legal advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The notice shall include the date, time and place of the scheduled hearing, as well as information regarding the special use permit, such as tower type, height and location. The notice shall be published not less than ten days nor more than 25 days before the date fixed for the hearing. 
(7)  Hearing. The board shall review and consider the TAA application at a quasi-judicial public hearing. At the hearing, interested persons may appear and offer information in support or in opposition to the proposed TAA. The board shall consider the following in reaching a decision: 
a.  Development criteria. The complete TAA shall be reviewed for compliance with the development criteria set forth in this chapter. 
b.  Tower siting conditions. The board may recommend alternative development criteria, impose conditions or add restrictions on the application as it deems necessary to reduce or minimize any adverse effects and to enhance compatibility of the wireless communication facility with the surrounding property, in accordance with the purposes and intent of this chapter, provided the alternative development criteria, conditions or restrictions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished. The inclusion of additional conditions, development criteria or restrictions shall be by specific inclusion in a motion for approval and a copy of that motion shall be made available to the applicant at no cost. 
c.  Findings. The special use permit shall be granted when each of the following findings of fact have been made by the planning board: 
1.  The wireless communication facility will not materially endanger the public health or safety if located where proposed and developed according to the plan submitted; 
2.  The wireless communication facility meets all required conditions, specifications and development standards of this chapter; 
3.  The wireless communication facility will not substantially injure the value of adjoining or abutting property, or that the use is a public necessity; 
4.  The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plan submitted, will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located and in general conformity with the plan of development of the area in which it is proposed to be located; 
5.  If applicable, additional development conditions are based upon the purpose and goals of this chapter; and 
6.  If applicable, additional development conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished. 
d.  Action. Following the public hearing and presentation of evidence, the board shall take one of the following actions: 
1.  Approve the application as submitted; 
2.  Approve the application with conditions or modifications; 
3.  Refer the application for additional information or neighborhood input; or 
4.  Deny the application in writing. 
(8)  Findings. All decisions rendered by the board concerning a TAA shall be supported by written findings of fact based upon substantial evidence of record. 
(9)  Timing of decision. The board shall hold a hearing within 60 days of the approval of the TAA, however, this time may be increased due to deferrals by either the applicant or the board, but such deferrals shall not exceed a 90-day limitation except by unanimous approval of the applicant, of the application and the board. 
(10)  Appeals. The decision of the board may be appealed under the following circumstances: 
a.  An appeal shall be filed no later than 30 days after the final action by the board. Only the applicant and those who registered an objection to the TAA in the record of the board shall have standing to appeal. 
b.  Notice of appeal shall be accomplished by delivering to the county board of commissioners a written notice of appeal, and any understandable form. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2014, art. VII) 
Sec. 10-8. - Shared facilities and co-location policy. 
All new wireless communication facilities shall be engineered, designed and constructed to be capable of sharing the facility with other applicants, to co-locate with other existing wireless communication facilities and to accommodate the future co-location of other wireless communication facilities. A TAA shall not be issued until the applicant proposing a new wireless communication facility shall demonstrate that it has made a reasonable good faith attempt to locate its wireless communication facility onto an existing structure. Competitive conflict and financial burden alone are not deemed to be adequate reasons against co-location. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2014, art. VIII) 
Sec. 10-9. - Removal of abandoned support structures. 
Any support structure that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the county, at its election, may require the support structure owner to remove the support structure within 90 days after notice from the county to remove that structure. If there are two or more users of a single support structure, this provision shall not become effective until all providers cease to use the support structure. If the owner of an abandoned support structure cannot be located or is no longer in business, the requirements of this section shall be the responsibility of the landowner upon whose property the support structure is located. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2014, art. IX) 
Sec. 10-10. - Nonconforming facilities. 
Wireless communication facilities in existence on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter (nonconforming wireless communication facilities) are subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Expansion. Nonconforming wireless communication facilities may continue in use for the purpose now used, but may not be expanded without complying with this chapter except as further provided in this section. 
(2)  Additions. Nonconforming wireless communication facilities may add additional antennas (belonging to the same provider or other providers), subject to board review under this chapter. 
(3)  Repairs or reconstruction. Nonconforming wireless communication facilities which become damaged, due to any reason or cause, may be repaired and restored to their former use, locations and physical dimensions, subject to the provisions of this chapter. Provided, however, that if the damage to the wireless communication facility exceeds 50 percent of replacement cost, said wireless communication facility may only be reconstructed or repaired in compliance with this chapter. 
(4)  Presumption of abandonment. Any nonconforming wireless communication facility not in use for six months shall be deemed abandoned and all rights as a nonconforming use shall cease. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2014, art. X) 
Sec. 10-11. - Revocation of tower and antenna use applications. 
The approval of any special use permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked after a hearing, as provided hereinafter. If the board or its designee finds that any permit holder has violated any provision of this chapter, or the conditions, restrictions or additional development standards of an approved special use permit, or has failed to make good faith reasonable efforts to provide or seek co-location, the board or its designee shall notify the permit holder in writing that the special use permit is revocable due to the permit holder's noncompliance with the conditions of the permit, and the board or its designee shall convene a meeting with the permit holder no later than 30 days from the date of the letter. After the appropriate public hearing, the board of commissioners and/or designees may revoke the special use permit upon such terms and conditions, if any, that the board of commissioners and/or designees may determine. Prior to initiation of revocation proceedings, the county shall notify the permit holder, in writing, of the specific areas of noncompliance and specify the date by which such deficiencies must be corrected. The time for correction of deficiencies shall not exceed 40 days. The permit holder shall provide the county with evidence that the required corrected action has been taken. Should the permit holder fail to correct any deficiencies in the time required, the board of commissioners and/or designees shall convene a public hearing to consider revocation of the special use permit. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to notice by publication in a newspaper with general circulation in the county not less than ten days prior to the hearing and by written notice forwarded by first class mail to the permit holder's last-known address or the address reflected in the application. At such hearing, the permit holder may be represented by an attorney and may cross-examine opposing witnesses. Other interested persons may comment. The board of commissioners and/or designees may impose reasonable restrictions with respect to time and procedure. The proceeding shall be recorded; provided, however, that stenographic services, if desired, shall be provided by the party desiring such services, and that party shall bear the sole cost of such services. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2014, art. XI) 
Sec. 10-12. - Civil penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties therefor provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 10-7-2014, art. XII) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 

Sec. 14-19. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "Glascock County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997, § I) 
Sec. 14-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events, up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below the original ground surface to the evacuated surface; also known as excavation. 
Department means the department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the Briarcreek Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan or plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.) or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 14-21(5). 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. The technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally-dispersed particles are present. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Project means the entire proposed development project, regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district-approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or sub-surface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sedimentation control practices include riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication entitled "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the state Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but which are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First-order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication entitled "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that, under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997, § II; altered in 2018 codification) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3. 
Sec. 14-21. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land, except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 14-22 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state water classified as trout streams pursuant to the state Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.). In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first-order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 14-22 and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include those practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; and the construction of farm buildings; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 14-22(c)(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activity, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located, and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in subsections 14-22(b) and (c); provided, further, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electrical membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electrical membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case, there shall be compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in subsection 14-22(b) and (c) as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Public water system reservoirs. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997, § III; altered in 2018 codification) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
Sec. 14-22. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this subsection (b) and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division, or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries, or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout water. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division, or any general permit for construction activities issued by the division, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(c)  Rules and regulations governing land disturbing activities; BMPs, sound conservation and engineering practices, etc. The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission, as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut/fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.); 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavation or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts, except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.) shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director, as provided by law. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed, except as otherwise provided. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for the owner's own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time, as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks or any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the state Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirement shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed; 
b.  Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remain to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for the owner's own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time, as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans, and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Ability of authority to adopt more stringent rules and regulations. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Injury, damage during a permitted land disturbing activity; violation of standards of article. The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997, § IV; altered in 2018 codification) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6. 
Sec. 14-23. - Application; permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the county tax assessor's office to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the county tax assessor's office and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plan shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 14-22(b) and (c). Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)  A fee in amount of $10.00 shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by sections 14-22(c)(15) and (16), and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(5)b of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(5)  Approval or disapproval. 
a.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
b.  The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing action and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Design criteria. Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 14-22(b) and (c). Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conversation commission as a guide, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  Data required for site plan. 
a.  Narrative or notes. Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of project. A description of the existing land use at the project site and a description of the proposed project. 
c.  Property owner information. The name, address, and telephone number of the property owner. 
d.  Erosion and sedimentation control contact. The name and telephone number of a 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation control. 
e.  Size of project. The size of the project or the phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Project schedule. An activity schedule showing the anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement, in bold letters, that "The installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities." 
g.  Stormwater/sedimentation management systems. Stormwater and sedimentation management systems storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Protective vegetation measures. A vegetation plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.  Project schematics. A detailed drawing for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  Maintenance statement. Include the statement, "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection." 
(3)  Supporting documents. Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity map showing the location of the project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within the project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
f.  Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, and residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in Metropolitan River Protection Act areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6. 
(4)  Responsibility for maintenance. Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable, but in any event, not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 14-22(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(5)b of this section, are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or the holder's successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or the holder's successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to the holder of the permit as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the tax commissioner's office certifying that all the ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997, § V) 
State Law reference— Permits, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-9 et seq. 
Sec. 14-24. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  Notification of noncompliance. The road department superintendent or designee will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities, as defined herein, has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, the person engaging in the land disturbing activity shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  Responsibility; right of entry. The road department superintendent or designee shall have the power to conduct such investigations as the road department superintendent may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose, to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(c)  Refusal of access; obstruction of duties. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purpose of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out such representative's official duties. 
(d)  Periodic reviews by districts or commission. The districts or the commission, or both, shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission, or both, may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  Periodic reviews by division. The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of the county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take the necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as an issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997, § VI) 
Sec. 14-25. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of the person's business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work order. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or water of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served on that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, the person engaged in the land disturbing activity shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited such person's performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 14-23(b)(5)b. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section, any person who violates any provision of this article, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(2)  The following penalties shall apply to land disturbing activities performed in violation of any provision of this article, any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article: 
a.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for the owner's own occupancy; and 
b.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each violation involving land disturbing activities other than as provided in subsection (d)(2)a of this section. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997, § VII; altered in 2018 codification) 
Sec. 14-26. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with conditions of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions, or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance, shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the county board of commissioners within 20 days after the receipt by the issuing authority or written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting the person's administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997, § VIII) 
State Law reference— Violations, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-12 et seq. 
Sec. 14-27. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any person to violate the state Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the state Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder, or pollute any waters of the state, as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 4-1-1997, § IX(C)) 
Chapter 18 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCATION OR RELOCATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Mobile home location permits, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-19—18-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 18-41. - Facilities; HUD Code compliance. 
Only manufactured homes bearing a label certifying that they are constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards (also known as the HUD Code), manufactured on or after June 15, 1976, may be moved into or relocated in the county. 
(1)  Sanitary facilities. Every manufactured home shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower and a water closet, all in working condition when properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be in a sanitary working condition free from leaks and obstructions. Septic tank systems must be installed by a bonded septic tank installer. 
(2)  Hot and cold water supply. Every manufactured home shall have connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory and tub or shower a supply of both cold and hot water. 
(3)  Water heating system. Every manufactured home shall have a water heating system in a safe working condition. 
(4)  Heating system. Every manufactured home shall have a heating system in a safe working condition. Unvented fuel-burning heaters shall be prohibited. 
(5)  Smoke detector. Every manufactured home shall be provided with a state-approved smoke detector installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. 
(6)  Windows. Every habitable room, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, and hallways, shall have at least one window which can be opened, facing directly outdoors. 
(7)  Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be opened, or such other device that will ventilate the room. 
(8)  Electrical. 
a.  Distribution panels. Distribution panels shall be installed in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all unused openings covered with blank covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connections shall be checked for tightness. Panels shall be accessible. 
b.  Electrical system. The electrical system (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired, and shall be in a working condition. The pre-owned manufactured home shall be subjected to an electrical continuity test to ensure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
c.  Third party inspection. The retailer may, in lieu of inspecting the electrical and heating systems of a pre-owned manufactured home, request an electrical inspection by a qualified third party. Approval by such a person will be accepted as compliance with those portions of the safety standards established herein which pertain to electrical systems. 
(9)  Exterior walls. The exterior of the home shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the manufactured home. 
(10)  Exterior siding. The exterior siding of the home shall be free of rot and rust, and must be uniform in appearance. 
(11)  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects which might admit rain or cause dampness to the interior portion of the home. 
(12)  Interior floors, walls, and ceiling. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be kept in sound condition to prevent the admittance of rain or dampness. 
(Res. of 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 10-41, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 18-42. - Lot size requirements. 
There shall be a maximum of one manufactured home per acre. 
(Res. of 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 10-42, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 18-43. - Manufactured home standards. 
No manufactured home may be used for occupancy until the following standards are met: 
(1)  Installation shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any other building and 15 feet from the property line for fire/safety access. 
(2)  The manufactured home shall be properly blocked and tied down. 
(3)  The manufactured home shall be underpinned to prevent passage of people, animals, and debris within spaces under the manufactured home. Underpinning shall be free of rot or rust, secured and uniform in appearance. Suggested materials include, but are not limited to, brick, concrete block, rock, vinyl, or wood (pressure-treated). 
(4)  Include installation of a landing with steps with a 36-inch by 36-inch landing, with at least one 32-inch handrail (if platform is 24 inches or more above ground) at each entrance/exit, permanently secured. 
(Res. of 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 10-43, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 18-44. - Compliance standards for manufactured homes used for storage. 
(a)  Manufactured homes being used for storage shall comply with, or be governed by, the following: 
(1)  All interior fixtures, plumbing and kitchen facilities shall be removed. 
(2)  They shall be underpinned to prevent passage of people, animals, and debris within spaces under the manufactured home. Underpinning shall be free of rot or rust, secured, and uniform in appearance. Suggested materials include, but are not limited to, brick, concrete block, rock, vinyl, or wood (pressure-treated). 
(3)  The external condition of the unit must be sound and secure to prevent debris from falling from said unit during transportation or at any other time (e.g., during a wind storm). 
(4)  They shall be 30 feet from dwellings and 15 feet from the property line. 
(5)  No septic tank permit or permanent power will be issued for storage purposes. 
(6)  A moving permit must be applied for before moving into or within the county for storage purposes, and expires 90 days after the issue date. Said permit fee will be $100.00. Reactivation of the same permit will be an additional $50.00 for a time period of 90 days. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article if all the requirements of subsection (a) of this section are not completed prior to the moving permit expiring. 
(Res. of 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 10-44, 12-5-2017) 
Secs. 18-45—18-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND APPROVALS 

Sec. 18-75. - Site; conditions for turning on electricity. 
(a)  All manufactured homes must be located on an approved site. 
(b)  Permission to turn on the electricity to the manufactured home shall not be granted until the following conditions have been met in accordance with established administrative procedures: 
(1)  Tax decal. A valid location decal must be obtained from the tax commissioner's office and attached to the manufactured home. Decals must be renewed annually. 
(2)  Septic tank permit. A septic tank permit for wastewater hook-up for the site must be obtained from the county health department (not applicable for units being used for storage purposes only). 
(3)  Moving permit. Once subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section and section 18-41 have been met, the applicant must obtain a moving permit pursuant to section 18-76. The moving permit must be attached to the manufactured home before it is moved into or within the county and installed. 
(4)  Street address. Additionally, the street address must be posted on the house where it is clearly visible from the street or clearly visible at the entrance to the house for 911 emergencies (not applicable for units being used for storage purposes only). 
(5)  Temporary power for completion of installation. The county's designated building inspector or designee is authorized to permit the applicable power company to provide temporary power not to exceed 120 volts for the express purpose of completing necessary construction and installation for the manufactured home. This provision does not authorize permanent power hook-up or occupancy of the manufactured home. It shall be unlawful for temporary power to be utilized on a permanent basis or for occupancy of said manufactured home. 
(6)  Time allowed for completion. Time limit compliance is three months for completing set-up, including skirting/underpinning. 
(7)  Variances. Variances are to be brought before the board of commissioners for consideration. 
(8)  Not applicable to recreational vehicles. The requirements of this section do not apply to recreational vehicles because they are not acceptable for permanent occupancy and may only be used for a maximum of 28 consecutive days, or 60 calendar days, in any given year as a temporary residence, unless located in an approved recreation vehicle park. All recreational vehicles must display a current state license before movement. A moving permit will not be issued for recreational vehicles. 
(9)  Final inspection; re-inspection. The county's designated building inspector or designee shall conduct a final inspection of the site and shall grant permission to have the electricity turned on if the site is appropriate. If the final inspection is not approved, then there shall be an additional fee of $50.00 for a re-inspection. 
(10)  Connection of permanent power. It shall be unlawful for permanent power to be connected without final approval by the county's designated building inspector or designee. 
(Res. of 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 10-45, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 18-76. - Moving permit for existing manufactured homes. 
(a)  No existing manufactured home in the county may be moved or relocated in any manner whatsoever within the confines of the county without first obtaining a moving permit. 
(b)  Before any manufactured home is moved from any location within the county, application must be made for a moving permit, which shall be issued only if the home meets the minimum standards and is approved by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Manufactured homes to be relocated within the county shall be inspected by the county's designated building inspector, or the building inspector's designee, and found to meet the minimum standards. A re-inspection fee will be required for any subsequent inspection. 
(2)  Applicants requesting a permit for a manufactured home not located within the county must provide the county's designated building inspector, or the building inspector's designee, with a signed affidavit of condition and photographs that clearly show that minimum standards are met, and post a $1,000.00 refundable "guarantee of condition" bond prior to the issuing of a permit. Once the manufactured home has been brought into the county, an inspection at the time of the installation inspection will be done to ensure the manufactured home meets these standards. If the manufactured home does not meet these standards according to the county's designated building inspector, or the building inspector's designee, power will not be approved until the standards have been met. The "guarantee of condition" bond will be forfeited if these standards are not met within 90 days. 
(c)  If the manufactured home is being moved from one location to another and is not to be used as a residence or office, or is not being used for storage, then the manufactured home may not be moved without a variance being obtained from the board of commissioners first. An example of when a variance might be granted is if a manufactured home is being temporarily relocated and will be moved out of the county; or if a manufactured home is being moved for repair and improvements to be either moved out of the county or set up within the county once rehabilitated. A permit may be granted at the sole discretion of the commissioners. 
(d)  The commissioners may attach any condition to a variance, including, but not limited to, a time within which certain things must be accomplished or any other condition the commissioners deem appropriate regarding the relocation, repair, and movement of such manufactured home. 
(Res. of 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 10-46, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 18-77. - Prohibited conduct; violation; penalties. 
(a)  The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Camp trailer means a trailer, as defined in this section, which is pulled behind a motorized vehicle, and is used for recreational camping as a shelter or carrier for equipment. 
Motor home means a motor vehicle built on a truck or bus chassis, and which is equipped to serve as a self-contained living quarters for recreational travel. 
Owner, whenever used in relation to parking a motor vehicle, means and includes the titled owner, any person who has purchased the vehicle but not yet applied for the title in the purchaser's name, any operator of the vehicle, any person renting the vehicle, and any person who operates a vehicle owned by a business, partnership, or corporation. 
Portable storage container means a self-storage container that is delivered to and retrieved from a home or business for long-term off-site or on-site storage. Portable Storage on Demand and PODS are familiar trade names for such containers. These containers are not on a chassis and do not have axles or wheels. 
Temporary storage container means a portable storage unit that does not have a permanent foundation or footing and which includes cargo containers, portable storage containers, truck trailers, construction trailers, and bulk solid waste containers. Such structures shall not be considered a building. 
Trailer means a transport vehicle designed to be hauled by an automobile, truck or tractor, or a furnished van drawn by a truck or automobile and used as a house or office. 
Vehicle means a device, such as a motor vehicle or a piece of mechanized equipment, used for transporting passengers, goods, apparatus, or equipment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to allow a motor home and/or camper trailer to be parked on any public right-of-way, except for loading and unloading, which loading and unloading shall not exceed 12 hours. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any motor home or camper trailer to be used as a residence for a period of time exceeding 28 consecutive days, or 60 calendar days, in any given year as a temporary residence, except after December 5, 2017, any existing motor home or camper trailer may be continued and maintained although the location and use of the same may not conform to the regulations of this article. 
(d)  No existing motor home or camper trailer, for either temporary or permanent occupancy, shall be relocated to another site, and no other motor home or camper trailer shall be placed on a site vacated by an existing motor home or camper trailer, unless such relocation or placement complies with the regulations of this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any temporary storage container or portable storage container to be kept on a lot used for residential purposes for more than 14 calendar days in a calendar year. Temporary storage containers and portable storage containers are not permitted to be placed in public rights-of-way. 
(f)  Any violation of this section shall result in a fine in an amount of no less than $200.00. Citations for failure to obtain a moving permit shall be issued by the county sheriff's department and shall be prosecuted in the magistrate court of the county by the sheriff or the sheriff's designee. Citations for violation of subsection (c) of this section shall be issued by the county sheriff's department and shall be prosecuted in the magistrate court of the county by the chief tax assessor, or the chief tax assessor's designee. Citations for violations of section 18-41 shall be prosecuted in the magistrate court of the county by the building inspector, or the building inspector's designee, and shall be prosecuted in the magistrate court. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 10-47, 12-5-2017) 
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 22-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Generally. Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following in the unincorporated area of the county shall be guilty of disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of the person's life, limb or health. 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of another person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm. 
(4)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property. 
(5)  Assemble or congregate with another or others and cause, provoke or engage in any fight or brawl. 
(6)  Collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities. 
(7)  Assemble or congregate with another or others and engage or attempt to engage in gaming. 
(8)  Frequent any public place and obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device, or attempt to do so. 
(9)  Assemble with another or others and engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person, or attempt to do so. 
(10)  Utter, in a place or any place open to the public, any obscene words or epithets. 
(11)  Frequent any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated. 
(12)  Use "fighting words" directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus create turmoil. 
(13)  Assemble or congregate with another or others and do bodily harm to another. 
(14)  By acts of violence, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(15)  Congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or refuse to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace office or other person having authority. 
(16)  Damage, befoul or disturb public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition. 
(17)  Be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not the person's own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person failing to comply with the mandatory provisions of, or doing any act prohibited by, subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction in the magistrate court, shall be punished by a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not in excess of 60 days. 
(Res. of 6-4-1991) 
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Firearm means any weapon that is designed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive or other frame or receiver of any such weapon, any firearm muffler or firearm silencer. 
Park means any property owned or leased by the county board of commissioners that is designated as a recreation area, including Brassell Park. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted tobacco product including cigarettes, cigars, and pipe tobacco. 
Vehicle means any wheeled conveyance for the transportation of persons or materials. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 15-1, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 26-2. - Provisions extended to parks. 
All laws, provisions of this Code and other ordinances in force in the county for the promotion of the peace, good order and morals thereof are, whenever applicable, hereby extended to and shall embrace the territory included in the public parks, and any person violating any such ordinance shall be subject to the penalties therefor provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 15-2, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 26-3. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No person shall do any of the following in any park, subject to approval for certain organized events: 
(1)  Climb or lie upon any tree, shrub, fence, statue, monument, or fountain. 
(2)  Enter or leave any park except through established entrances or exits and within established time periods. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to refuse to leave a park or recreational area after violating any of the laws or regulations established by this article after being directed to leave by any law enforcement officer or any authorized representative of the county. 
(4)  Place or display any sign or advertisement, except that this rule does not apply to any signs or advertisements regarding any county-sponsored or county-authorized program, festival, or other event that occurs in the park. Signs or advertisements regarding county-sponsored or county-authorized programs, festivals, or other events may be placed or displayed only with permission by the recreation department director and only at the locations and during the times authorized in writing. 
(5)  Play, practice or otherwise participate in any game, sport or other recreational activity that is destructive to the lawns, plants, walls, roads, or other infrastructure of a park, except at or upon places designated for that game, sport or recreational activity. 
(6)  Knowingly, or through reckless behavior, destroy or damage the lawns, plants, walls, roads, or other infrastructure of a park, except by permission from the recreation department director. 
(7)  Drive stakes, posts, poles or any other device, or dig holes for the purpose of securing stakes, posts, poles or any other device, for any reason, including to erect a tent, stage or other structure, except by permission from the recreation department director. 
(8)  Bring in, erect, or permit a minor child in one's custody to bring in and/or erect any inflatable amusements, amusements requiring water, or any amusements requiring an independent power source, except by permission from the recreation department director. 
(9)  Hang any sign, banner, or any other item from a tree located in the park. 
(10)  Use off-road vehicles in the public parks, trails and green spaces, to include all-terrain vehicles and motorcycles, except motorcycles that remain upon roadways laid out and maintained for vehicular travel. 
(11)  Drive a vehicle on any roads in a park or recreational area in excess of 25 miles per hour. 
(12)  Hunt, trap, or otherwise pursue or catch any wildlife in any park or recreational area. It shall also be unlawful to shoot into a park or recreational area from beyond the boundaries of such park or recreational area. 
(13)  Enter or remain in any park or recreational area while intoxicated and under the influence of any drug or alcohol. It shall also be unlawful for any person to consume or use alcoholic beverages or intoxicants in any park or recreational area. 
(14)  Use or possess in any park or recreational area any fireworks, explosives, or firecrackers, unless such use has been approved with special permission granted by the county board of commissioners. 
(15)  Use or discharge any firearm, air rifle or spring gun in any park or recreational area. 
(16)  Remain in the park or recreational area upon the locking of the entrance to the park or closure of the park by the recreation department director, or to park any vehicle overnight in any park or recreational area. 
(17)  Allow any animal to be present without a leash within any portion of the park, or to allow any animal on an area designated as a ball field. 
(b)  Smoking shall not be permitted within any park, subject to any designated areas for smoking by the recreation department director. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04, § 15-3, 12-5-2017) 
Chapter 30 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq. 

Sec. 30-1. - Timber operations—Generally. 
All persons or firms harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located inside or outside the state are to provide notice of such harvesting operations to the county prior to entering onto the property, if possible, but in no event later than 24 hours after entering onto the property. Further, such persons shall give notice of cessation of cutting within 24 hours after the job is completed. 
(1)  Notice required; contents. Prior written notice shall be required of any person or firm harvesting such timber for each separate tract to be harvested thereby, and shall be in such form as prescribed by rules or regulations of the director of the state forestry commission, and shall consist of: 
a.  A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested, and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road, and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
b.  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per-unit sale, or owner harvest, for purposes of ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5; 
c.  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller, if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per-unit sale, or of the timber owner, if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
d.  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber. 
(2)  Manner of submission of notice. Notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via tele-facsimile, e-mail, or such other means as approved by the board of commissioners, or by mail. 
(3)  Bond. Persons or firms subject to such notice requirement shall deliver a bond or letter of credit as provided by this subsection, in which case notice shall not be or remain effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered to the governing authority or its designated agent a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in the state, protecting the county or municipality, as applicable, against any damage caused by such person or firm in an amount of $5,000.00, or, at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the amount of and in lieu of such bond. For purposes of this subsection, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered. 
(4)  Effectiveness of notice; report of changes. Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract upon receipt of the same by the board of commissioners or its designated agent and compliance with the requirements of subsection (3) of this section, and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the board of commissioners or its designated agent within three business days after such change. 
(5)  Penalty. Violation of the notice requirements of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of timber operations, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24. 
Sec. 30-2. - Same—With ingress by county road. 
In cases where the timber operation utilizes a county road for ingress, the county road superintendent shall establish measures to protect such road from the timber operation. No person shall conduct timber operations that utilize a county road for ingress until such protective measures have been constructed. 
(Added in 2018 codification) 
Chapter 34 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - YARD TRIMMINGS DISPOSAL 

Sec. 34-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetable residuals, and vegetable matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 10-1-1996) 
Sec. 34-20. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the county. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the county. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 10-1-1996) 
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; general powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

Sec. 38-1. - Speed zones. 
(a)  The following speed zones are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law: 
(1)  On-system. 
a.  State Route 80 from the Jefferson County line (M.L. 0.00) to the Warren County line (M.L. 7.66), a distance of 7.66 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
b.  State Route 102 from the Washington County line (M.L. 0.00) to the Mitchell southwest city limit (M.L. 2.85) 0.03 mile north of County Road #32-Lyons Hattaway Road, a distance of 2.85 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
c.  State Route 102 from the Mitchell southwest city limit (M.L. 2.85) to a point 0.28 mile southwest of State Route 123 (M.L. 3.35), a distance of 0.50 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
d.  State Route 102 from a point 0.28 mile southwest of State Route 123 (M.L. 3.35) to a point 0.18 mile northeast of State Route 123 (M.L. 3.81), a distance of 0.46 mile to be zoned 35 mph. 
e.  State Route 102 from a point 0.18 mile northeast of State Route 123 (M.L. 3.81) to the Mitchell northeast city limit (M.L. 4.27), a distance of 0.46 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
f.  State Route 102 from the Mitchell northeast city limit (M.L. 4.27) to the Gibson west city limit (M.L. 9.22) 0.21 mile east of County Road #18-Old Mitchell Road, a distance of 4.95 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
g.  State Route 102 from the Gibson west city limit (M.L. 9.22) to a point 0.22 mile west of City Street #501-Project Street (M.L. 9.64), a distance of 0.42 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
h.  State Route 102 from a point 0.22 mile west of City Street #501-Project Street (M.L. 9.64) to City Street #500-Church Street (M.L. 10.07), a distance of 0.43 mile to be zoned 35 mph. 
i.  State Route 102 from City Street #500-Church Street (M.L. 10.07) to City Street #509-Dean Street (M.L. 10.32), a distance of 0.25 mile to be zoned 25 mph. 
j.  State Route 102 from City Street #509-Dean Street (M.L. 10.32) to City Street #510-South Usry Street (M.L. 10.58), a distance of 0.26 mile to be zoned 35 mph. 
k.  State Route 102 from City Street #510-South Usry Street (M.L. 10.58) to the Gibson east city limit (M.L. 10.94) 0.50 mile west of County Road #114-Gibson Hadden Road, a distance of 0.36 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
l.  State Route 102 from the Gibson east city limit (M.L. 10.94) to the Jefferson County line (M.L. 14.98), a distance of 4.04 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
m.  State Route 123 from State Route 102 (M.L. 0.00) to a point 0.20 mile northwest of State Route 102 (M.L. 0.20), a distance of 0.20 mile to be zoned 35 mph. 
n.  State Route 123 from a point 0.20 mile northwest of State Route 102 (M.L. 0.20) to the Mitchell northwest city limit (M.L. 0.65) 0.12 mile northwest of County Road #31-Sand Hill Road, a distance of 0.45 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
o.  State Route 123 from the Mitchell northwest city limit (M.L. 0.65) to the Warren County line (M.L. 4.08), a distance of 3.43 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
p.  State Route 171 from the Jefferson County line (M.L. 0.00) to the Edgehill south city limit (M.L. 1.75) 0.29 mile south of County Road #59-Fred Williams Road, a distance of 1.75 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
q.  State Route 171 from the Edgehill south city limit (M.L. 1.75) to the Edgehill north city limit (M.L. 2.51) 0.12 mile south of County Road #113-Louisville Mitchell Road, a distance of 0.76 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
r.  State Route 171 from the Edgehill north city limit (M.L. 2.51) to the Gibson south city limit (M.L. 7.43) 0.01 mile south of County Road #49-Harper Street, a distance of 4.92 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
s.  State Route 171 from the Gibson south city limit (M.L. 7.43) to a point 0.01 mile south of County Road #125-Palmetto Street (M.L. 7.68), a distance of 0.25 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
t.  State Route 171 from a point 0.01 mile south of County Road #125-Palmetto Street (M.L. 7.68) to a point 0.01 mile north of City Street #508-Hawkins Avenue (M.L. 7.94), a distance of 0.26 mile to be zoned 35 mph. 
u.  State Route 171 from a point 0.01 mile north of City Street #508-Hawkins Avenue (M.L. 7.94) to City Street #503-College Street (M.L. 8.20), a distance of 0.26 mile to be zoned 25 mph. 
v.  State Route 171 from City Street #503-College Street (M.L. 8.20) to a point 0.13 mile north of County Road #116-Beall Springs Street (M.L. 8.41), a distance of 0.21 mile to be zoned 35 mph. 
w.  State Route 171 from a point 0.13 mile north of County Road #116-Beall Springs Street (M.L. 8.41) to the Gibson north city limit (M.L. 8.62) 0.34 mile north of County Road #116-Beall Springs Street, a distance of 0.21 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
x.  State Route 171 from the Gibson north city limit (M.L. 8.62) to the Warren County line (M.L. 13.66), a distance of 5.04 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
y.  State Route 296 from the Jefferson County line (M.L. 0.00) to the Warren County line (M.L. 0.10), a distance of 0.10 mile to be zoned 55 mph (this section of roadway shall not be included on the speed detection device permit due to inadequate distance). 
Signs to be erected by the state department of transportation. 
(2)  Off-system. 
a.  County Road #03-Blankenship Mill Road from County Road #114-Steephollow Road to County Road #117-Bastonville Road, a distance 1.89 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
b.  County Road #06-Hammond Usry Road from County Road #117-Bastonville Road to County Road #03-Blankenship Mill Road, a distance of 0.54 mile to be zoned 55 mph. 
c.  County Road #12-Chalker Road from State Route 171 to County Road #116-Beall Springs Road, a distance of 3.01 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
d.  County Road #15-Hadden Ranch Road from County Road #115-County Line Road to County Road #116-Beall Springs Road, a distance of 2.96 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
e.  County Road #17-School Circle from County Road #116-Beall Springs Road to County Road #116-Beall Springs Road, a distance of 0.62 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
f.  County Road #17-School Circle school zone from County Road #107-J.W. Braswell Road to a point 0.10 mile south of County Road #116-Beall Springs Road, a distance of 0.36 mile to be zoned 35 mph, from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days only. 
g.  County Road #18-Old Mitchell Road from State Route 102 to State Route 102, a distance of 6.03 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
h.  County Road #34-Big Creek Road from State Route 102 to County Road #113-Edgehill Mitchell Road, a distance of 5.90 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
i.  County Road #35-Griffin Chapel Road from County Road #34-Big Creek Road to the Mitchell southeast city limit, a distance of 2.60 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
j.  County Road #50-Lyons Road from County Road #113-Edgehill Mitchell Road to State Route 171, a distance of 3.49 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
k.  County Road #55-Smith Road from County Road #113-Edgehill Mitchell Road to State Route 171, a distance of 1.62 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
l.  County Road #62-Barford Road from State Route 171 to State Route 171, a distance of 5.03 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
m.  County Road #66-Griffin Pond Road from State Route 171 to the Gibson southeast city limit, a distance of 1.72 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
n.  County Road #70-Usry Mill Road from State Route 102 to County Road #71-Jim and Joe Usry Road, a distance of 2.59 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
o.  County Road #71-Jim and Joe Usry Road from County Road #70-Usry Mill Road to County Road #77-Bethel Church Road, a distance of 1.82 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
p.  County Road #77-Bethel Church Road from County Road #114-Steephollow Road to the Jefferson County line, a distance of 2.09 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
q.  County Road #85-Health Road from the Jefferson County line to County Road #114-Steephollow Road, a distance of 0.93 mile to be zoned 55 mph. 
r.  County Road #91-Rabun Road from the Warren County line to State Route 80, a distance of 0.61 mile to be zoned 55 mph. 
s.  County Road #93/#94-Hobbs Road from County Road #03-Blankenship Mill Road to State Route 80, a distance of 3.42 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
t.  County Road #101-Wilcher Road from County Road #45-Nebo Church Road to County Road #113-Edgehill Mitchell Road, a distance of 0.51 mile to be zoned 55 mph. 
u.  County Road #102-Hattaway Road from County Road #113-Edgehill Mitchell Road to State Route 102, a distance of 1.09 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
v.  County Road #111-Agricola Road from the Washington County line to State Route 102, a distance of 1.33 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
w.  County Road #112-Mitchell-Warrenton Road from the Mitchell northeast city limit to County Road #115-County Line Road, a distance of 3.14 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
x.  County Road #113-Edgehill Mitchell Road from State Route 171 to the Mitchell southeast city limit, a distance of 5.79 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
y.  County Road #114/#117-Bastonville Road from State Route 102 to State Route 80, a distance of 6.82 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
z.  County Road #114-Steephollow Road from County Road #117-Bastonville Road to County Road #77-Bethel Church Road, a distance of 1.47 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
aa.  County Road #114-Steephollow Road from County Road #77-Bethel Church Road to a point 0.15 mile east of County Road #81-Quail Road, a distance of 0.34 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
bb.  County Road #114-Steephollow Road from a point 0.15 mile east of County Road #81-Quail Road to State Route 80, a distance of 2.93 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
cc.  County Road #116-Beall Springs Road from County Road #115-County Line Road to the Gibson northwest city limit, a distance of 4.88 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
dd.  County Road #116-Beall Springs Road from the Gibson northwest city limit to a point 0.02 mile west of City Street #516-Brassell Street, a distance of 0.29 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
ee.  County Road #116-Beall Springs Road from a point 0.002 mile west of City Street #516-Brassell Street to State Route 171, a distance of 0.20 mile to be zoned 35 mph. 
ff.  County Road #118-Edgehill-Avera Road from the Edgehill east city limit to the Jefferson County line, a distance of 2.44 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
gg.  County Road #119-Kitchens Road from the Warren County line to the Warren County line (far east end), a distance of 0.80 mile to be zoned 55 mph. 
hh.  County Road #137-Kitchens Road from State Route 80 to the Warren County line, a distance of 3.05 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
ii.  County Line Road from Georgia Hwy. 80 to Georgia Hwy. 171 North, a distance of 2.9 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
jj.  County Line Road from Georgia Hwy. 171 North to Beall Springs Road, a distance of 4.0 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
kk.  County Line Road from Beall Springs Road to Mitchell-Warrenton Road, a distance of 3.3 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
ll.  County Line Road from Mitchell-Warrenton Road to Georgia Hwy. 123, a distance of 2.4 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
Signs to be erected by the county. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 98.007, 7-8-1998; altered in 2018 codification) 
State Law reference— Authority to alter speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 38-2. - Trucks prohibited on certain roads; definitions; penalty. 
(a)  Generally. No truck tractor, semitrailer, trailer, bimodal semitrailer, tandem trucks, or combination of vehicles shall use the following roads for through traffic, to wit: 
(1)  Steephollow Road. 
(2)  Bastonville Road. 
(3)  Mitchell-Edgehill Road. 
(4)  Beall Springs Road. 
(5)  Big Creek Road. 
(6)  Edgehill-Avera Road. 
(7)  Hobbs Road. 
(8)  Barford Road. 
(9)  Lyons Road. 
(10)  Mitchell-Warrenton Road. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bimodal semitrailer means a detachable load-carrying unit designed to be attached to a coupling on the rear of a truck tractor by which it is partly supported during movement over the highway and designed either with retractable flanged wheels or to attach to a detachable flanged wheel assembly for movement on the rails. 
Combination of vehicles means a semitrailer pulled by a truck tractor or a semitrailer and trailer pulled by a truck tractor operating in a truck tractor/semitrailer/trailer combination. 
Semitrailer means a detachable load-carrying unit designed to be attached to a coupling on the rear of a truck tractor by which it is partly supported. 
Tandem truck means a dual-axle dump-truck. 
Through traffic means being on or using a county road, except for pickup or delivery or as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 32-6-26(g)(1)(A) through (E). 
Trailer means a detachable load-carrying unit designed to be attached to a coupling at the rear of a semitrailer and capable of support in operation without the truck tractor. 
Truck tractor means the non-cargo-carrying power unit that operates in combination with a semitrailer or trailer, except that a truck tractor and semitrailer engaged in transportation of automobiles may transport motor vehicles on part of the owner unit. 
(c)  Penalty. Fines shall be a minimum of $300.00 but not more than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 6-2-1998, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 1-3-2003) 
Sec. 38-3. - Bicycles and three-wheel and all-terrain vehicles. 
(a)  The county hereby adopts by reference as county ordinances the following state statutes: 
(1)  O.C.G.A. § 40-6-291. 
(2)  O.C.G.A. § 40-6-292. 
(3)  O.C.G.A. § 40-6-293. 
(4)  O.C.G.A. § 40-6-294. 
(5)  O.C.G.A. § 40-6-295. 
(6)  O.C.G.A. § 40-6-296. 
(7)  O.C.G.A. § 40-6-298. 
(8)  O.C.G.A. § 40-6-390. 
(b)  Any person who races, cuts circles, donuts, or figure eights; drives in any manner that prevents all the wheels of the vehicle from remaining on the ground; or otherwise disturbs the peace or causes damage to any public or private property while operating a bicycle or three- or four-wheel all-terrain vehicle commits the offense of disorderly conduct. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all bicycles and three- or four-wheel all-terrain vehicles, and any reference to a state law governing bicycles shall apply equally to three- or four-wheel all-terrain vehicles, and where the term "bicycle" is used in any state law adopted herein by reference, said term shall be deemed to include three- or four-wheel all-terrain vehicles. 
(Ord. of 1-7-1998, §§ 1—4) 
State Law reference— Bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code and Local Acts, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia State Law. 

 