THE CODE 
____________ 
Published in 2011 by Order of the Board of County Commissioners 
____________ 

OFFICIALS AT CODIFICATION 
Kelly S. Spratt 
Chairperson 
____________ 
Joel Williams 
David S. Stevens 
Charles E. Jordan 
Mark Douglas 
County Commissioners 
____________ 
C. Brett Cook 
County Manager 
____________ 
Adam S. Poppell, III 
County Attorney 
____________ 
John Patrick Zoucks 
County Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Kelly S. Spratt 
Chairperson 
____________ 
David Stevens 
Vice-Chairperson 
____________ 
Joel Williams 
Charles Jordan 
Bill Watson 
County Commissioners 
____________ 
Patrick Zoucks 
Interim County Manager 
____________ 
Adam S. Poppell, III 
County Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of McIntosh County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances as adopted by the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners through December 14, 2010. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Jack Renfroe, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Brett Cook, County Manager, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and McIntosh County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and McIntosh County, Georgia. 
© ;hg;Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and McIntosh County, Georgia. 2011. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2011-1 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE GOVERNING BODY OF MCINTOSH COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MCINTOSH COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of McIntosh County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 44, each inclusive, is hereby adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 14, 2011, and not included in the Code or its Appendices or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed, with the exception of the McIntosh County Zoning Ordinance, and the various amendments thereof, and the McIntosh County Subdivision Ordinance and the various amendments thereof. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the maximum amount allowable under the Official Code of Georgia, General Laws and the Constitution thereof, which is currently $1,000.00 and costs or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding the maximum term allowable under the Official Code of Georgia, General Laws and the Constitution thereof, which is currently 60 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 14, 2011 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon passage. 
Passed and adopted by the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners this 14 th day of June, 2011. 

ATTEST: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - SPECIAL ACTS AND RELATED LAWS 
Subpart A - SPECIAL ACTS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Special Act establishing the governing body of the county, as adopted by 1876 Ga. Laws (Act No. 370), p. 283, as amended. Amendments to this Act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Each section of the charter in the original text of the Act began with the prefatory language "[b]e it further enacted, [t]hat said." At the editor's discretion, this prefatory language has been omitted from the reprinting of this Act as unnecessary language. 

Sec. 1. - Composition; districts. 
(a)  Those members of the Board of Commissioners of McIntosh County who are serving as such immediately prior to the effective date of this Act and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. On and after the effective date of this Act, the Board of Commissioners of McIntosh County shall consist of five members all of whom shall be elected from commissioner districts described in subsection (b) of this section except for the member who is elected at large as provided in this Act. 
(b)  For purposes of electing members of the board of commissioners, other than the at-large member, McIntosh County is divided into four commissioner districts. One member of the board shall be elected from each such district. The four commissioner districts shall be and correspond to those four numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan Name: mcintp4 Plan Type: Local User: Gina Administrator: McIntosh. 
(c)  When used in such attachment, the terms "Tract" and "BG" (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a "BG" heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of McIntosh County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of McIntosh County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any commissioner district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 697), p. 5207, § 1) 
Editor's note— The attachment referred to by this Act was omitted from this printing at the discretion of the editor. It may be found at 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 697), p. 5207. 
Sec. 2. - Eligibility; resident qualifications. 
(a)  No person shall be a member of the board if that person is ineligible for such office pursuant to Code Section 45-2-1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1] or any other general law applicable to that office. 
(b)  In order to be elected as a member of the board from a commissioner district, a person must receive the number of votes cast as required by general law for that office in that district only. Only electors who are residents of that commissioner district may vote for a member of the board for that district. At the time of qualifying for election as a member of the board from a commissioner district, each candidate for such office must reside in such district and shall specify the commissioner district for which that person is a candidate. A person elected or appointed as a member of the board from a commissioner district must continue to reside in that district during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
(c)  The at-large member of the board may reside anywhere within McIntosh County and, if elected, must receive the number of votes cast for that office as required by general law in the entire county. The at-large member must continue to reside within the county during that person's term of office or that office shall become vacant. 
(2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 697), p. 5207, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Terms; designation. 
(a)  [Staggered terms.] 
(1)  The members of the board of commissioners who are in office on the effective date of this Act shall serve out the terms of office to which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(2)  At the November general election in 2006, members of the board of commissioners from Districts 1, 3, and 5 shall be elected to take office on January 1, 2007, and serve a term of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors to such members shall be elected at the November general election immediately preceding the expiration of their terms of office who shall take office on the first day of January immediately following such election and shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(3)  At the November general election in 2006, members of the board of commissioners from Districts 2 and 4 shall be elected to take office on January 1, 2007, and serve a term of office of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors to such members shall be elected at the November general election immediately preceding the expiration of their terms of office who shall take office on the first day of January immediately following such election and shall serve terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  All members of the board who are elected thereto shall be nominated and elected in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code" [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.]. 
(c)  Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4, as they exist immediately prior to the effective date of this Act, shall continue to be designated as Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and on and after the effective date of this Act, such members of the board serving from those former commissioner districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this Act. Commissioner District 5 as it existed immediately prior to the effective date of this Act shall be redesignated as the at-large district and shall be composed of all of McIntosh County and, on and after the effective date of this Act, the member serving from former Commissioner District 5 shall be deemed to be serving from and representing the at-large district as described under this Act. 
(2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 697), p. 5207, § 3; 2005 Ga. Laws (HB 449), p. 3622) 
Sec. 4. - Compensation. 
Each member of the board of commissioners of McIntosh County shall receive for their services as such a salary of $125.00 per month. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 424), p. 3367, § 1) 
Sec. 5. - Powers. 
Commissioners shall have in said county exclusive jurisdiction and control over the following matters, viz: 
First: In directing and controlling all the property of the county, as full as said power was possessed and exercised by law by the Justices of the Inferior Court. 
Second: In levying a general tax for general, and a special tax for particular and county purposes, according to the provisions of the law in force. 
Third: In establishing, altering or abolishing all roads, bridges and ferries, in conformity to law. 
Fourth: In establishing and changing election precincts and militia districts. 
Fifth: In supplying, by appointment, all vacancies in county offices, and in ordering elections to fill them, in the same manner as said powers are now given to the Ordinaries of counties. 
Sixth: In examining, settling and allowing all claims against the county. 
Seventh: In examining and auditing the accounts of all officers having the care, management, keeping, collection or disbursement of money belonging to the county or appropriated for its use and benefit, and in bringing them to a settlement. 
Eighth: In making such rules and regulations for the support of the poor of the county, for the protection of the health of said county, and for quarantine, as are not inconsistent with law. 
Ninth: In regulating peddling, and fixing the costs of license therefor. 
Tenth: To approve of all officers' bonds in said county; to deliver the commissions of said officers sent them by the Governor, and to qualify said officers. 
Eleventh: To appoint any person to discharge any trust authorized by their powers, where no other person is designated by law, and to regulate his compensation, and to take bond and security for the proper discharge of his duty. 
Sec. 6. - Criminal and civil jurisdiction. 
The Chairman of the Board of Commissioners, and also the Chairman pro tem of said board, shall be vested with the same criminal jurisdiction as is now vested by law in Justices of the Peace in this State; and the Chairman of said board, and his successors, shall also have and exercise the same jurisdiction in civil cases, within the limits of the 271st District, Georgia Militia, in the county of McIntosh, as is vested by law in Justices of the Peace. 
Sec. 7. - Court powers. 
A majority of said Commissioners may sit at any time as a court for county purposes, and for the exercise of any power they possess under this Act. 
Sec. 8. - Records transition. 
Immediately upon the qualification of said Commissioners (whose oath shall be that which was taken by the Justices of the Inferior Court), there shall be turned over to them all books, papers and property of the County of McIntosh and City of Darien, in the same manner and to the same extent to which the Justices of the Inferior Court of the county of McIntosh and the corporate authorities of the City of Darien have been and are entitled by law to the possession and custody of the same. 
Sec. 9. - Oath. 
The persons elected under this Act shall, before entering upon the discharge of their duties, take and subscribe the following oath: "I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully discharge the duties of a Commissioner of McIntosh County in accordance with law and to the best of my ability. So help me God." 
(1913 Ga. Laws (Act No. 16), p. 418) 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - COUNTY OFFICERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Special Act 1965 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 461), p. 3239, as enacted by the General Assembly of the Georgia Legislature regarding McIntosh County. Amendments to this Act are indicated in the parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Each section of the original text of the Act began with the prefatory language "[b]e it further enacted, [t]hat said." At the editor's discretion, this prefatory language has been omitted from the reprinting of these Acts as unnecessary language. 

Sec. 1. - Compensation—Fee system abolished. 
The [ ____________ ] mode of compensating the clerk of the superior court, the sheriff, [probate judge, ex officio chief magistrate,] and the tax commissioner of McIntosh County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, annual salaries for such officers are prescribed [by State statute]. 
Sec. 2. - Same—Sheriff. 
[1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 461), p. 3239, § 2 regarding the annual salary and expense allowance for the sheriff has been superseded and made obsolete by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III and O.C.G.A. § 15-16-1 et seq. (Sheriffs).] 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 794), p. 2453, § 1; 1970 Ga. Laws (Act No. 930), p. 2427, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Same—Clerk of the superior court. 
[1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 461), p. 3239, § 3, regarding the annual salary and expense allowance for the clerk of the superior court, has been superseded and made obsolete by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III and O.C.G.A. § 15-6-50 et seq. (Clerks of Superior Courts).] 
Sec. 3A. - Same—Additional fees for clerk of the superior court. 
[1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 172), p. 2528, § 1(3A) regarding the fees specified in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-6-70, 15-6-77 for the clerk of the superior court has been superseded and made obsolete by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III and O.C.G.A. § 15-6-50 et seq. (Clerks of Superior Courts).] 
(1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 172), p. 2528, § 1(3A)) 
Sec. 4. - Same—Tax commissioner. 
[1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 461), p. 3239, § 4, regarding the annual salary and expense allowance for the tax commissioner has been superseded and made obsolete by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III and O.C.G.A. § 48-5-180 et seq. (Compensation).] 
Sec. 5. - Officers collect funds for county. 
After the effective date of this Act, said officers shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed as compensation for services in any capacity in their respective offices, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the 15th day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, each of said officers shall furnish the governing authority of the county a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. ;oh5 Sec. 6.\Salary in lieu of fees for tax commissioner. 
It is specifically provided that the salary provided herein for the tax commissioner shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions, costs, fines, emoluments and perquisites of whatever kind including those commissions allowed by an Act approved March 9, 1955 (Ga. L. 1955, p. 659), as amended, relating to the sale of motor vehicle license plates by local tax officials, notwithstanding the fact that such services for which the commissions are derived may have been performed in the capacity of an agent for the State Revenue Department, and an Act relating to the commission on taxes collected in excess of a certain percentage of the taxes due according to the Tax Net Digest, approved January 17, 1938 (Ga. L. 1937-38, Ex. Sess., p. 297), as amended. 
Sec. 7. - Sheriff's deputies. 
The sheriff shall be authorized to employ [ ____________ ] deputies and to fix their compensation at an amount [within the budget set by] the governing authority of McIntosh County, payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of McIntosh County for each such deputy. The sheriff shall also be authorized to employ two part-time deputies when, in his discretion, he deems such part-time deputies necessary to carry out the official duties of his office. The governing authority of McIntosh County shall fix the compensation of such part-time deputies and it shall be payable monthly from the funds of McIntosh County. The sheriff may, upon the approval of the governing authority of McIntosh County, employ additional full or part-time deputies. Such additional deputies shall receive such compensation as the governing authority of McIntosh County shall approve. The funds authorized by this section shall be available and shall be used only for the purposes herein provided. Such full-time deputies and part-time deputies shall serve at the pleasure of the sheriff. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 521), p. 3861, § 1) 
Sec. 8. - Sheriff's automobiles. 
The governing authority of McIntosh County shall be authorized to purchase two automobiles for the use of the sheriff and his deputies in the performance of their duties. Said automobiles shall be the property of McIntosh County and said governing authority shall be authorized to dispose of and replace said automobiles at such time and in such manner as is determined to be most advantageous to McIntosh County. Said governing authority shall provide for the cost of repairs, tires, gasoline, oil and other maintenance and supplies necessary for the operation of said automobiles. The funds for purchasing said automobiles and the replacements, thereof, supplies, equipment and maintenance of said automobiles, as herein provided, shall be payable from the funds of McIntosh County. [The Sheriff may purchase additional automobiles and equipment with funds lawfully seized, as provided by law.] 
Sec. 9. - Jailer. 
The sheriff shall be authorized to employ a jailer and fix his compensation [within the budget set by the Board of Commissioners], payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of McIntosh County. Said jailer shall serve at the pleasure of the sheriff. 
Sec. 10. - Assistant to superior court clerk. 
The clerk of the superior court shall be authorized to employ one assistant and fix the compensation of such assistant [within the budget set by the Board of Commissioners], payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of McIntosh County. Said assistant shall serve at the pleasure of the clerk. 
Sec. 11. - Assistant to tax commissioner. 
The tax commissioner shall be authorized to employ one assistant and fix the compensation of such assistant [within the budget set by the Board of Commissioners], payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of McIntosh County. Upon the approval of the governing authority of McIntosh County, the tax commissioner may employ an additional assistant at an annual salary of not less than $5,200.00, such salary to be fixed by the governing authority of said county. Said assistants shall serve at the pleasure of the tax commissioner. 
(1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 378), p. 4423, § 1) 
Sec. 11.a. - Same; additional compensation. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 11, the governing authority of McIntosh County is authorized to increase the compensation of the assistant to the tax commissioner and such other clerical personnel as shall be employed within the tax commissioner's office [within the budget set by the Board of Commissioners]. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 423), p. 3365, § 1(11A)) 
Sec. 12. - Operating expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of each of said offices shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture, utilities and uniforms, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of each office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements for each office shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority of McIntosh County. 
Sec. 13. - Bonds. 
The official bonds of each of said officers, and the respective deputies, clerks, assistants and other personnel, as may be required by law, shall be procured by each elected officer, and the premiums and costs thereof shall be paid out of any county funds available for that purpose. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX COMMISSIONER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Special Act 1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 124), p. 627, as enacted by the General Assembly of the Georgia Legislature regarding McIntosh County. Amendments to this Act are indicated in the parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Transition; offices abolished. 
[1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 124), p. 627, § 1, abolished the offices of the receiver of tax-returns and tax-collector in and for McIntosh County.] 
Sec. 2. - Office created. 
[T]here [ ____________ ] is hereby created the office of County Tax-Commissioner in and for the said County of McIntosh, said County Tax-Commissioner to perform all the duties now and heretofore exercised by the receiver of tax-returns and tax-collector under the general laws of Georgia relating to said offices, and all the duties prescribed by law relating to the office of Tax-Commissioner heretofore enacted or which may hereafter be enacted by general law. He shall be elected at the general election preceding the expiration of the term of office of the tax-receiver and tax-collector, whose offices are herein abolished, as other county officers are elected. The County Commissioners shall furnish him with office in the court-house, and he is required to attend to the duties of his office at the place so furnished as far as practicable. 
Sec. 3. - Oath; bond required. 
[B]efore entering upon the discharge of his duties said County Tax-Commissioner shall take oath to faithfully and diligently discharge all duties of such office, and to properly account for all monies collected to the proper authorities at the times prescribed by law, and shall give bond with some surety company authorized to do business in Georgia as surety, in such amount of money as may be fixed by the County Commissioners of McIntosh County, but in no event to be less than twenty-five thousand dollars, conditioned for the faithful discharge of the duties of his office in the form and manner prescribed by law for tax-receivers and tax-collectors, in so far as practicable. The premium on said bond to be paid by the county. 
Sec. 4. - Term; vacancy. 
[T]he first election for County Tax-Commissioner of McIntosh County shall be held at the same time and under the same laws as other county officers are now elected at the general election for county officers in the year 1928, and quadrennially thereafter, and that the person so elected shall enter upon the duties of the office hereby created on January 1, 1929, and shall serve for a term of four years. If a vacancy should occur, then the office shall be filled in the same manner as vacancies are filled in other county offices. 
Sec. 5. - Funds collected. 
[A]ll fees, commissions, and all other compensation now allowed to the tax-receiver and tax-collector of McIntosh County from State, County, school, and special, shall be collected by the Tax-Commissioner and paid into the county depository of said county, and the same to be accounted for by the county depository in like manner as all other funds belonging to the county deposited with it. ;oh5 Sec. 6.\Compensation. 
[1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 124), p. 627, § 6, regarding the annual salary and expense allowance for the tax commissioner has been superseded and made obsolete by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III and O.C.G.A. § 48-5-180 et seq. (Compensation).] 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY COURTS 
DIVISION 1. - PROBATE COURT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Special Act 1927 Ga. Laws (Act No. 124), p. 627, as enacted by the General Assembly of the Georgia Legislature regarding McIntosh County. Amendments to this Act are indicated in the parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Compensation; fee system abolished. 
[1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 425), p. 3369, § 1, abolished the office of the judge of the probate court of McIntosh County.] 
Sec. 2. - Compensation. 
(a)  [1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 425), p. 3369, § 2, regarding the annual salary for the judge of the probate court has been superseded and made obsolete by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III and O.C.G.A. § 48-5-180 et seq. (Compensation).] 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3, in addition to said salary, the judge of the probate court shall be entitled to fees collected by the probate court pursuant to the [statute], relating to vital records. 
(1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 381), p. 4429, § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Funds collected. 
[1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 425), p. 3369, § 3, regarding the collection of fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed the judge of the probate court as compensation for services rendered has been superseded and made obsolete by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III and O.C.G.A. § 15-9-60 et seq. (Probate Courts).] 
Sec. 4. - Appoint deputies and assistants. 
The [probate court judge] shall have the authority to appoint such deputies, clerks, assistants and other personnel as he shall deem necessary to efficiently and effectively discharge the official duties of his office. The [probate court judge] shall, from time to time, recommend to the governing authority of said county the number of such personnel needed by his office, together with the suggested compensation to be paid each employee. However, it shall be within the sole discretion of the governing authority of McIntosh County to fix the compensation to be received by each employee in said office. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the [probate court judge], during his term of office, to designate and name the person or persons who shall be employed as such deputies, clerks, assistants or other employees, and to prescribe their duties and assignments, and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within his sole discretion. 
Sec. 5. - Operating expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of the [probate court judge's] office, expressly including the compensation of all personnel and employees, shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture, utilities and equipment, and the repair, replacement and maintenance thereof, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority of McIntosh County. 
Sec. 6. - Expense allowance. 
[1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 425), p. 3369, § 6, regarding the expense allowance of the judge of the probate court as compensation for services rendered has been superseded and made obsolete by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III and O.C.G.A. § 15-9-60 et seq. (Probate Courts).] 
Sec. 7. - Election. 
All elections for the office of probate judge of McIntosh County shall be nonpartisan elections as provided for in Code Section 21-2-139 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-139]. Such nonpartisan elections shall be held and conducted as provided in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code" [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.]. 
(2003 Ga. Laws (HB 805), p. 3790, § 1) 
DIVISION 2. - MAGISTRATE COURT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Special Act 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 662), as enacted by the General Assembly of the Georgia Legislature regarding McIntosh County. Amendments to this Act are indicated in the parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. In addition, Special Act 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 662) § 3, repealed 1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 382), p. 4431, § 1 and 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 666), p. 4346, § 1, which had established the Small Claims Court in and for McIntosh County. 

Sec. 1. - Ex official chief magistrate. 
Pursuant to subsection (g) of Code Section 15-10-20 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 15-10-20(g)], the chief magistrate of the Magistrate Court of McIntosh County shall not be separately elected for any term of office that begins on or after January 1, 2009, but on and after that date the probate judge of McIntosh County shall serve ex officio as the chief magistrate of the Magistrate Court of McIntosh County. 
(2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 662), § 1) 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Special Act 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 790), as enacted by the General Assembly of the Georgia Legislature regarding McIntosh County. Amendments to this Act are indicated in the parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. In addition, Special Act 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 790), § 15, repealed 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 810), p. 5593, which created and established the duties and responsibilities of the board of elections and registration for McIntosh County. 

Sec. 1. - Created. 
Pursuant to subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40(b)], there is created the Board of Elections and Registration of McIntosh County, hereinafter referred to as "the board." The board shall have the powers and duties of the former superintendent of elections of McIntosh County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," relating to the conduct of primaries and elections and the former board of registrars of McIntosh County under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," relating to the registration of electors and absentee voting. 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
The terms "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," and "public office" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act, and the term "commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of McIntosh County and "county" means McIntosh County. 
Sec. 3. - Composition; qualifications; terms. 
(a)  The board shall be composed of seven members, each of whom shall meet the applicable eligibility requirements under Article 1 of Chapter 2 of Title 45 of the O.C.G.A., Code Section 21-2-75 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-75], and other general law, and shall be qualified and selected in the following manner: 
(1)  Four members shall be appointed by the county executive committee of the political party whose candidate at the last preceding general election received the largest number of votes in this state for the officer of Governor; 
(2)  Three members shall be appointed by the county executive committee of the political party whose candidate at the last preceding general election received the next largest number of votes in this state for the election of Governor; 
(3)  Each of the appointments made by the respective executive committees shall have been ratified by a majority of the members of each such respective executive committee voting at a meeting called and held for such purposes. In the event such appointments are not ratified by a majority of the members of such executive committee, then such members shall be appointed by the judge of the probate court of McIntosh County; 
(4)  At the first meeting of each calendar year, the members of the McIntosh County Board of Elections and Registration shall select one of their members of the board to serve as chairperson and one of their members to serve as secretary; 
(5)  [Terms.] 
(A)  The initial appointments to the board shall be made no later than January 1, 2007; 
(B)  Of the four initial members appointed by the executive committee of the political party whose candidate at the last preceding election received the largest number of votes in this state for the office of Governor, two of the persons so appointed, who shall be designated by the executive committee, shall serve a term of office beginning on January 1, 2007, and expiring on December 31, 2011, and two of the persons so appointed, who shall be designated by the executive committee, shall serve a term of office beginning on January 1, 2007, and expiring on December 31, 2009; 
(C)  Of the three initial members appointed by the executive committee of the political party whose candidate at the last preceding election received the next largest number of votes in this state for the office of Governor, two of the persons so appointed, who shall be designated by the executive committee, shall serve a term of office beginning on January 1, 2007, and expiring on December 31, 2011, and one of the persons so appointed, who shall be designated by the executive committee, shall serve a term of office beginning on January 1, 2007, and expiring on December 31, 2009; 
(D)  All such persons so appointed shall serve for the initial terms specified and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified; 
(6)  After the initial term of office, successors to members whose terms are about to expire shall be appointed to take office on the first day of January immediately following the expiration of a term of office and shall serve a term of four years each and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified; 
(7)  Appointments on behalf of political parties that do not have executive committees in McIntosh County shall be made by the state executive committee of such party; and 
(8)  Each member of the board shall successfully complete all mandatory training by achieving a passing score on any test administered as a part of such training. Any board member who fails to successfully complete such training and achieve a passing score of any test administered as a part of such training shall stand immediately terminated and shall be replaced by the authority appointing such board member. Any such appointment shall be to fill the unexpired term of the member replaced. 
Sec. 4. - Certification; appointment. 
The appointing authorities shall certify the appointment of each member of the board by filing an affidavit with the clerk of the Superior Court of McIntosh County no later than 15 days preceding the date upon which such members are to take office, stating the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifying such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. The clerk of the superior court shall record each of such certifications on the minutes of the court and shall certify the name of each such appointed member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members within the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for registrars. If any appointing authority does not, in conformity with this Act, certify an appointment to the board within 30 days after the beginning of a term of office or within 30 days after the creation of a vacancy in that office, a vacancy shall be deemed to have been thereby created and the judge of the probate court of McIntosh County shall fill that vacancy by making the appointment thereto and shall certify it as provided in this section. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve out the unexpired term of office. 
Sec. 5. - Successive terms; removal. 
Each member of the board shall be eligible to serve successive terms without limitation and shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of such resignation to the appointing authority and to the clerk of the Superior Court of McIntosh County. Each member shall be subject to removal from the board at any time, for cause, after notice and hearing, by the chief judge of the Superior Court of the Atlantic Judicial Circuit in the same manner and by the same authority as provided for the removal of registrars. 
Sec. 6. - Vacancy. 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any board member before the expiration of his or her term, by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the appointing authority for that position on the board. The clerk of the superior court shall be notified of such interim appointment and record and certify such appointment in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. 
Sec. 7. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the member's duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
Sec. 8. - Duties and responsibilities; meetings; rate of compensation. 
(a)  The board shall be authorized to organize itself, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate to the management of the affairs committed to its supervision; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with state law. Action and decision by the board shall be by a majority of the members of the board. The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in primaries and elections and such workers shall be appointed, insofar as practicable, from lists provided to the board by the county executive committee of each political party. 
(b)  The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall hold regular meetings each month and more often if needed in the opinion of the members. The time of such meetings shall be set by the board. Any specially called meeting shall be called by the chairperson or any three members of the board. The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions amended to include additions or deletions. Such written records shall be made available for the public to review. 
(c)  Members of the board shall receive $55.00 per day for each day of service on the board. The chairperson and the secretary shall receive $75.00 per day for each day of service on the board. On primary and election days and during the period of advance voting pursuant to subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-380 of the O.C.G.A., the chairperson and members of the board shall be compensated at the rate of $10.00 per hour. The hours of service shall be certified to the commissioners by the chairperson of the board. 
Sec. 9. - Authority to contract with municipality. 
The board shall have the authority to contract with any municipality located within McIntosh County for the holding by the board of any primary or election to be conducted within such municipality. 
Sec. 10. - Elections supervisor; additional clerical assistants. 
(a)  An elections supervisor shall be employed by the governing authority of McIntosh County who shall generally supervise, direct, and control the administration of the affairs of the board pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board. The election supervisor shall not be a member of the board. The election supervisor shall be considered an employee of McIntosh County and shall be entitled to the same benefits as other employees of McIntosh County. The election supervisor shall be subject to all personnel and policy procedures of McIntosh County. The election supervisor shall maintain regular office hours as directed by the governing authority of McIntosh County. 
(b)  The supervisor of elections shall not be an active member of any political party or body. 
(c)  Upon indictment of any felony involving election fraud or moral turpitude, the election supervisor shall be terminated from the position as a matter of law. Such vacancy shall be filled within ten business days following the occurrence of such vacancy. 
(d)  The board is authorized, with the approval of the commissioners, to employ additional clerical assistants as needed to carry out the duties and functions of the board. All such clerical assistants shall be considered employees of McIntosh County and shall be entitled to the same benefits as other employees of McIntosh County. Any clerical assistants shall be subject to all personnel and policy procedures of McIntosh County. Upon indictment of any felony involving election fraud or moral turpitude, a clerical assistant shall resign or be terminated from his or her position. 
Sec. 11. - Compensation in general. 
Compensation for the members of the board, election supervisor, clerical assistants, and other employees shall be fixed by the board of commissioners in accordance with the provisions of this Act. Such compensation shall be paid wholly from county funds. 
Sec. 12. - Facilities and equipment; audits. 
(a)  The Board of Commissioners of McIntosh County shall provide the board with such proper and suitable offices, equipment, materials, and supplies and with such clerical assistance and other employees as the Board of Commissioners of McIntosh County deems appropriate. 
(b)  The commissioners shall also cause periodic audits to be made of the board and its offices. 
Sec. 13. - Transition. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval for purposes of making initial appointments to the board only. This Act shall become fully effective on January 1, 2007. Upon this Act becoming fully effective, the superintendent of elections of McIntosh County and the board of registrars of McIntosh County shall be relieved of all powers and duties to which the board succeeds by the provisions of this Act and shall deliver to the board all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities pertaining to such powers and duties. 
SPECIAL ACTS AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Special Acts and Related Laws, and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; authority of county to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of McIntosh County, Georgia," and may be so cited. It may also be referred to as the "McIntosh County Code" or the "Code." 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this Code shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified. In the construction of this Code and all ordinances found herein, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of county commissioners or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Board of county commissioners or county commission. The term "board of county commissioners" or "the county commission" or "the board" or "the commission" means the governing body of the county. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of McIntosh County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. Except that if the last day shall be excluded if it is falls on a Saturday, Sunday or a county recognized holiday then the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of McIntosh, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires the head of a department of the county to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
Governing authority or governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the Board of County Commissioners of the County of McIntosh, Georgia. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper, proprietor. The term "keeper" or "proprietor" means and includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the terms "of the County of McIntosh" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing only the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; and every word importing the plural number may extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The term "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or person in possession under a bond for title. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the county seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature, subscription. The signature or subscription of a person shall include a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the county. 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense/time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Title of officer. Whenever the title of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the terms "of McIntosh County" were added. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Historical notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred, or any right accrued, any offense committed, or any proceeding commenced, before the repeal took effect. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of the Code, since the same would have been enacted by the mayor and council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-6. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to and existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not new enactments. 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the passage of the ordinances originally included herein which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and added thereto. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and included, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of McIntosh County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provision may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of McIntosh County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapter, or provisions desired to be repealed may be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-8. - Altering Code, ordinances or other public notice. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the county board of commissioners. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, or in any other manner alter the ordinance book, minutes, notices posted by the county for the benefit of the public, or any other documents or records of the government of the county. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
Any violation of any county ordinance as contained in this Code of Ordinances may be punished by incarceration or monetary penalty. The punishment imposed for any county ordinance violation whether specified in such ordinance or not shall not exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment or both, except as otherwise provided by general law. This punishment shall be imposed by the magistrate court of the county. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Maximum sentences and fines which may be imposed for violation of municipal ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3. 
Sec. 1-10. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary of any county officer or employee, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing employment and personnel policies, procedures, or benefits; 
(6)  Any right of franchise granted by the county to any person, firm, or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, widening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the county; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the county; 
(9)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a board of zoning appeals, board of architectural review, or planning commission, including joint commissions; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; 
(14)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the county or annexing property to the county; 
(15)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(16)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(17)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; and 
(19)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)  Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule power of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; general authority of counties to legislate, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Board of commissioners. 
At or after the board of commissioners are sworn in and qualified to act on behalf of the citizens of McIntosh County, and on the first Monday in January that has not been declared a national holiday, the board of commissioners shall met for all purposes allowable under the law, including but not limited to the appointment of the clerk of the board of commissioners, the designation of the depository and the legal organ, as well as the election of officers. Currently, the board elects a chair and vice-chair. 
Secs. 2-2—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 2-19. - Chair. 
(a)  The presiding officer of the board shall be the chairperson, who shall be elected annually at the first meeting in January of each year, by the members of the board. The chairperson shall assume his chair immediately after election. 
(b)  The chair of the board of commissioners is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chair must enforce the rules of procedure that have been adopted by the board of commissioners. The chair shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The chair may not introduce motions or second a motion except that the chair may introduce or second a motion to go into executive session. The chair shall vote to break a tie and may vote on any motion under consideration. 
(c)  The chair may create committees of members of the board to study any issue before the board or contemplated by the board to be an issue. Any such committees may make recommendations to the board of commissioners but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to board members, committees may include other county officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any limitation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the chair with the concurrence of the board. The chair or his designee shall serve as an ex officio member of all committees. 
Sec. 2-20. - Vice-chair. 
(a)  The board shall select a vice-chair from the board members at the beginning of every calendar year. The vice-chair shall fulfill the duties of the chair if the chair is not in attendance, or has a conflict of interest. 
(b)  If the chair and the vice-chair are absent and a quorum is present, the remaining commissioners shall select a commissioner to serve as temporary chair of the meeting until either the chair or vice-chair is present at the meeting. 
Sec. 2-21. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the board. A quorum is a majority of all the members of the board then in office. It is the duty of the chair to enforce this rule. 
Sec. 2-22. - Voting; majority; abstentions. 
(a)  Passage of a motion shall require three affirmative votes. 
(b)  A commissioner shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest which would prevent him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. The chair may, on the advice of the county attorney, rule on the matter of a conflict of interest. 
Sec. 2-23. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
Sec. 2-24. - Meeting notice. 
The time, place, and dates of regular meetings shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the public at the regular meeting place of the board, as required by state statute. 
Sec. 2-25. - Regular meeting times. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month at 5:00 p.m. All regular meetings shall be held in a room of the county courthouse or any other location as designated by the chair. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the county courthouse. The dates and times of the regular meetings may be modified by the chair. Special called meetings may be set by the chair. 
(b)  In general, the board of commissioners shall apply Robert's Rules of Order (most recent edition) in the conduct and administration of the meetings of the board. Nothing contained herein shall prevent deviation from Robert's Rules of Order to ensure the efficient and timely conduct and administration of the meetings. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2012(1); Ord. of 08-08-2017(2)) 
State Law reference— Regular meetings, special meetings and emergency meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); executive sessions, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4. 
Sec. 2-26. - Agenda. 
(a)  The county manager shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. The agenda shall be made available to the commissioners at least two business days before each board of commissioners meeting. 
(b)  Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. To be considered, this request must be submitted in writing to the county manager and must be received at least six days before the meeting. 
(c)  The order in which agenda items are considered shall be determined by the county manager, unless a majority of the board votes otherwise. 
(d)  The agenda item shall be placed upon the agenda only upon approval of the chair. Any commissioner may add items to the agenda at any time before the agenda is approved during the meeting. Any amendment to the agenda shall be made upon affirmative vote of at least three members of the board of commissioners. 
(e)  A new subject that requires attention by the board shall be added to the agenda at the request of the chair and approved by a majority vote of the board. 
(f)  A copy of the agenda shall be posted at the meeting site prior to the meeting. 
State Law reference— Meeting agenda, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(e)(1). 
Sec. 2-27. - Order of business. 
All regular board of commissioners meetings should follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
(1)  Invocation. 
(2)  Pledge of allegiance to the flag. 
(3)  Call to order. 
(4)  Approval of minutes. 
(5)  Approval of agenda. 
(6)  Visitors' presentations. 
(7)  Public hearings. 
(8)  Old business. 
(9)  New business. 
(10)  Commissioner reports. 
(11)  Chair report. 
(12)  County manager's report. 
(13)  County attorney's report. 
(14)  Executive session. 
(15)  Adjournment. 
Sec. 2-28. - Minutes. 
(a)  The clerk of the board shall promptly record the minutes for each board meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the board meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the board but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the board. The minutes shall specify the names of commissioners present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the commissioner who proposed each motion, the commissioner who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote, the name of each commissioner voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a commissioner has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the board. 
(b)  The board must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the board. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the commissioners at least two business days before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the board at the beginning of each meeting. 
(c)  A majority vote is required for approval of the contents of the minutes. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chair and attested to by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Minutes of meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(e)(2). 
Sec. 2-29. - Decorum. 
(a)  All commissioners must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chair and not to individual commissioners, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A commissioner may not speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the chair. All comments made by a commissioner shall address the motion that is being discussed. 
(b)  The chair shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a commissioner believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is required. The chair can rule on the question or he can allow the board to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-30. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the county site by the chair for any reason. Other special meetings may be scheduled by the chair or at the request of two commissioners. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the county or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Special meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-31. - Emergency meetings. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the board of commissioners may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the county or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the board of commissioners as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
State Law reference— Emergency meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-32. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  Executive sessions of the board may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the board is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. 
(b)  No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of a quorum present at the meeting. The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the clerk of the board of commissioners at the direction of the chair. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the board may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. The board shall comply with any other requirements of state law. 
State Law reference— Procedure when meeting closed, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4. 
Sec. 2-33. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the board of commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Public participation on agenda items. The chair of a majority vote of the board may allow public comments on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the board. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for two minutes and may only speak once. Anyone wishing to speak at any board meeting must be recognized by the chair before addressing the board. 
(2)  Decorum. Members of the public who disrupt or interfere with the meeting by physical action or verbal boisterous utterances that are inappropriate or offensive may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chair. Individuals who violate any rules of the board may be ruled out of order by the chair or out of order on a point of order made by a commissioner. A majority vote of the board will rule on the point of order. 
(3)  Public hearings. The board may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the board. Hearings may be held at a meeting of the board or at such other places and times as the board may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. The board shall provide no less than 15 days' notice of any public hearing. 
(4)  Public presentations. Any member of the public wishing to appear before the commission shall notify the county manager in writing no less than six days prior to the meeting. The notice shall include the topic of the presentation. 
Secs. 2-34—2-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-55. - Use of equipment. 
Usage of county-owned equipment by employees of the county in off-duty employment positions is hereby prohibited. Each department head and elected official is directed to inform all employees of his department or elected office to cease and desist from such activities. 
(Res. of 1-14-1997) 
Sec. 2-56. - Outside employment. 
An employee of the county subject to the personnel policy shall have the consent of the county manager before accepting outside employment. 
(Res. of 1-14-1997, amd. 8) 
Secs. 2-57—2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFFICERS 

Sec. 2-86. - County officers. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall appoint qualified persons to each of the following positions for the county: 
(1)  County manager. 
(2)  County attorney. 
(3)  County clerk. 
(4)  Superintendent of roads. 1 
(5)  County auditor. 1 
(6)  Emergency medical services director. 1 
(7)  Emergency management director. 1 
1 Nominees are to be assembled and presented to the board by the county manager. 
(b)  The duties of these officials shall be as enumerated under state law and by resolution of the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners may change such duties and responsibilities at any time, in accordance with state law, and the officials shall serve at the will and pleasure of the board, subject to the right to contract. 
(c)  Each of the appointed positions listed in subsection (a) of this section have job descriptions which are on file in the county clerk's office. Nothing contained within those job descriptions shall serve to prevent the assignment of additional duties. 
Sec. 2-87. - Consolidation. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the consolidation, at the discretion of the board of commissioners, of one or more of the county official positions. Nothing contained herein shall prevent one individual from acting as a county official in one or more county positions subject to the direction of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-88. - County manager. 
(a)  Position created; purpose. There is created the position of county manager to provide administrative assistance to the board in the performance of its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The county manager as the chief executive officer of the government of the county shall be responsible to the board of commissioners for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the county, and shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To direct and supervise the administration of all county offices and departments for which the board is responsible, or may hereafter be responsible, and specifically the construction, maintenance and operation of all county roads, bridges, drains, buildings and other public works, and the care and maintenance of all real and personal property owned by the county. The county manager shall be the chief official in directing the county's economic development strategies and plans; 
(2)  To appoint and, when in his discretion the welfare of the county requires it, suspend, discharge, transfer or remove all employees for whom the board is responsible, excepting the county clerk and county attorney, who are appointed directly by the board. The county manager shall not fire a department head without the consent of the commission but shall be empowered to discipline department heads in any other manner without the commission's consent. He may delegate to any department head such powers with respect to subordinates within the officer's department or office; 
(3)  To see that all ordinances, resolutions and orders of the board and all laws of the state subject to enforcement by him or by officers or department heads subject under this section to his direction and supervision are faithfully executed; 
(4)  To prepare and submit the annual budget to the board and to execute the budget adopted by the board, approving all disbursements and expenditures as budgeted and/or authorized by the board; 
(5)  To confer with and act as a liaison between the commission and all boards, such as the county health department, leisure services, planning and zoning, board of elections and registration, industrial development authority, tax assessors board, and board of equalization, whose missions are not under the direct control and supervision of the board, but who are dependent upon appropriations of the board for their continued operation; 
(6)  To confer with and advise all elected or appointed officials of the county who are not under the immediate control of the board, but who receive financial support from the board, such as the sheriff, clerk of court, tax commissioner, state court judge, state court solicitor, probate and magistrate court judge; 
(7)  To examine regularly at periods fixed by the board the accounts, records and operations of every county board, commission, department, office and agency which receives appropriations from the board; to make regular monthly reports to the board on county fiscal and other affairs; to keep the board fully advised on the financial condition of the future needs of the county; and to make such recommendations on county affairs as he deems necessary for the efficient operation of the county; 
(8)  To supervise the keeping of all records, books of account, bookkeeping, etc., of the county; 
(9)  To supervise and approve the issuance of all purchase orders of the county; 
(10)  To submit to the board at the end of each fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the county for the preceding year; 
(11)  To carry into execution such other powers and duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the board. 
All reports by the manager shall be made to the full board in either a regular or called meeting of the board. 
Sec. 2-89. - County clerk. 
(a)  Position created; purpose. There is created the position of county clerk to provide administrative assistance to the board in the performance of its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The board of commissioners shall appoint a clerk, whose salary shall be determined by the board, to be paid weekly out of the county treasury, and it shall be the duty of said clerk to attend all meetings of the board of commissioners and keep complete and orderly minutes of all such meeting. 
(1)  The clerk shall file and keep in the order of their date all original orders and papers, petitions, applications, and other papers addressed to the board of commissioners concerning county business. 
(2)  The clerk shall also keep on record and in a separate book the payment of all money out of the county treasury or county depository by order of the chairperson of the board of commissioners, giving the amount and date of said such payments and the persons to whom paid and for what purposes paid. 
(3)  Said clerk shall also keep a book showing a full and detailed statement of all accounts and other indebtedness contracted by the board of commissioners. All the books, files, and records required to be used or kept in the office of the board of commissioners shall always be ready and open to inspection of any taxpayer of the county during normal working hours. 
(4)  Said clerk before entering on the discharge of his duties shall be required to give bond in any amount to be determined by the board for the faithful performance of his duties and shall take the same oath as required by commissioner. 
(5)  Said clerk shall hold said office at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. The clerk shall work in conjunction with the county manager and shall be subject to the manager's oversight; however, the county manager may not discharge the clerk of his duties but shall be given the authority of any disciplinary actions provided in the personal policy except for termination. 
Sec. 2-90. - County attorney. 
(a)  Position created; purpose. There is created the position of county attorney to provide legal assistance to the board in the performance of its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The board of commissioners shall appoint a county attorney whom shall serve at the pleasure of the board. The county attorney may be discharged upon a vote of a majority of the board. The county attorney shall: 
(1)  Act as a legal advisor, attorney, and counsel to the board of commissioners and all of its officers in matters relating to their official duties; 
(2)  Prepare or supervise preparation of all contracts, bonds, and other instruments in writing in which the county government is concerned; 
(3)  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, ordinance, or resolution of the board of commissioners. The county attorney may not represent any county official or employee if the representation of the county official or employee conflicts with the interest of the county government. In such cases, the board of commissioners may employ separate counsel to represent the county official or employee in which the county government is obligated to provide representation for such county official or employee. If needed, the board of commissioners may appoint other attorneys to represent the board or to assist the county attorney upon such terms and conditions as the board may consider appropriate. No person who serves as county attorney or deputy county attorney may represent any client before the board of commissioners. No person who is a member of the same law firm as the county attorney may represent any client before the board of commissioners. The compensation of the county attorney shall be fixed by the board of commissioners upon such terms and conditions as maybe approved by the board; and 
(4)  The county attorney shall work in conjunction with the county manager but is not subject to any oversight from the county manager. The county manager is authorized to engage the services of the county attorney on behalf of the board of commissioners and provide such supervision as may be required to accomplish said duties. 
Secs. 2-91—2-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-120. - Boards created. 
There are hereby created the following boards with the powers and limitations provided for under state law. The members of these boards shall be appointed by the county board of commissioners, and the responsibilities and duties of these boards shall be as established by the county board of commissioners. 
McIntosh County Industrial Development Authority Board 
McIntosh County Board of Health 
McIntosh County Board of Elections 
McIntosh County Board of Tax Assessors 
McIntosh County DFCS Board 
Ida Hilton Library Board 
Gateway Community Service Board 1 
Coastal Regional Commission 1 
1 Multicounty entity 
Secs. 2-121—2-136. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LEISURE SERVICES BOARD 

Sec. 2-137. - Created. 
The leisure services board is an organization and agency of the county created and vested by law with powers granted to similar agencies under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1978(1), art. I, § 1) 
Sec. 2-138. - Purposes. 
The purposes of the leisure services board are as follows: 
(1)  To provide, establish, maintain and conduct a county public leisure service program; 
(2)  To participate actively in local, state and national leisure/recreation affairs; 
(3)  To educate the citizens of the county by dissemination among them information concerning development and progress of the leisure services. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1978(1), art. II, § 1) 
Sec. 2-139. - Membership. 
The board shall consist of seven members each of whom shall be resident citizens of the county, and who shall serve without pay; the terms of office of the board members shall be five years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that the members of such board first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member shall expire annually thereafter; the board members shall be appointed by the chair of the county commission pursuant to the direction of O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1978(1), art. III, § 1) 
Sec. 2-140. - Powers of board. 
The board is empowered to provide, establish, maintain and conduct playgrounds, athletic fields, recreational centers and other recreational activities and facilities, to maintain and equip playgrounds athletic fields, recreation centers, buildings and facilities, to employ play leaders, playground directors, supervisors, or such other officers and employees as it deems necessary and proper. The board shall also have the power to adopt by laws and rules and regulations for the proper conduct of public recreation for the county. Said board shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the people of the community in a constructive and wholesome manner, and for such purposes are empowered to carry on such purposes are empowered to carry on such facilities and activities on any of the properties owned or controlled by the county, with consent of the governing officials, or on other properties as may be lawful and proper. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1978(1), art. IV, § 1) 
Sec. 2-141. - Budgets and reports. 
(a)  The board shall submit to the governing officials of the county a budget for its approval. Upon approval of said budget, the board shall be responsible for the administration of the provisions of the same. The board may receive fees and revenues from the operation of recreational facilities and programs, and may also solicit or receive gifts or bequests of money, personal or real property, or donations which it may apply, either principal or income, for temporary or permanent uses for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. 
(b)  The board shall make a full and complete annual report to the governing officials of the county and make such other reports as may be required by them from time to time. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1978(1), art. V, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 2-142. - Officers. 
(a)  The officers of the board shall be a chair, a vice-chair and a secretary-treasurer. 
(b)  The officers shall be elected annually, and shall serve for the term of one year, or until their successors are elected and qualified. Any or all of the officers thus elected may serve for consecutive years, if re-elected. 
(c)  The chair shall preside at meetings of the board and he shall appoint committees, and perform all other duties generally pertaining to the office of chairperson. 
(d)  The vice-chair shall perform these duties in the absence of the chair. 
(e)  The secretary-treasurer shall keep a record of minutes of the meetings of the board, record all official actions of the board, have custody of its books and records, which shall be housed at the office of the director, give notices to the members of meetings and shall attend to such other duties as may be assigned to him by the board. 
(f)  The treasurer of the board shall receive all monies for the board and deposit them in such depositories as the board may direct. He shall pay all charges and bills approved by the board for payment, and shall render to the board a statement at such intervals as the board may direct itemizing the expenses and income for the period reported. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1978(1), art. VI, §§ 1—6) 
Sec. 2-143. - Meetings and attendance. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the board shall be held at the board's designated office on the first Tuesday of every month at 7:30 p.m. Special meetings of the board may be held at any time at the call of the chair of the board, or at the call of the director of leisure services or by a majority of the members of the board or by the board of the county commissioners. 
(b)  A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(c)  The absence for three consecutive meetings of any member of the board, without due and acceptable excuse, shall constitute a vacancy on the board. Any such unexcused absences shall be reported by the secretary to the board of county commissioners who shall thereupon declare a vacancy and proceed to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1978(1), art. VII, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 2-144. - Created; vacancy. 
(a)  Under the provisions of House Bill 794, approved February 1, 1946, there is hereby established a leisure services board. 
(b)  Vacancies on such boards occurring other than by expiration of a term shall be filled by majority vote of the county commissioners for the unexpired term only. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1978(2), § 1) 
Sec. 2-145. - Chair election; powers. 
(a)  Immediately after their appointment, board members shall meet and organize by electing a chair and other necessary officers. The board shall have power to adopt by laws, rules and regulations, for the proper conduct of recreation for the county leisure service board. 
(b)  The leisure service board shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, playfields, indoor recreation centers and other recreation facilities owned or controlled by the county designated by the board of county commissioners. It shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the people in a wholesome or constructive manner. It may conduct such activities on properties under its own control on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof, and on other properties as may be lawful and proper. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1978(2), §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 2-146. - Director. 
The leisure services board shall have the power to appoint or design someone to act as director who is trained or properly qualified for the work, and such other personnel as the board deems proper. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1978(2), § 4) 
Sec. 2-147. - Budget; gifts. 
Annually, the leisure services board shall submit a budget to the county board of commissioners for approval. The board may also solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1978(2), § 5) 
Sec. 2-148. - Annual report. 
The leisure services board shall make an annual report to the county board of commissioners and such other reports as may be requested. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1978(2), § 6) 
Secs. 2-149—2-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - JOINT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-180. - Members. 
(a)  The number of members of the authority shall be ten. Two members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of each participating county and each such member shall be a resident and taxpayer of such county. The members appointed by the board of commissioners of each participating county shall be the chair of the board of directors of the development authority of each participating county or his nominee and the executive director of the development authority for each participating county. 
(b)  If, at the end of any term of any member, a successor to such member has not been appointed, the member whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until his successor is appointed. 
(c)  The members of the authority shall constitute its board of directors. A majority of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, but no action may be taken by the authority without the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the authority. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(1), § 2) 
Sec. 2-181. - Creation. 
Pursuant to the provisions of state law and by concurrent resolutions approved by the Board of Commissioners of Glynn County, the Board of Commissioners of Camden County, the Board of Commissioners of McIntosh County, the Board of Commissioners of Charlton County, and the Board of Commissioners of Brantley County, there is hereby created a public body corporate and politic to be known as the "Joint Development Authority of Glynn, Camden, McIntosh, Charlton and Brantley Counties" (the "Authority") which shall be deemed an instrumentality of Glynn, Camden, McIntosh, Charlton and Brantley Counties (hereinafter collectively referred to as participating counties) and a public corporation, with the powers and limitations provided for herein and under O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1, authorizing the creation of joint development authorities by two or more counties. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(1), § 1) 
Sec. 2-182. - Public purpose. 
The authority is created for the public purpose of promoting and expanding business, industry and trade in Glynn, Camden, McIntosh, Charlton and Brantley Counties and to attract and support new business industry to provide increased employment for the citizens living within the jurisdiction of the authority and to expand the ad valorem property tax base for the three counties. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 1) 
Sec. 2-183. - Board of directors. 
(a)  The authority shall be controlled by a board of directors (the "board") consisting of members as follows: 
(1)  Two members of the board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Glynn County consisting of the current chair of the board of the Brunswick and Glynn County Development Authority or his nominee and the executive director of the Brunswick and Glynn County Development Authority; 
(2)  Two members of the board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Camden County consisting of the current chair of the board of the Camden County Joint Development Authority or his nominee and the executive director of the Camden County Joint Development Authority; 
(3)  Two members of the board shall be appointed by the county board of commissioners consisting of the current chair of the board of the county development authority or his nominee and the executive director of the county development authority; 
(4)  Two members of the board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Charlton County consisting of the current chair of the board of the Folkston/Charlton County Development Authority or his nominee and the executive director of the Folkston/Charlton County Development Authority; and 
(5)  Two members of the board shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of Brantley County consisting of the current chair of the board of the Brantley County development authority or his nominee and the executive director of the Brantley County development authority. 
(b)  Each member of the authority appointed who is the executive director of the development authority of the participating county from which he is appointed shall serve a term coextensive with his term as executive director. Each member of the authority appointed who is the chair of the board of directors of the development authority of the participating county from which he is appointed or the nominee of such chair shall serve a term coextensive with the term of the chair of the board of the development authority of the participating county from which he is appointed. 
(c)  The members of the board shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as members of the board. Each member of the board shall serve his stated term and continue to serve as a member of the board until his successor is qualified and chose. In the event of the death or resignation of a member of the board, his successor shall be duly appointed by the respective board of commissioners of the county where the former member was a resident. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 2) 
Sec. 2-184. - Officers. 
At the initial meeting of the board, there shall be elected by majority vote, a chair, vice-chair, secretary and treasurer for the authority, all of whom shall serve a one year term. The chair or the vice-chair shall sign, on behalf of the authority, all official documents which shall be attested to by either the secretary or the treasurer. All resolutions of the board binding the authority to any legal obligation must be approved by a majority vote of the members of the board. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 3) 
Sec. 2-185. - Staff. 
The authority shall have authority to hire an executive director who will act as chief operating officer of the authority. The executive director shall serve as secretary of the authority and shall hire all staff, be responsible for the annual work plan and budget creation. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 4) 
Sec. 2-186. - Term. 
The authority shall be deemed formally created and authorized to do business upon the filing with the secretary of state of these articles of organization with supporting resolutions from the participating counties. The authority shall have perpetual existence but may be dissolved at any time by the adoption of the appropriate resolution by the governing authorities of the participating counties. Any participating county may withdraw from the authority through the execution of amended concurrent resolutions by the governing bodies of the participating counties. Such action shall not effect the existence of the authority. Additional counties may join the authority through the execution of appropriate amended concurrent resolutions by the governing bodies of the participating counties currently comprising the authority as well as the governing bodies of the counties joining the authority. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 5) 
Sec. 2-187. - Taxation. 
The authority shall not be required to pay any state or local taxes or other assessments imposed by the state, or any county, municipal corporation or other political subdivision or taxing district, nor shall there be any ad valorem property taxes assessed against any property acquired and owned by the authority or under its jurisdiction, control, possession, supervision or leased to a private entity, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-3. The foregoing exemption from taxes shall not include an exemption from sales and use taxes on property purchased by or used by the authority. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 6) 
Sec. 2-188. - Powers of the authority. 
The authority shall have all the powers provided for under O.C.G.A. § 36-62-6 and any amendments thereto including, but not limited to, the power: 
(1)  To bring and defend actions; 
(2)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(3)  To make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary to exercise the powers of the authority, any of which contracts may be made with the county in which the authority is located or with any one or more municipal corporations in such county; 
(4)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and devises of any property and to administer trusts; 
(5)  To acquire, by purchase, gift, or construction, any real or personal property desired to be acquired as part of any project or for the purpose of improving, extending, adding to, reconstructing, renovation, or remodeling any project or part thereof already acquired or for the purpose of demolition to make room for such project or any part thereof; 
(6)  To sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, mortgage, dispose of, or grant options for any real or personal property or interest therein for any such purposes; 
(7)  To dispose of any real property for fair market value, regardless of prior development of such property as a project, whenever the board may deem such disposition to be in the best interest of the authority if the board prior to such disposition shall determine that such real property no longer can be used advantageously as a project for the development of trade, commerce, industry, and employment opportunities; 
(8)  To mortgage, convey, pledge, or assign any properties, revenues, income, tolls, charges, or fees owned or received by the authority; 
(9)  To extend credit or make loans to any person, firm, corporation, or other industrial entity for the planning, design, construction, acquisition, or carrying out of any project, which credit or loans shall be secured by loan agreements, mortgages, security agreements, contracts, and all other instruments, fees, or charges, upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall determine reasonable in connection with such loans, including provision for the establishment and maintenance of reserves and insurance funds; and, in the exercise of powers granted by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-6 in connection with a project for such person, firm, corporation, or other industrial entity, to require the inclusion in any contract, loan, agreement, security agreement, or other instrument, of such provisions for guaranty, insurance, construction, use, operation, maintenance, and financing of a project as the authority may deem necessary or desirable; 
(10)  To acquire, accept, or retain equitable interest, security interests, or other interest in any property, real or personal, by mortgage, assignment, security agreement, pledge, conveyance, contract, lien, loan agreement, or other consensual transfer, in order to secure the repayment of any moneys loaned or credit extended by the authority; 
(11)  To construct, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, and equip projects located on land owned or leased by the authority or land owned or leased by others and to pay all or part of the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations or nay other contribution, all of which the authority is authorized to receive, accept and use; 
(12)  To borrow money and issue its revenue bonds and bond anticipation notes from time to time and to use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, adding, to, or improving the project, or for the purpose of refunding any such bonds of the authority theretofore issued and to otherwise carry out the purposes for which the authority was created and to pay all other costs of the authority incident to or necessary and appropriate to such purposes, including the providing of funds to be paid into any fund or funds to secure such bonds and notes, provided that all such bond and notes shall be issued in accordance with the procedures and subject to the limitations set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-8; 
(13)  As security for repayment of authority obligations, to pledge, mortgage, convey, assign, hypothecate, or otherwise encumber any property, real or personal, of the authority and to execute any trust agreement, indenture, or security agreement containing any provisions not in conflict with law, which trust agreement, indenture, or security agreement may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default, on such obligations, either in payment of principal or interest or in the performance of any term or condition, as are contained in such agreement or indenture; and 
(14)  To expend for the promotion of industry, agriculture, and trade within its jurisdiction any funds of the authority determined by the board to be in excess of those needed for the other corporate purposes of the authority. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 7) 
Sec. 2-189. - Limitations of the authority and prohibited transactions. 
The authority shall be prohibited from directly owning or operating a project, except for an industrial park, as provided under O.C.G.A. § 36-62-7, and all members of the board shall be prohibited from transacting business for pecuniary gain with the authority, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5(e) with such exceptions as provided therein. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 8) 
Sec. 2-190. - Job tax credits. 
The authority shall be able to take advantage of tax credits as outlined in O.C.G.A. § 48-7-40 as well as any other tax credits now or hereafter available under state law. Each county shall be able to offer its credit plus an amount not less than $500.00. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 9) 
Sec. 2-191. - Business and industrial park. 
Acting as the agent for the participating counties involved the authority may create multi-county business/industrial park as allowed under Amendment 1 to the Georgia Constitution passed by the citizens November 6, 1994. The counties will enter into a single contract relating the expense and tax sharing no matter in which county the park is located. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 10) 
Sec. 2-192. - Debt. 
The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the state, Glynn, Camden, McIntosh, Charlton and Brantley Counties or any municipal corporation located therein. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 11) 
Sec. 2-193. - Bonds. 
The authority shall be entitled to issue bonds, bond anticipation notes, trust indentures, deeds to secure obligations, security agreements, and mortgages as provided under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-62-8, subject to the limitations of O.C.G.A. § 36-62-9. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 12) 
Sec. 2-194. - Dissolution. 
If for any reason the separate corporate existence of the authority is terminated and dissolved, any and all property owned by the authority shall be transferred and assigned to the host county wherein the property is located. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 13) 
Sec. 2-195. - Amendment. 
The board, by majority vote, shall have the right to amend these articles of organization, so long as such amendment does not violate any of the provisions of the Development Authorities Law for the state, as referenced in this division. 
(Res. of 12-9-2003(2), § 14) 
Secs. 2-196—2-213. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 

Sec. 2-214. - Worker's compensation coverage. 
While performing their elected duties the board of commissioners, sheriff, probate judge, clerk of court and tax commissioner shall be covered under the workers' compensation laws of the state as stated in O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1. 
(Res. of 2-8-2000, § I) 
Sec. 2-215. - Volunteers and elected officials covered by the ACCG-Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. 
The following volunteers and elected officials shall be covered under the workers' compensation laws of the state: 
(1)  Volunteer firefighters; 
(2)  Volunteer law enforcement personnel that are post certified; 
(3)  Volunteer members of emergency management or civil defense organization, emergency medical service or rescue organization; 
(4)  Volunteer first responder; and 
(5)  Elected county officers and elected members of the county board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 10-18-2005, § I) 
Sec. 2-216. - Other benefits. 
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the county from providing other benefits, such as health insurance and retirement benefits, to employees. 
Secs. 2-217—2-238. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-239—2-269. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-270. - Purpose; responsibilities of county manager. 
(a)  The purpose of this policy is to provide guidance to personnel engaged in the purchasing process throughout the county so as to provide for an efficient and fiscally responsible system for procurement. The highest quality material or goods at the best possible price can only be secured if all departments are aware of, and engaged in proper policies and procedures. 
(b)  Responsibilities of the county manager include: 
(1)  The purchase and distribution of supplies, materials, property, equipment and inventory pursuant to ordinances, policies and procedures established by the board of commissioners and in accordance with this article and the laws of the state; 
(2)  The establishment of reliable and reputable sources of supply; 
(3)  The fostering of competition and good procurement practices while giving consideration to value and price; and 
(4)  The handling of all negotiations with the highest ethical and fiscal standards. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 2-271. - Nondiscrimination clause. 
It is the policy of the county to offer equal opportunities to all persons regardless of race, color, age, sex, religion or national origin. All county employees and agents are to take every step necessary to ensure that there is no such prohibited discrimination in any aspect of the county's purchasing function. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 2) 
Sec. 2-272. - Ethics in purchasing. 
All county employees, both elected and appointed, will adhere to strict ethical standards when purchasing materials. Any employee with a financial interest in a private business is discouraged from bidding on county projects. The county will not purchase equipment, materials and supplies from businesses in which county employees have a financial interest, unless there is a compelling meritorious reason to the contrary as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 3) 
Sec. 2-273. - Vendor list. 
The county clerk will maintain a file of all vendors desiring to do business with the county. Persons or businesses wishing to be added to the vendors list will submit a written request to the county clerk. The application will be submitted and signed by the principal as distinguished from an agent. Any business not responding to requests for bids for over a period of one year may be eliminated from the vendor list, but are eligible for reinstatement upon request. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 4) 
Sec. 2-274. - Vendors in default. 
Any person, corporation or other entity in default to the county for any ad valorem taxes, license fees or other taxes, assessments or fees which are not the subject of an appeal to a court or other legal tribunal shall not be permitted to bid on any proposed purchase by the county or shall not be awarded any contract with the county unless they shall first assign to the county all or so much of the price of such purchase or the proceeds of such contract as will pay the existing default in full. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 5) 
Sec. 2-275. - Request for qualifications. 
A request for qualifications (RFQ) document may be sent to firms interested in providing professional services such as architectural or other consulting services. Respondents will be requested to indicate their interest in the project, specific, relevant, and comparable experience, and their ability to perform the services requested. The request will be advertised in order that any firm interested in submitting a proposal will have adequate time to do so. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 6) 
Sec. 2-276. - Method of advertising. 
Only the county manager or the county clerk will receive bids for any material, equipment and supplies. Bids may be solicited by a variety of methods which include direct mail request, by telephone to prospective vendors or through newspaper advertisement. Notice inviting sealed bids will be published as needed in the official newspaper in the county. The newspaper notice will include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, will state the location of where bid specifications may be secured, and the date, time and place the bid opening will occur. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 7) 
Sec. 2-277. - State bidding requirements. 
Any persons engaged in purchasing on behalf of the county will comply with all applicable sections of the state statutes as well as any other pertinent legislation. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 8) 
Sec. 2-278. - Pre-bid conferences. 
A pre-bid conference to clarify advertised specifications for prospective responsive bidders may be convened between the date of advertisement and the actual bid opening date. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 9) 
Sec. 2-279. - Bids and quotations. 
(a)  Competitive bids will be taken on all items other than recurring purchases (e.g., professional services, utilities and state contract purchases) and those of sole source procurement in order to ensure open and competitive bidding on all county purchases. Bid specifications will be prepared in such a manner as to invite and encourage bidding from all suppliers of goods and equipment being purchased by the county. 
(b)  Only the county manager or the county clerk will secure competitive bids in the form of telephone quotes, written quotes, or sealed bids. The type of bid will be determined by the dollar amount set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 10) 
Sec. 2-280. - Performance bonds, bid bonds and other instruments. 
In accordance with state law, county officials involved in the letting of construction projects will ascertain the financial solvency of any bonding company offering bonds. 
(1)  Performance bonds. The county manager will have the authority to require a performance bond, before entering a contract, in such amount as is reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the county, or whenever such bond is required under the laws of the state. Notice of a bond requirement shall be included in the public notice and bidding specifications. The bond will not exceed 100 percent of the bid amount. 
(2)  Bid bonds. Bid bonds will be required in the amount of five percent of the proposed bid quotation as prescribed by state law on all public works bids. The county may also require bid bonds whenever it is deemed to be in the county's best interest for other projects or services. Legitimate substitutes such as cashier or certified checks may be accepted in lieu of bid bonds with the county receiving any interest accrued. 
(3)  Personal or company checks. Personal or company checks are not valid substitutes for a bid bond or performance bond. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 11) 
Sec. 2-281. - Total cost bidding. 
The county may consider the guaranteed delivery, maintenance and operating costs as well as the guaranteed resale or buy back price of equipment at established time intervals when purchasing equipment. This method of bidding is generally reserved for capital heavy equipment costing in excess of $50,000.00. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 12) 
Sec. 2-282. - Sealed bid opening. 
Sealed bids will be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the date, time and place stated in the invitation for bids. The name of each bidder, the amount of each bid and other such information as the county manager deems appropriate will be recorded. All bids will be open for public inspection. Improper, unresponsive or incorrect bids will not be accepted. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 13) 
Sec. 2-283. - Bid awards. 
All contracts and/or purchase awards will be made to the vendor whose quotation is most advantageous to the county. If awarded to other than the low bidder, the reason for such action shall be written and filed with the related purchase documents. Professional services may be awarded to the firm judged by the board of commissioners to be the best qualified even though not the lowest bidder. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 14) 
Sec. 2-284. - Rejection of bids or quotations. 
The county manager is hereby given the authority to reject all bids when, in his opinion, such action is in the county's best interest. The county manager may further direct that the proposal be re-bid should it be determined that such action is in the county's best interest. The exercise of the authority given the county manager in this section requires the approval of the board of commissioners on any unbudgeted purchase over $5,000.00. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 16) 
Sec. 2-285. - Purchasing policy; authorization levels. 
(a)  All purchases must be approved by the department head, the county clerk and the county manager. Further approval may be necessary depending on circumstances. 
(1)  Purchases for which funds are budgeted must be approved if $500.00 or over. Purchases less than $500.00 (if budgeted) will not require the approval of the county manager. The department director will inform the county manager that a budgeted purchase of less than $500.00 is needed and a purchase order will be issued, subject to availability of funds. 
(2)  Purchases for which no funds have ever been budgeted but where funding can be made available by transferring funds within the budget of the involved department may be made if the transfer is approved by the county manager, and will not require additional approval unless it exceeds the total budget for a given office. 
(3)  Purchases for which funds have been budgeted and the budgeted funds are exhausted may be made by transferring available funds within the budget of the involved department from some other object account if the transfer is approved. Such transfer must be approved by the county manager. 
(4)  In the event that an emergency should arise after office hours, which emergency requires immediate action on the part of the county's department director involved for the protection of the best interest of the county, or should such a situation arise on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday and where it is not possible or convenient to reach the county manager, any necessary purchase up to $2,500.00 may be made by the department director. The purchase shall be reported to the county manager without delay. 
(b)  All purchases must be approved by the department director or in his absence, a designee, the county clerk and the county manager in written form. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 18) 
Sec. 2-286. - Purchasing during a declared emergency. 
(a)  In the event of a declared state of emergency, the county manager or board of commissioners may suspend all or any part of this purchasing policy. 
(b)  The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) will reimburse a portion of all expenses incurred during a Presidentially-declared emergency. In order to apply for this reimbursement, meticulous records must be maintained. Virtually all expenses, except those that would have occurred had there been no emergency, will be reimbursed. The current reimbursement rate is 75 percent federal and 25 percent state. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 19) 
Sec. 2-287. - Annual bids; price agreement contracts. 
Whenever most advantageous to the county, long-term contracts or blanket purchase agreements should be obtained for materials used by one or more departments on a regular and continuing basis. The contract will cover a specified period of time and will show a price for the goods and services which will be valid for the contract period. Contracts or purchase agreements would extend no longer than a one-year period and will be subject to the applicable bidding or quotation requirements as for any other purchase. 
(1)  Oral telephone quotes. Two quotes will be secured and memorialized in writing by the recipient for all purchases exceeding $5,000.00 but less than $10,000.00. 
(2)  Written quotes. Three written quotes will be secured for all purchases exceeding $10,000.00. 
(3)  Sealed bids. Sealed bids based on written specifications must be secured for all purchases exceeding $25,000.00. 
All quotes will be documented as to the vendor, amount quoted, description and specification of the product, contact person and delivery costs and date. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 20) 
Sec. 2-288. - Sole-source purchasing. 
The county manager may, subject to purchasing authorization levels, designate a sole source for the purchase of any item or service due to special scientific technology, extraordinary specifications, compatibility with existing equipment, or when circumstances of competition is deemed inadequate. A memorandum documenting the reason for the sole source purchase will be maintained in the files. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 21) 
Sec. 2-289. - State contract purchases. 
Whenever any item or service which meets all county requirements is available through a contract with the state and is offered to local governments, the item or service may be purchased from the state contract when it can be demonstrated to be lower in price than local bidding or advantageous to operational efficiency. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 22) 
Sec. 2-290. - Recurring purchases. 
Goods received or used on an ongoing, expected basis such as utility bills, travel, seminar and conference fees, membership dues, subscription costs and payments made under the terms of a previously approved contract, will be handled without the issuance of a purchase order. The county manager will pre-approve all vendors and the type purchases which will qualify. In most instances, the purchase price will be determined in advance with quantity based on need. Each department will verify that billings are a true representation of goods and services received and that sufficient funds are available to cover the recurring expense. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 23) 
Sec. 2-291. - Local vendors. 
Equal opportunity will be afforded to all vendors who desire to supply materials and service as needed by the county. In all phases, efforts will be made to obtain quotations or bids from local vendors, and all factors being equal, the award will be made to a vendor having an established place of business in the county, but solicitation of bids is not restricted to the county vendors. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 24) 
Sec. 2-292. - Product standardization. 
(a)  Materials, supplies and equipment purchased by the county on a regular basis will be standardized as much as possible in an effort to purchase goods and services at the best possible prices. Purchases will be made through the use of standard specifications whenever possible. Each standard specification will apply in terms and effect to the purchase or contract for the item or service described in the specification. However, if any item requested by a department is not on the standard list or listed as an exemption, the county manager is authorized to exempt the item if sufficient justification in writing is provided by the requesting department. 
(b)  If a requisition is submitted for a brand name item or service, the county manager will notify the requesting department of acceptable and approved like items or services which meet the specification requirements. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 25) 
Sec. 2-293. - Surplus stock. 
All departments will submit to the county manager on an annual basis in such form as prescribed, reports reflecting stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out, or scrapped. The county manager may transfer surplus stock to other departments or may sell all supplies which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for, or trade-in the same on, new supplies. Sale will be made to the highest responsible bidder at public auction. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 26) 
Sec. 2-294. - Petty cash fund. 
The county manager is given the authority to allow certain departments the use of a petty cash fund not to exceed $100.00. This fund will be used for purchases not to exceed $25.00. The petty cash fund will be reimbursed based upon sales receipts reflecting proper authorization and account codes. 
(Ord. of 6-14-1994, § 27) 
Sec. 2-295. - Authorization for payment. 
All checks and electronic financial transactions shall be authorized by both the county manager and the clerk of the board of commissioners. In the absence of the county manager, the chairman or vice-chairman shall be authorized to sign. 
Sec. 2-296. - Authorization for changes in county ad valorem tax digest. 
The county manager shall be authorized, upon the receipt of a sworn affidavit from the taxpayer indicating that the change is true and correct, to acknowledge, on behalf of the board of commissioners, that the tax commissioner has made a change to the county ad valorem tax digest. No further approval shall be required after the tax commissioner has recommended same. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL FUND RESERVE FUND POLICY 

Sec. 2-297. - Authority. 
The chairman and the board of commissioners are responsible for legislation, policy formulation, and overall direction setting of the government. This includes the approval of financial policies which establish and direct the operations of McIntosh County. The county manager is responsible for carrying out the policy directives of the board of commissioners and managing the day-to-day operations of the executive departments, including the department of financial administration. This policy shall be administered on behalf of the county manager by the financial administration department. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-298. - Purpose. 
The county desires to maintain a prudent level of financial resources to guard its stakeholders against service disruption in the event of unexpected temporary revenue shortfalls or unpredicted one-time expenditures. In addition, this policy is intended to document the appropriate reserve level to protect the county's credit worthiness. The general fund operating reserves are accumulated and maintained to provide stability and flexibility to respond to unexpected adversity and/or opportunities. 
This policy establishes the amounts the county will strive to maintain in its general fund operating reserve, how the reserve will be funded, and the conditions under which the reserve may be used. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-299. - Applicability and scope. 
This policy shall apply to the general fund. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-300. - Definitions and acronyms. 
Capital improvement plan (CIP). A plan that describes the capital projects and associated funding sources the county intends to undertake in the current year plus five additional future years, including the acquisition or construction of capital facilities and assets, and the maintenance thereof. 
Cash balance. The sum of cash and the cash equivalents of an accounting fund. 
Cash equivalent. In the context of cash flows reporting, short term, highly liquid investments that are both: 
(1)  Readily convertible to known amounts of cash; and 
(2)  So near their maturity that they present insignificant risk of changes in value because of changes in interest rates. Generally, only investments with original maturities of three months or less meet this definition. For this purpose, "original maturity" means maturity as of the date the investment is acquired. 
Fund balance. Fund balance is the difference between: 
(1)  Assets and deferred outflows of resources; and 
(2)  Liabilities and deferred inflows of resources in a governmental fund. 
General fund is one of five governmental fund types. The general fund typically serves as the chief operating fund of a government. The general fund is used to account for all financial resources not accounted for in some other fund. 
Investment income or expenditure is allocated to the various funds based on their respective participation and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
Non-recurring item. An expenditure that has not occurred in the previous two years and is not expected to occur in the following year. 
Pooled cash. The sum of unrestricted cash and investments of several accounting funds that are consolidated for cash management and investment purposes. 
Reserve. Reserve refers only to the portion of fund balance that is intended to provide stability and respond to unplanned events or opportunities. 
Unassigned fund balance. The difference between total fund balance in a governmental fund and its nonspendable, restricted, committed, and assigned components. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-301. - Reserve levels. 
The county will maintain a minimum level of unassigned fund balance in the general fund equivalent to three months of regular, on-going operating expenditures (including transfers out). The county will measure its compliance with this policy as of September 30th of each year, as soon as practical after final year end account information becomes available. During the course of the year, the financial administration department shall closely monitor the county's revenues and expenditures to ensure reserves are not used beyond any planned allocations. For the purpose of this policy, current year's actual expenditures will exclude significant non-recurring items. 
If based on staff's analysis and forecasting, the target level of reserves is not being met or is not likely to be met at some point within a five-year time horizon, then during the annual budget process, fund balance levels will be provided to the chairman and board of commissioners. Should the projected year-end fund balance be below the minimum reserve amount established by this policy, a plan to replenish the reserve would be established based on the requirements outlined in this policy. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-302. - Cash balance. 
In order to provide liquidity adequate to meet the needs and demands of providing government services including unanticipated reductions in revenues or unplanned increases in expenditures, cash balances will be maintained and managed through the pooled cash method in such a way as to minimize short-term borrowing. This reduces overall cost to taxpayers by minimizing interest expense. The three month reserve is intended to support this effort and counterbalance the tax collection cycle. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-303. - Funding the reserve. 
Funding of general fund reserve targets will generally come from excess revenues over expenditures or one time revenues. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-304. - Conditions for use of reserves. 
It is the intent of the county to limit use of general fund reserves to address unanticipated, non-recurring needs. Reserves shall not normally be applied to recurring annual operating expenditures. Reserves may, however, be used to allow time for the county to restructure its operations in a deliberate manner (as might be required in an economic downturn), but such use will only take place in the context of an adopted long term plan. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-305. - Authority of reserves. 
The board of commissioners may authorize the use of reserves. The financial administration department will regularly report both current and projected reserve levels to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-306. - Assigning fund balance. 
The county manager and the financial administration department collectively, are hereby authorized to assign fund balance for specific purposes in accordance with the intent and actions of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-307. - Replenishment of reserves. 
In the event that reserves are used resulting in a balance below the three months minimum, a plan will be developed and included in the formulation of the five-year forecast presented during the annual budget process. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-308. - Excess of revenues. 
In the event reserves exceed the minimum balance requirements, at the end of each fiscal year, any excess reserves may be used in the following ways: 
(1)  Fund accrued liabilities, including but not limited to debt service, pension, and other post-employment benefits as directed and approved within the long term financial plan and the annual budget resolution. Priority will be given to those items that relieve budget or financial operating pressure in future periods; 
(2)  Appropriated to lower the amount of bonds or contributions needed to fund capital projects in the county's CIP; 
(3)  One-time expenditures that do not increase recurring operating costs that cannot be funded through current revenues. Emphasis will be placed on one-time uses that reduce future operating costs; or 
(4)  Startup expenditures for new programs, provided that such action is approved by the board of commissioners and is considered in the context of multi-year projections of revenues and expenditures as prepared by the financial administration department. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-309. - Periodic review of the targets. 
At a minimum, during the budget process, staff shall review the current and five-year projected reserves to ensure that they are appropriate given the economic and financial risk factors the county is subject to. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Sec. 2-310. - Quality control and quality assurance. 
It is the responsibility of the finance administration to ensure the presence of procedures that provide sufficient guidance to affected County personnel to fulfill the intent of this policy. These policies will be reviewed at least annually and updated on an as-needed basis. 
(Ord. of 08-08-2017(1)) 
Chapter 4 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Governing authority has power to enact legislation to restrict operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1. 

Sec. 4-1. - Findings; public purpose. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of the county has found that the county is an attractive place for the location of commercial enterprises and of residences for families and the board is committed to adopting ordinances designed to protect the quality of life for its citizens. 
(b)  Based upon the experience of other counties and municipalities, which experiences the board finds are relevant to the problems faced by McIntosh County, and which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within this country, the board finds that public nudity, under certain circumstances, particularly related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment facilities offering live entertainment, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. 
(c)  The board finds and declares that the purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse effect on property values and on the public health, safety and welfare of the county, and on its citizens and property, and on the character of its neighborhoods and development, will be curtailed. This chapter is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. Instead, this chapter is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: to reduced criminal activity and to protect neighborhoods, developments, and the county's citizenry through the regulation of adult establishments where adult entertainment is permitted and other sexually oriented businesses, such as adult book stores and adult video stores, versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. This chapter is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment or activity which would otherwise be unlawful 
(d)  The Supreme Court of Georgia, in Chambers d/b/a Neon Cowboy v. Peach County, Georgia, 266 Ga. 318 (1996), held that local governments may adopt ordinances designed to combat the undesirable secondary effects of sexually explicit businesses, and further held that a governing authority seeking to regulate adult entertainment establishments must have evidence of a relationship between the proposed regulation and the undesirable secondary effects it seeks to control. 
(e)  The Supreme Court of Georgia further held in the same opinion, and the United States Supreme Court held in City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986) that a local government may rely on the experience of other cities in enacting legislation to regulate adult entertainment businesses. 
(f)  Based on the experiences of other municipalities and counties including, but not limited to, Sandy Springs, Georgia; City of St. Mary's, Georgia; Rome, Georgia; Gwinnett County, Georgia; Fulton County, Georgia; Hamilton County, Tennessee; Adams County, Colorado; New York City, New York; Indianapolis, Indiana; Dallas, Texas; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Amarillo, Texas; Austin, Texas; Phoenix, Arizona; Manatee County, Florida; City of Garden Grove, California; Forth Worth, Texas; Houston, Texas; St. Cloud, Minnesota; Whittier, California; and the City of Los Angeles, California, which are found to be relevant to the problems faced by McIntosh County, the board notes the documented negative economic, physical, and social impact adult entertainment businesses have on the community. 
(g)  The Supreme Court of Georgia has upheld ordinances prohibiting the serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments. 
(h)  Among the undesirable community conditions identified with live nude entertainment and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for the allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order; increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior, and acceleration of community blight; Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); 5634 East Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), aff'd, 2008 WL 4279670 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curium); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); Flanigans Enterprises, Inc. of Georgia v. Fulton County, Georgia, 2010 WS 520542 (11th Cir. 2010). 
(i)  This chapter furthers important governmental interests of reducing crime and protecting property values which are unrelated to the suppression of speech. 
(j)  It is the intent of the board to enact an ordinance, narrowly tailored, sufficient to combat the undesirable secondary effects of the serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages at adult entertainment facilities. 
(k)  It is not the intent of the board in enacting this chapter to deny to any person the right to speech or expression protected by the United States Constitution or state constitution, nor it is the intent to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain or view any sexually oriented performance or materials protected by the United States Constitution or state constitution, but to adopt a content-neutral ordinance to combat the undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment where alcoholic beverages are served or consumed. 
(l)  The board further finds that other forms of adult establishments, including, but not limited to, adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, and adult theaters, have an adverse effect on the quality of life in other similar communities. 
(m)  The board finds that the negative secondary effects of adult establishments upon the community in the county are similar whether the business features live nude dancing, sells books, videotapes or other media depicting sexual activities or sexual devices or allows the exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos on the premises of the adult entertainment establishment. H & A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale, 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); High Five Investments, LLC v. Floyd County, No. 4:06-CV-0190-HLM (N.D. Ga. Mar. 14, 2008). 
(n)  The board finds that it is the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and other specific areas to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult establishments by imposing regulations pertaining to the exhibition of nude dancing, sexually explicit films or videos, regulations on loitering, visibility and monitoring requirements, prohibiting alcohol sales and consumption, and restricting the distance from other adult establishments and providing for minimum distance requirements from residential areas, schools, public parks, churches and other sensitive uses as set forth in this chapter. 
(o)  The board finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment. 
(p)  This chapter is enacted to further the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 1; Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), intro.) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment means and includes an adult bookstore, adult dancing establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult video store, erotic dance establishment, and any similar type business or occupation. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means a building or structure used for presenting material distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sale from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcoholic beverages, including without limitation, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine and fortified wine. 
Employee as used in this chapter includes without limitation any worker, traditional employees, dancers, waitresses, food service workers, clerks, supervisors, and includes independent contractors who perform any such function or occupation. 
Entity means any sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership of any nature, limited liability company, company, organization, association, or any other similar formation, whether recognized by any secretary of state or not. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Felony means, for purposes of this chapter, a conviction of a criminal offense punishable by more than one year's imprisonment, by any federal, state or other court. For purposes of this chapter, such term shall include the entry of a plea of guilty although adjudication of guilt has been withheld by the court. 
Interest holder means any person who owns any interest in any entity, as the term "entity" is defined in this section. 
Licensed premises means the adult entertainment establishment which has been granted a permit or license to operate an adult entertainment establishment, but only during the duration of a current and valid license or permit. 
Licensee means any person who is a resident of the county or entity with an office in the county, which person or entity has been granted a license by the county to operate an adult entertainment establishment. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Specified anatomical areas includes less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(3)  Sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion or urination upon another human being. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 1) 
Sec. 4-3. - No alcoholic beverage to be served. 
Adult entertainment establishments shall not serve, sell, distribute, nor give any alcoholic beverage to any patron. Nor shall any adult entertainment establishment permit any patron or employee to consume alcoholic beverages or controlled substance upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 2) 
Sec. 4-4. - Advertisement of adult entertainment establishment. 
No person or entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised the operation of an adult entertainment establishment without first obtaining a valid adult entertainment establishment license. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 3) 
Sec. 4-5. - Location. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment may be located within 1,000 feet of any church building, public or private school, college, or similar institution, library, public park, designated historic district or site, any property zoned for residential use, any business which sells alcohol beverages (pouring licensee or packaged sales licensee), or any building or land owned by a governmental entity. 
(b)  Any license issued to an adult entertainment establishment shall be valid only for the single location specified in the application. 
(c)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment at any other location without first obtaining a license for such other location. 
(d)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 4) 
Sec. 4-6. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person convicted of any felony. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. Such establishment shall be closed from Sunday morning at 2:00 a.m. to Monday at 8:00 a.m. 
(d)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or give any patron any alcoholic beverage; and such establishment may not permit any patron or employee to consume any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(e)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this chapter. 
(f)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor; no dancing shall occur closer than three feet to any patron. 
(g)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron. 
(h)  All public areas of an establishment licensed under this chapter shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present, both inside and outside the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 5) 
Sec. 4-7. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the unincorporated area of the county any adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter without a license to do so. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or of the United States of America. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 6) 
Sec. 4-8. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate an adult bookstore, adult dancing establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult video store, erotic dance establishment, and any similar type of adult entertainment establishment unless such person or entity shall have a currently valid license. No such person or entity shall operate an adult entertainment establishment at any time such establishment's license is under suspension or revoked. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 7) 
Sec. 4-9. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 8) 
Sec. 4-10. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any employee or other person employed by an adult entertainment establishment to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 9) 
Sec. 4-11. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No adult entertainment establishment may employ anyone who, within the previous five years, has been convicted of any felony offense. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction. All licensed adult entertainment establishments shall conduct initial criminal background checks as a condition of employment with the adult entertainment establishment. At least annually, adult entertainment establishments shall conduct followup criminal background checks to ensure its employees are not felons. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 10) 
Sec. 4-12. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person who is a resident of the county or entity maintaining an office in the county desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the county manager or his designee. Along with the application, applicant shall deposit a $4,000.00 nonrefundable fee, made payable to McIntosh County. Such fee is to defray, in part, the cost of investigation, reporting, appeals, monitoring activities, and costs of law enforcement work associated with ongoing adult entertainment establishments. 
(b)  The application for an adult entertainment establishment license does not authorize the operation of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 11) 
Sec. 4-13. - Application contents. 
(a)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true names of the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  All previous addresses and telephone numbers of applicant in the previous five years. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(5)  Business, occupation and employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(6)  The true full names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any and all interest holders, owners, partners, members, managers, shareholders, directors, and officers of any other entity which has an interest in the proposed adult entertainment establishment or its proposed license. 
(7)  The applicant must state whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory, has had any license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended. If so, the applicant must state the reason for such suspension or revocation. 
(8)  Applicants shall state all felony convictions, misdemeanor convictions (excluding minor traffic offenses; but including all drug offenses), and ordinance violation of the applicant and all interest holders of any entity or person who owns or presently intends to own any portion of the proposed adult entertainment establishment. For each conviction or violation, applicant must state the dates and places of any such conviction or violation. 
(9)  If the applicant has formed an entity through the secretary of State of Georgia, or of any other state, application must state the name of the entity exactly as shown in its articles of such entity. 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(11)  Such other identification and information as the county sheriff or his designee may require in order to discover or verify the information in the application. 
(12)  If the applicant, any partner, any member, any manager, any stockholder, or any other interest holder of the entity which proposes to operate an adult entertainment establishment has been convicted of any felony in the five-year period preceding the application, then a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition shall be furnished to the county with the application. 
(13)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual renewal. 
(14)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony in the past five years. 
(15)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(16)  A plat prepared by a state-registered land surveyor showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site, any business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, any historic district or site, any real property zoned for residential use, and the proximity to any other restricted site or zoning classification. 
(17)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If a limited liability company, by its manager; and 
e.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(b)  The county manager shall prepare an application in such format to obtain all information required in this section. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 12) 
Sec. 4-14. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant shall personally appear before the county manager and produce proof that the nonrefundable application fee has been paid, and shall personally present the application containing the aforementioned and described verified information. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 13) 
Sec. 4-15. - Application; investigation. 
Once the applicant has provided all of the information required herein and has paid the nonrefundable application fee, the county shall have 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the county manager may grant the license if he finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant and all interest holders as stated hereinabove have not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any felony in the previous five years; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit suspended or revoked for cause by this county or any other city or county located in or out of this state; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the proposed premises is not to be located within 1,000 feet to any church, school, library, governmental building or site, business which sells alcoholic beverages (pouring license or packaged sales), property zoned for residential use, any designated historic district or site, or any other site restricted hereunder; 
(10)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulations of the county, state or the United States; and 
(11)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the county to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county and the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 14) 
Sec. 4-16. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
No license provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and property taxes and other indebtedness to the county; 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted of a felony within the previous five years; or 
(3)  Any entity, any of whose interest holders have been convicted of a felony within the previous five years. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 15) 
Sec. 4-17. - License—Refusal; appeal. 
Following the receipt of a complete application and fee, and following the investigation by the county, if the county manager deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, he shall notify the applicant in writing at the address furnished by the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any such denial notification shall be deemed received on the date indicated on the return receipt; and if the same is not accepted or signed for, it shall be deemed received on the third day following the day the notification was mailed. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 16) 
Sec. 4-18. - Same—Renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a calendar year basis, provided that the licensee continues to meet the requirements set out in this chapter. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be $2,500.00. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 17) 
Sec. 4-19. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 18) 
Sec. 4-20. - Same—Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Any licensee who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to suspension or revocation of its adult entertainment establishment license. The county manager shall notify any licensee of an alleged violation of this chapter. The county's notice to the licensee shall state the grounds of the alleged violation and shall be mailed to the licensee, at the address noted on the licensee's application, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The county manager shall notify the licensee of the time, date, and location to appear to before the county manager to answer to the allegations of violation. 
(b)  After the county manager and licensee meet regarding the violation, the county manager shall propose a warning, suspension, or revocation of the licensee, which shall be in writing. The licensee may appeal the determination of the county manager by making an appeal to the board of commissioners in the same manner and procedures as appeals of denials of application as stated hereinbelow. 
(c)  The county manager shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners' meeting occurring not less than seven nor more than 45 days after receipt of the appeal. The county manager shall notify the applicant or licensee of the date, time, and location of the board meeting at which the appeal will be presented to the board. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 19) 
Sec. 4-21. - Appeal—Procedure. 
(a)  Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the county board of commissioners within 30 days of receipt of the written denial. Any appeal must be in writing, addressed to the board of commissioners, and served by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  The applicant's notice of appeal shall be addressed to the chairman, McIntosh County board of commissioners. Such notice shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application (or requests), the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the county board of commissioners, and the name and address of the applicant and all person who will appear or testify before the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The county manager shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners' meeting occurring not less than seven nor more than 45 days after receipt of the appeal. The county manager shall notify the applicant or licensee of the date, time, and location of the board meeting at which the appeal will be presented to the board. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 20) 
Sec. 4-22. - Same—Board determines procedure. 
(a)  When an appeal is placed on the board of commissioners' agenda, the board shall either: 
(1)  Hear the appeal; or 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer who shall hear evidence and make a recommendation to the board of commissioners. 
(b)  If the board of commissioners appoints a hearing officer to receive evidence and make recommendations, then the county manager shall notify the applicant/licensee of the time, date, location, and name of the hearing officer. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 21) 
Sec. 4-23. - Hearing. 
The county board of commissioners (or hearing officer) shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the applicant or licensee, from interested parties, from relevant law enforcement, and from county staff. The board of commissioners may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of and the decisions of the county manager or hearing officer. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 22) 
Sec. 4-24. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The board of commissioners or hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 23) 
Sec. 4-25. - Hearing officer's report. 
(a)  If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the board. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the county manager and shall be mailed to the applicant/licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  The county manager shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular board meeting occurring not less than seven days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least seven days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 24) 
Sec. 4-26. - Action by board of commissioners. 
The board of commissioners may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the board does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 25) 
Sec. 4-27. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. Each day that a violation exist constitutes a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 26) 
Sec. 4-28. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove the nuisance caused by such adult entertainment establishment, and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 27) 
Sec. 4-29. - Nonapplicability. 
This chapter is not intended to make unlawful and shall not be enforced against those persons and entities which offer for sale: 
(1)  Nude magazines and similar publications which articles do not occupy more than five percent of the business' total floor space nor make up more than five percent of the business' net sales; 
(2)  Adult videos and similar media which articles do not occupy more than five percent of the business' total floor space nor make up more than five percent of the business' net sales and rentals; and 
(3)  Mainstream performance theater or auditorium which regularly features live performances such as plays or concerts which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, display, or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, and where such depiction is only incidental to the primary purpose of the performance. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(1), § 28) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 11, 2013, repealed the former ch. 6, arts. I—IX, §§ 6-1—6-4, 6-27—6-32, 6-53, 6-80—6-83, 6-110, 6-111, 6-136—6-138, 6-160, 6-189—6-204, 6-232, 6-258, 2-280—6-282, 6-313—6-321, 6-346—6-356, 6-386—6-392, 6-411, 6-412, 6-438—6-441, 6-470—6-473, and 6-500—6-504, and enacted a new ch. 6 as set out herein and subsequently amended. The former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from original codification; §§ 1(a)—(c) and 2 of an ordinance adopted Jan. 11, 1994; §§ 6-1—6-4, 6-52, 6-53, 6-55—57, 6-90, 6-109—6-114, 6-142—6-144, 6-172, 6-198, 6-199, 6-201—6-214, 6-237, 6-268, 6-300—6-302, 6-323—6-330, 6-332, 6-353—6-363, 6-391—6-397, and the intro ¶ to art. V of an ordinance adopted June 2, 2009; and an ordinance adopted Feb. 14, 2012. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; county governing authority given power to regulate alcoholic beverages permitting and licensing, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 et seq. and 3-5-80 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of wine, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-40 et seq. and 3-6-60 et seq.; local government may authorize issuance license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises where sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Purposes of chapter. 
This chapter has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community; to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sales of alcoholic beverages; to protect and preserve schools and churches; to give effect to existing land use and preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable consideration being given, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values; to prevent the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises by establishments other than full service restaurants; and to protect against concentration of the retail outlets for alcohol in single-family residential areas. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means that person authorized with a work permit and designated by a license to sell alcoholic beverages. 
Alcoholic beverages include but are not limited to malt beverages, vinous beverages, and spirituous liquors as defined in this section. 
Bar means an establishment that does not meet the definition of a restaurant or farm winery and serves alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises. 
Bar facility means a physical structure, permanent, where the establishment staff dispenses alcoholic beverages. 
Bottle house means any place of business open to the public or any private club which allows guests, patrons or members to bring in and to consume the guest's, patron's or member's alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and shall be publicly designated as a church, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes. 
College means only such state, county, city, church or other colleges as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state, and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Convenience store means a retail establishment which offers for sale packaged or unprepared food and grocery items for consumption off of the premises which may sell fuel products, household items, or tobacco products and having 5,000 or less square feet of floor area. 
Conviction means adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly called the State of Georgia First Offender Act, being O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq. 
Distance means the measurement as measured from the front door of the structure from which beverage alcohol is sold or offered for sale, in a straight line to the front door of the church building, school building, school grounds, day care facility, alcoholic treatment center, or residence. 
Drink means any spirituous liquor not in its original package served for consumption on the premises, which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
Family means any person related to the holder of an alcoholic beverage license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
Farm winery means a domestic manufacturer of wine in quantities of less than 100,000 gallons of wine per year, that is licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1. Provided a license is issued as required by this chapter, a farm winery is authorized to sell wine by the package, by the drink and operate a wine tasting facility on the premises of the farm winery without additional license requirements. 
Grocery store means a retail establishment whose primary function is the sale of packaged or unprepared food and grocery items for consumption off the premises and whose annual gross sales of alcoholic beverages do not exceed five percent of its total gross sales. 
Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which ten or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least 12, where meals are regularly served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a restaurant on their premises; and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel hereunder. 
Legal alien means a person who possesses a valid United States government-issued I-551 card; an application for I-551 status does not meet the legal alien definition. Any other status which allows a person to enter the United States does not comply with this definition. 
License means the authorization by the board of commissioners to engage in the sale or consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
Licensee means a person holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Managing capacity means the president or chief executive officer of a corporation, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed or supervision of management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed and who is a full-time employee of the corporation, partnership, proprietor or other ownership entity. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Minor means a person less than 18 years of age. 
Package store means a business establishment whose primary business activity is the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. 
Park means any public lands owned or controlled and operated by this county, any county of the state, any municipality of the state, the state, the United States of America or any property owned or managed by a nonprofit organization, in and upon which play facilities are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Pouring license means a license that authorizes on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
Principal shareholder means a person who owns any shares of a corporation with less than 35 shareholders or more than five percent of the shares of a corporation which has more than 35 shareholders, except that a person who owns shares which are publicly traded shall not be deemed to be a principal shareholder or to have a beneficial interest in the corporation based solely on the fact of stock ownership. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one or more than two families customarily reside and shall not include a mobile home, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, a boardinghouse or rooming house where there are five or more boarders or roomers, any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of any application for license, or any residence that shall be a nonconforming use in a commercial zone. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of malt or vinous beverages by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property, or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee or his agent to the purchases, without any deduction there from whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any malt or vinous beverage by the drink or bottle. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place of business where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served, without sleeping accommodations, and holding a certificate of approval from the county health department. Any licensed restaurant, in addition to the above requirements, shall be a bona fide public eating place which actually and regularly prepares and serves food on the premises; shall have a full kitchen facility open and operating to prepare food on the premises for consumption in the establishment, such kitchen to include at a minimum one cooking stove and/or oven or equivalent apparatus (this requirement is not met by a microwave oven and/or food rotisserie), one standard size food refrigerator and freezer, kitchen sink, and any and all food service requirements of the McIntosh County Health Department; with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A restaurant shall have 50 percent or more of its total annual gross sales of food and alcoholic beverage from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Retail sale means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. Such term shall also include, without limitation, the sale to any member of the public of any ticket or license, or the charging of any cover charge or fee, for admission to any event or premises where alcoholic beverages are available without further charge, as well as the sale of any ticket, stamp, token or similar item which may be redeemed or exchanged for alcoholic beverages. 
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Spirituous or alcoholic liquors means all beverages containing alcohol, obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume, including fortified wines and distilled spirits. 
Tax means tax imposed for each calendar month of the year. 
Underage person means a person who is less than 21 years of age. 
Vinous beverages or wine means any alcoholic beverages containing not more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
Wholesaler means any person engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale of any alcoholic beverages as defined in this section. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-3. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-9, which may include a fine or imprisonment, or both. Such punishment, if imposed, shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license suspension or revocation under this chapter. Violations of this chapter shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption by establishments other than full-service restaurants. It shall be unlawful to operate, facilitate, condone, or house a bar or bottle house within the unincorporated area of McIntosh County. No license for on-premises consumption shall be issued and no licensee shall operate a restaurant meeting the food sales requirement of a restaurant except in accordance with this article. 
(2)  On school grounds. No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, possessed or consumed by any person in any school building or on any school grounds. 
(3)  In parks. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, possessed or consumed by any person in any county park. 
(4)  In vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume while driving or operating any vehicle on any public road or street any alcoholic beverage in any open or unsealed original container or cup, can, bottle or other open or unsealed container. 
(5)  By unlicensed individuals. It shall be unlawful for unlicensed individuals to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for fines, suspensions, or revocation of any retail or wholesale license issued hereunder. 
(c)  Any licensee, person or entity who fails to pay any fee, tax or other payment due to the county of any kind when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax or other charge, a separate penalty equal to ten percent of the required fee, tax or other charge for each period of 30 days, or portion thereof, following the due date, until paid in full including penalties. 
(d)  Fees, fines and penalties shall be established by the board of commissioners and kept on record in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Cross reference— Distance requirements—exemption for existing establishments, section 6-20. 
Sec. 6-4. - Licenses constitute grant or privilege. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses constitute a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and related laws and other ordinances and resolutions of the county relating to such business. 
(b)  All licenses under this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled by the Board of Commissioners of McIntosh County, and is subject to any future ordinances eliminating notice and hearing prior to revocation with or without cause." 
(c)  All new licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to a six-month probationary period. During said period, any violation of this chapter or state law can result in the in the license or licenses being revoked by the county. Said revocation can be done exclusively by the county manager and does not require approval of the board of commissioners. However, the licensee can appeal the revocation as set forth in section 6-27 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-5. - Annual license fee to be set by the board of commissioners. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee and tax on all persons in the unincorporated area of the county for the manufacture, distribution, sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, including spirituous malt and fermented wine. The annual license fee for each classification of license under this chapter shall be set by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The schedule of fees for each license classification under this chapter shall be on file at the office of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Any new license issued under this chapter shall be effective annually from the date the license is issued until December 31 of each year. In the case of revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of a full year since payment of the license fee, the holder of the license shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(d)  All license fees required under this chapter shall be paid by cash, certified check, or cashier's check. 
(e)  Fees for alcoholic beverage licenses can be found in the county fee schedule located in appendix A to this Code. These fees may be changed by resolution of the board of commissioners and a schedule will be kept on file in the county clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
State Law reference— County license fees on sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-41, 3-5-43; maximum annual county license fee for distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-50. 
Sec. 6-6. - Renewal of license. 
Any person subject to this chapter shall be required to renew his license on or before December 31 of each year. Failure to pay or renew the license on or before December 31 shall automatically revoke the license. Upon the expiration of the license to sell alcoholic beverages, the licensee shall cease the sale of alcoholic beverages until a current license is issued. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-7. - Separate license for each place of business. 
A person doing business at more than one place shall take out and pay for a separate license under this article for each place of business. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-8. - Levied; amount; payment; duties of dealers and wholesalers; unlawful sales and deliveries; bonds; penalties. 
(a)  Scope of section. In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon the sale of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits, as defined under the laws of the state, there is imposed and levied upon the sale of alcoholic beverages within the unincorporated area of the county an excise tax, to be computed and collected as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Amount of tax. The excise taxes on alcoholic beverages shall be as set forth in the schedule of excise taxes on file in the office of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Computation, payment, duties of wholesale dealer or distributor. The taxes imposed in this section shall be computable and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping or delivering malt beverages or fermented wine to any retail dealer in the unincorporated area of the county shall, as a condition to the privilege of carrying on the business: 
(1)  Keep true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of such alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer in the unincorporated area of the county, such records to be kept for a period of one year for malt beverages and fermented wine and to be made available upon request to any duly authorized representative of the county. 
(2)  Collect from each such retail dealer in the unincorporated area of the county at the time of delivery of the malt beverages and fermented wine the amount of tax due under the terms of this section and to hold such amount in trust for the county until such amount is remitted to the county as provided in this section. 
(3)  Except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81 or other applicable state law, on or before the 20th day of each calendar month make a verified and comprehensive report to the county finance office, which shall correctly show all sales and deliveries of malt beverages and fermented wine to or for retail dealers in the unincorporated area of the county for the month immediately preceding such report. Such report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount collected under the terms of this section, and such other information as may be called for by the county. This report shall be accompanied by remittance to the county for all taxes collected or due as shown on the report. 
(d)  Noncompliance by wholesale dealer or distributor. If any wholesaler dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the report provided for in this section, the county shall notify the party in writing; and if the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of notice, the county may revoke the wholesale dealer's or distributor's license. In addition, such a wholesaler shall pay a late payment charge of ten percent per month for each month of delinquency together with interest on the total amount due (including late payment fee) equal to one percent per month. 
(e)  Unlawful retail sales. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell at retail within the limits of the unincorporated area of the county any malt beverages or fermented wine on which the taxes provided for in this section have not been paid. This section shall also apply to farm wineries. 
(f)  Unlawful deliveries. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any wholesale dealer or distributor to deliver any malt beverages or fermented wine to any retail dealer in the unincorporated area of the county without collecting the taxes provided for in this section at the time of delivery. 
(g)  Posting of bonds. Each wholesaler dealer or distributor who sells malt beverages or fermented wines to retail dealers in the unincorporated area of the county shall post a bond in the sum of $10,000.00 as a condition that such dealer or distributor shall comply with every provision and make payment of any sums due under this section. If the wholesaler's license shall be revoked for cause, the bond shall be forfeited and paid to the county. 
(h)  Violations and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, or who shall assist any retail dealer in malt beverages or fermented wines in the county to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes provided for in this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 and shall also be subject to having his license revoked. 
(i)  Farm wineries. Wines sold at retail by a farm winery shall have levied thereon the excise tax that applies to wholesalers. Farm wineries shall prepare and keep accurate records as to what is sold at retail and what is sold at wholesale for a period of one year. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
State Law reference— Nudity and related acts on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41; employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42; display of prices of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-26; levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq.; imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; authorization to levy tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 6-9. - License required for manufacture, sale. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be manufactured or sold at wholesale except under a wholesale wine and malt beverage license granted by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold by the package for off-premises consumption except wine and malt beverages under a retail alcoholic wine and malt beverage package sales license granted by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail for consumption on-premises except under an alcoholic beverage pouring license granted by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  A farm winery is required to obtain a license as provided in this chapter for the manufacture of wine. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
State Law reference— Local permit or license required for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a). 
Sec. 6-10. - Application, filing; form; contents. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license required under this chapter shall make written application at the office of the county manager. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the place where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and stockholders; and such other information as may be required by the county manager, and be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(b)  Each applicant will make an oath that they have read and understand this chapter and understands that all provisions contained herein are applicable to all applicants for retail or pouring licensees. 
(c)  The applicant shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the county manager. The county manager shall deny the application of any applicant who fails to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of request. Upon the county manager's approval that the application is sufficient, the manager shall forward the application to the county zoning administrator to determine if the application meets the requirements set forward in the McIntosh County Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  For the purpose of this chapter, the term "applicant" shall include in the case of a partnership or corporation all partners, officers, directors and shareholders of such partnership or corporation. 
(e)  All applications for licenses, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interests, as defined in subsection 6-19(a), in retail alcoholic beverage package stores or establishments offering alcoholic beverages for sale by the drink. This shall include: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling at retail packaged alcoholic beverages or alcoholic beverages for sale by the drink, together with any interest each person or any member of his immediate family has in any other retail alcoholic beverage package store or establishment offering alcoholic beverages for sale by the drink; 
(2)  The ownership of the land and building where such retail business or establishment is operated; 
(3)  The amount of rental paid for such land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid; and 
(4)  The names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sub-lessor of such land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail alcoholic beverage package store or establishment offering alcoholic beverages for sale by the drink is located. 
(f)  Each application for an alcoholic beverage license at a location for which there is no existing county license for the same type of alcoholic beverage license in effect shall include a blue line copy of a surveyor's plat, eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in size, with a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, showing the location of the building or proposed building and location of all customer entries in relation and distance to all real property and buildings on such real property which fall within the distance requirements set forth in section 6-19, together with the zoning classifications and present uses of all such real property. 
(g)  Each application furnished under this section must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the county for filing and processing. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-11. - Citizenship, residence and age requirements. 
(a)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a corporation, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either the majority shareholder thereof, or a person employed full-time in a managing capacity by the corporation. 
(b)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a partnership, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either the managing general partner thereof, or a person employed full-time by the partnership in a managing capacity. 
(c)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a sole proprietor, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor if he is working full-time in a managing capacity on the premises, and, if not, then the sole proprietor and a person employed full-time by the sole proprietor in a managing capacity. 
(d)  In order to be eligible to hold an alcoholic beverage license, the individual proposed as the licensee must be a U.S. citizen, or a legal alien for at least one year prior to making application, and must be 25 years of age or older at the time the application for a license is filed. 
(e)  If the licensee leaves employment or no longer qualifies as complying with the definition of "managing capacity" the alcoholic beverage license shall be void. However, when filing an application the applicant may identify a substitute licensee, who shall meet all the requirements as the original licensee and shall be approved by the county manager. The substitute licensee may serve as licensee and the alcoholic beverage license shall remain valid in the event that the original licensee no longer qualifies as licensee. 
(f)  The licensee shall notify the county manager in writing of the name(s), addresses and telephone numbers of all managers and employees who are authorized to receive court documents, communications and notices required under this chapter at the location of the business and shall keep such notification current. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-12. - False information in application. 
Any material omission or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for any license or permit issued under this chapter shall be unlawful, and shall be cause for a denial thereof. If any such license or permit has previously been granted under the above-described circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of such license or permit. The omission of information relating to a conviction of a crime, be it misdemeanor or felony, shall constitute a material omission for the purposes of this sub-section. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
State Law reference— False swearing, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-71. 
Sec. 6-13. - Sheriff's investigation of applications. 
After the zoning administrator has determined that the application meets the requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance, the application shall be forwarded back to the county manager who shall then forward the application to the sheriff's office. All applications required by this chapter shall be investigated by the sheriff's department, which shall report its recommendation to the county manager. No action shall be taken by the county or by any applicant with respect to any application until the sheriff's department's investigation is completed. The sheriff's department shall make its recommendation within 30 days after receipt of all required information and any additional information requested by the county manager. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-14. - Notice of intent to engage in business. 
All new applications for an alcohol or beverage license at a new location or a location which has been previously denied shall not be granted without a call for a public hearing in the legal organ of the board of commissioners. The notice shall contain information on the pending application including location, license being sought, and name of applicant. The applicant shall pay the county a fee found in appendix A to this Code to cover charges associated with said advertisement. The advertisement shall be made one time within 15 to 45 days of when said application shall be considered by the board of county commissioners. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-15. - Initial consideration of application and appeal. 
(a)  All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be acted upon at the time advertised unless an objection is filed as provided herein. If the application does not meet the legal requirements of this chapter, the county manager shall deny the license. Any license at a location that has not been licensed before shall only be issued by the board of commissioners in addition to any licenses that are seeking reissuance after revocation for any reason. Licenses not requiring approval by the board of commissioners which the county manager may consider shall be acted on by the county manager within 15 days of receipt of the sheriff's office findings. The county manager is authorized to approve or deny the following type licenses which are all at locations previously approved for alcohol licenses by the board of commissioners: 
(1)  Change of ownership or corporation. 
(2)  A new owner or business seeking to obtain a license at a previously approved business. 
(3)  Transfer of license. 
(4)  Modification of license or addition of license. 
(b)  The decision of the county manager shall be transmitted to the applicant by certified mail. Any decision of the county manager shall be final unless appeal is made to the county board of commissioners by an aggrieved party within ten days from the date that the decision of the county manager is mailed to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-16. - Circumstances prohibiting issuance. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license may be issued where the application or other evidence shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  That the applicant is of bad moral character or has a bad reputation in the community or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. 
(2)  That the applicant has had any license issued under the police powers of any county, state, municipality or other governmental entity previously suspended or revoked. 
(3)  That the applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)  That any applicant for a retail license under this chapter is related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity. This subsection shall not restrict a farm winery from selling at retail and wholesale. 
(5)  That any applicant or any corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, shareholder, general partner or managing agent is delinquent in payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to the county or to the state. 
(6)  The applicant has demonstrated lack of knowledge of the county ordinances and federal and state law regulating the business. Prima facie evidence of lack of knowledge, as described in this subsection, would include but is not limited to violations of such law or regulation, regulating the business. 
(7)  The applicant fails to answer questions on the alcoholic beverage application accurately or to provide accurate information to the board of commissioners, county administrator, sheriff, or zoning administrator staff regarding laws and regulations governing the business. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the circumstances set out in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section, the county manager or the board of commissioners may waive such circumstances and grant a license. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-17. - Issuance of license to persons with prior convictions. 
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for pecuniary gain shall be issued to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal shareholder, or licensee shall have been convicted within the ten-year [period] immediately prior to the consideration of the alcoholic beverage application for any felony or a violation of federal, state, or local law involving moral turpitude, or for the violation of any county, state, or federal law of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place; or any charge relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages or serious traffic offense as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-390 et seq., the traffic offense of hit and run or leaving the scene of an accident, but excluding any first conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or for whom outstanding indictments, accusations or criminal charges exist charging such individual with any of such offenses and for which no final disposition has occurred. If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea or verdict or dismissal. The board of commissioners may waive this disqualification after hearing in all cases. The applicant shall appeal any disqualification by virtue of this section directly to the board of commissioners without hearing by the county manager. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-18. - Denial on basis of license already held. 
(a)  No retail licensee or person having an interest therein shall have any business or commercial transactions with a wholesaler or manufacturer of alcoholic beverages other than the purchase of and payment for alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or person having an interest therein to have any connection, either directly or indirectly, in any scheme or device to obtain an interest in a retail package store, being more than allowed by this chapter, or to engage in any scheme or device to use another person as a guise or dummy to obtain a retail license. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-19. - Distance requirements—From schools, churches, parks, and other facilities. 
(a)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell: 
(1)  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus; 
(2)  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus; 
(3)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(4)  As used in this subsection, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state and which public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any new establishment to obtain licensure to sell liquor by the package within 500 yards of an existing establishment with a liquor consumption off premises sales license. 
(b)  All measurements to determine whether the distance requirements set forth in this section have been met shall be measured in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the Georgia Department of Revenue as now enacted or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Cross reference— Plat filing requirements, section 6-10. 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools or college campus, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21; adoption of rules and regulations; determination of location of distilleries or businesses licensed by municipal or county governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 
Sec. 6-20. - Same—Exemption for existing establishments. 
Any application for renewal or transfer of a license under this chapter on an existing licensed location shall not be subject to the distance requirements from churches, schools, child day care centers, alcoholic treatment centers, housing authority property, private residences, and other distance requirements set forth in this chapter, nor subject to zoning standards or additional architectural standards as set forth in this chapter. An applicant requesting renewal or transfer of a license under this section must meet all other requirements of this chapter for the granting of a new license. 
In addition, any bar facilities operating before the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be permitted to continue to operate under the regulations that where in place when their original license was issued. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Cross reference— Penalties, subsection 6-3(a)(1). 
Sec. 6-21. - Additional standards for issuance, renewal, transfer or denial of retail license. 
In addition to the standards stated elsewhere in this chapter, the following standards shall apply for issuance, retention, renewal, transfer or denial of licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages either by the package or for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  Evidence that, even though there is compliance with the minimum distances from schools and churches, the type and number of schools or number of churches in the vicinity causes underage persons to frequent the immediate area. 
(2)  Evidence that the location of the type of structure could create difficulty in police supervision. 
(3)  Evidence that a license for the location would be detrimental to the property values in the area. 
(4)  Evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking which would result in parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
(5)  Evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold to an intoxicated person or to an underage person. 
(6)  Evidence that the conducting of the business creates a disturbance, congregation of intoxicated persons, congregation of underage persons, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises by underage persons, or causes the sheriff to answer excessive complaints or make extra surveillance of the premises. More than three underage persons without supervision of a parent or one authorized by a parent shall be prima facie a congregation of underage persons. "Excessive" is defined as three or more complaints involving the business within any cumulative three months selected. 
(7)  Evidence that any agent or employee of any corporation in which any shareholder of the applicant had any interest, violated any ordinance, law statute regulating the business. 
(8)  In addition to the standards set out in subsections (1) through (7) of this section, the following evidence shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
a.  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license, the manner in which he conducted the business there under as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulations or ordinance relating to such business. 
b.  If the applicant's spouse shall not be able to meet the qualifications of an applicant, particularly if it appears that the applicant's spouse or another person is using the applicant as a guise or dummy to obtain a license. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-22. - Supplemental requirements for sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be issued to any applicant that does not meet the requirements of a restaurant as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  A license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink may be issued to a hotel that includes, on the premises, a restaurant defined in section 6-2, and provided, further, that sales of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted only in the restaurant or as an in-room service provided to guests by the hotel. 
(c)  The square foot area of a bar facility in a restaurant shall not be greater than 25 percent of the square footage of the dining area of the establishment where tables are located excluding kitchen area, hall, restrooms, waiting area, and areas where games or pool tables are located. 
(d)  No bar, other than a bar facility in a restaurant meeting the food sales requirement of a restaurant, nor any bottle house shall be operated in the unincorporated area of the county. 
(e)  Failure to produce satisfactory evidence that a business meets the percentage of food requirement of its total annual food and beverage sales from the sale of food as required to be a restaurant shall be cause for denial or revocation of the alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-23. - Restrictions upon transfers. 
Licenses under this chapter shall not be transferable as to location or ownership, except upon approval of the county manager and issuance of and payment for the license, subject to the following: 
(1)  In case of the death of any person holding such a license or any interest therein, the license may, in the discretion of the county manager, be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person. 
(2)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(3)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more principal shareholders in a corporation holding a license to withdraw from the corporation, who were principal shareholders at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the corporation. 
(4)  Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee, and the new location shall be considered under and meet the requirements of a new license. 
(5)  It shall be deemed a change of ownership when an owner or licensee adds an additional partner or partners or an additional stockholder or stockholders. 
(6)  All applications for transfer of location shall be posted as required by section 6-14. 
(7)  A change in ownership as set forth in this section requires an application for a new license and the payment of a new license fee according to the procedures in this chapter. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of each licensee to promptly report any changes of any kind in the ownership or distribution of ownership to the county manager. 
(9)  If a licensee desires to sell the business for which the license was issued, the purchaser of the business must be informed by the licensee that the purchaser of the business must make application for and obtain a license prior to operating the business. Any transfer of the business for which the license is issued without the new owners being licensed shall cause the automatic revocation of the license. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-24. - Wholesale licensees prohibited from interest in other licenses. 
No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license under the terms of this chapter. This section shall not apply to farm wineries. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-25. - Temporary event alcohol permit. 
A temporary event alcohol permit may be requested by any group holding a special event that has been approved by the board of commissioners. Such permit shall be for the sale of beer and wine only and the sale of such shall meet all requirements for hours of operation that pertains to other licensed restaurants. 
The applicant must submit a completed application to the county manager along with the special event permit submitted to the clerk of the board of commissioners. A temporary event alcohol permit shall be issued only in conjunction with a special event which has been approved by the board of commissioners. In addition the applicant must obtain a State of Georgia special event alcoholic beverage permit before any sales commence. All applicants who apply for a temporary event alcohol permit must have food available to event attendees for free or for sale. 
A separate application must be made for each location and for each event. No more than six permits may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year and all events must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the license issued and shall subject the applicant to prosecution under the laws of the state. A fee found in appendix A to this Code shall be charged per event per permit. 
The granting of a temporary event alcohol permit is a privilege subject to be annulled and revoked if the applicant is deemed to not conduct the event in accordance with ordinances of the county or the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-26. - Architectural and zoning standards. 
(a)  [ Premises requirements. ] All applicants for licenses for premises that have not previously been in use for the same purpose as applied for shall furnish plans and renderings of the proposed premises. Such premises shall be constructed, renovated or built so as to be equal to and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood or better. The exterior shall be of finished building material such as brick, stone, steel or wood. The applicant shall comply with all building, health and similar county codes. An applicant for retail or pouring license shall obtain and file with his application a certification of zoning compliance, certifying that the property where the applicant shall operate his business is zoned for the appropriate category as provided in this article. 
(b)  Wholesalers. No license shall be issued to a wholesaler of alcoholic beverages unless the wholesaler's business is to be located in an area of the county that is appropriately zoned for the same. 
(c)  Pouring licenses. No pouring license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be issued unless the location is zoned C-G or C-I under the zoning laws of the county, or is in use as a business under a specific special use permit, provided that this section shall not apply to private clubs as defined in this chapter. No license shall be issued for a location that operates as a nonconforming use. 
(d)  Package sales. No license for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in package form shall be issued to any person for the operation of such business, except within the areas zoned C-G or C-I. No license shall be issued for a location which is a nonconforming use. No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall operate under such license unless the front entrance to the licensed premises is clearly visible from the public street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply where the licensee is a hotel, motel, or farm winery, or is located in a shopping center or multiple story business building. "Clearly visible" shall mean that not less than 60 percent of the front area shall be glass. "Front area" shall mean the width of the premises from the ceiling to the floor. 
(e)  Farm wineries. A farm winery shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-27. - Hearings and appeals before the county board of commissioners. 
(a)  Applicants who have appealed shall be given written notice of the date, time and place when the county board of commissioners will consider the respective matter. A sign shall be posted by the county manager at the location giving notice of the date, time and place when the county board of commissioners shall consider the application. The applicant and interested parties shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard by the county board of commissioners. 
(b)  Minutes and records of all proceedings before the county board of commissioners shall be kept and maintained in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The county board of commissioners shall consider the matter and shall, by a majority of the required quorum render a written decision not more than 15 days after the date of the hearing. The decision shall be transmitted to the applicant and to all parties that filed objections, if any, by certified mail. 
(d)  The decision of the board of commissioners, unless appealed in accordance with subsection (e) below, shall be final. Should the applicant be denied the applicant will not be entitled to reapply for a period of 180 days. The 180-day period shall begin on the day upon which the denial is deemed final. 
(e)  The decision of the board of commissioners on an appeal under this section shall be final unless appeal is made to the superior court of the county. Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the board of commissioners by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court within 30 days of the decision of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-28. - License to be obtained within two weeks of approval of application. 
(a)  All licenses under this chapter must be obtained and fees paid not later than two weeks from the date of the approval of the application; and if not so obtained, the permit granted shall be void. 
(b)  When a license under this chapter has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the county manager the required fees, the license shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Sec. 6-29. - Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for any holder of an alcoholic beverage license with a Sunday sales endorsement to sell alcoholic beverages on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. to 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total gross income from rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the package sales by retailers of wine/beer/distilled spirits on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m., if such Sunday sales of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits are approved by a majority of the voters of McIntosh County in a referendum called for that purpose. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs and dangerous dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; governing authorities of counties are authorized and required in the control of rabies to require regulation or licensing of animals, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Abandoned animal means any animal: 
(1)  Which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended and uncared for; 
(2)  Upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property and is unattended or without care; or 
(3)  Which has been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of this animal for a period of time in excess of 36 hours unattended and without proper food, water and shelter. 
Abandonment shall also include failure to provide reasonable remedy or relief for any injured or diseased animal. 
Animal means and includes the following: 
(1)  Domestic animals. Animals that are accustomed to live in or about the habitation of humans, that are not found naturally in the wild state, including, but not limited to, cats, cattle, dogs, fowl, goats, horses, swine, and various genetically established strains of laboratory/pet animals such as mice, rats, hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs and rabbits. 
(2)  Feral animals. Domestic animals which have reverted back to a wild state and do not exhibit traits consistent with their intended use. 
(3)  Native wildlife animals. A non-domesticated animal which is normally found in the natural state within the confines of the state. 
(4)  Non-native or exotic wildlife animals. A non-domesticated animal which is not normally found in the natural state within the confines of the state. 
(5)  Domestic/wild animals. An established strain of wild animal which is generally used in the fur or pet industry including, but not limited to, ranch mink, ferrets and brown and white skunks. 
Animal control officer means any person employed by the county as the director, an animal control officer, a county code enforcement officer, any other persons so designated by the county manager, and any certified law enforcement officer. 
Animal shelter or pound means the facilities operated by the county for confining animals impounded or surrendered under the provisions of this chapter. 
Animal under restraint means: 
(1)  Any animal secured by a leash or lead with a collar, or enclosed by way of a fence or other enclosure; 
(2)  Any animal under the supervision of a responsible and competent person at least 14 years of age, obedient to the person's commands, and located within the boundaries of property owned, leased or occupied by the owner; 
(3)  A dog being trained or used to hunt in conformance with the game laws of the state; or 
(4)  A dog owned by a government agency. 
Certificate means a certificate or document issued at the time of vaccination for rabies of a dog or cat and bearing thereon the signature of the vaccinator, the vaccination tag number, the name, color, breed and sex of the dog or cat, the name and address of the owner, and the date of the vaccination. 
County attorney means the McIntosh County Attorney. 
County manager means the McIntosh County Manager. 
Cruelty to animals means the neglect, an act, or an omission, which causes unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death to any living animal, including without limitation, the injuring, beating, choking, shooting, stabbing, burning, or otherwise physically harming any animal. Causing one dog to engage in a fight with another dog for sport shall constitute an act of cruelty to animals. The term "cruelty to animals" does not include the killing of animals raised for the purpose of providing food nor does it apply to any person who hunts wild animals in compliance with the game and fish laws of the state. 
Current vaccination tag means a metal tag issued by the state department of human resources, or other state agency, which bears a number showing that it is current for a one-year period up to a three-year period for immunization of rabies. 
Director means the chief supervisor of the county animal services activities. 
Fence means a structure of wire, wood, stone, or other materials which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. The term "fence" also includes so-called "invisible fence" systems which provide an electric shock which prevents an animal from leaving the property of its owner, provided the animal is a dog which is neither vicious nor in estrus. (Dogs which are vicious as defined in this section shall be restrained in an enclosure which not only restrains the animal from leaving the owner's property, but also protects persons who may come onto the property from harm. Female dogs in estrus shall be confined in a conventional enclosure or otherwise restrained in a way which prevents breeding not intended by the owner.) 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and/or within which it is located. 
Humane manner means to provide care for an animal to include, but not necessarily limited to, adequate ventilation and reasonably sanitary shelter, appropriate manner of restraint, wholesome food and water consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed, and necessary veterinary medical care to insure relief from undue pain or suffering. 
Inhumane manner means the failure to provide humane care and shall also mean restraining an animal by affixing to its collar or otherwise attaching to its body a chain, rope, cord, or other lead which is attached to the ground or a fixed object and which is not of sufficient length to allow the animal access to food and water or to move about freely in an area of reasonable size considering the size and nature of the animal. 
Owner means any person owning, keeping, harboring or acting as custodian of an animal for a period of 72 hours or more. 
Person means an individual, firm, corporation, municipality, society or owner. 
Public nuisance means any animal which: 
(1)  Is vicious; 
(2)  Attacks passersby or excites fear of attack by reasonably prudent passersby; 
(3)  Attacks passing vehicles or enters a roadway as if to attack a vehicle; 
(4)  Is found repeatedly at large; 
(5)  Damages property of others; 
(6)  Excessively produces disturbing noises; 
(7)  Female dog while in estrus (in heat, in season) not confined in a manner which can reasonably be expected to keep away or not attract male dogs; or 
(8)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health, and other appropriate state laws, rules, and regulations, which rules and regulations are incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. 
Vaccinate means the proper administration, by a licensed veterinarian, of a specified dose of anti-rabies vaccine into a dog or cat. 
Veterinarian means any person who holds a license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine in the state. 
Vicious animal means an animal whose owner knows or reasonably should know presents a danger to humans or other animals because it has: 
(1)  Without provocation, bitten or attacked a person or another animal in the past; or 
(2)  It has exhibited threatening or vicious conduct or propensities toward humans or other animals. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-1-2) 
Sec. 8-2. - Animal control unit. 
There is hereby created the county animal services department under the general supervision of the director of such department, who reports to the county manager. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2005, art. I, § 2-4-2; Res. of 11-7-2008) 
Sec. 8-3. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall apply to and be enforceable in the unincorporated portions of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-1-4) 
Secs. 8-4—8-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-29. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  Abandon any animal; 
(2)  Fail to keep an animal under restraint; 
(3)  Fail to provide a collar and display on said collar: 
a.  The name and telephone number of the person who owns the animal; and 
b.  The animal's current vaccination tag; 
(4)  Fail to provide care for an animal in a humane manner; 
(5)  Allow any animal to become a public nuisance; 
(6)  Fail to have any dog, cat or ferret vaccinated against rabies; 
(7)  Treat any animal in an inhumane manner; 
(8)  Keep a vicious animal, except as authorized by article V of this chapter; 
(9)  To neglect any animal; 
(10)  Commit an act of cruelty to any animal; 
(11)  To sponsor, participate in or attend an organized dog fight; or 
(12)  To violate any criminal law of the state regarding animals. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-2-1) 
Sec. 8-30. - Unattended animals. 
It shall be unlawful to leave an animal unattended in a parked vehicle without proper ventilation such that will prevent the animal from suffering physical distress from dangerous temperatures, lack of food or lack of water. Animal control officers shall take such action as is necessary, including entry of the vehicle by any reasonable means to remove an animal from such jeopardy, and may impound said animal and secure medical treatment for said animal as needed at the owner's or custodian's expense. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-2-2) 
Sec. 8-31. - Acts of neglect. 
(a)  A person commits an act of animal neglect when such person permits any animal under his care or control to endure one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Lack of immediately available proper drinking water or inadequate supply of drinking water. 
(2)  Lack of wholesome, palatable, free from contamination food or sustenance to be provided in sufficient quantity. 
(3)  Failure to provide an animal sufficient space to stand to full height, turn around, lay down and make normal postural adjustments for comfort. 
(4)  The lack of a stationary shelter from weather such as sun, rain, wind or inclement weather or failure to maintain said shelter in a clean and sanitary condition free of excrement and unreasonably objectionable odors. 
(5)  To have an animal in one's possession that is known or suspected to have an injury, accidental or deliberate, or to exhibit obvious signs of disease, tremors, open wounds, inability to eat, abnormal bleeding, partial paralysis, or discharging blood or mucus. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to habitually neglect any animal in any of the manner stated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section. A person habitually neglects an animal when, after being warned by an animal control officer to not neglect an animal, such person, within 60 days thereafter, permits a condition of neglect to exist as to any animal. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-2-3) 
Secs. 8-32—8-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 8-51. - Supplement to state requirement. 
This article is intended to supplement the state requirement of rabies vaccination as provided in O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq., and to provide the county with additional enforcement methods to the extent permitted by law. 
Sec. 8-52. - Vaccination tag. 
It shall be the duty of each dog or cat owner or custodian thereof, to provide a collar for their dog or cat to which a current rabies vaccination tag shall be attached. The collar, together with the tag, shall be worn by the dog or cat at all times, except as provided in this chapter. Failure to comply with this section shall be unlawful and shall be punished as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-3-1) 
Sec. 8-53. - Tag required for dog or cat over four months of age. 
(a)  The owner or custodian of each dog or cat over four months of age kept, maintained or harbored within the unincorporated areas of the county shall apply for and obtain a rabies tag for such dog or cat which shall be affixed to a collar worn by such dog or cat at all times. The director may grant applications upon forms it designates for exemption from this tag display requirement for show dogs or cats wherein the wearing of a collar may cause damage to the coat of the animal. Owners of show dogs or cats shall have in their immediate possession the rabies tag where it may be produced on demand of animal control officer. 
(b)  Any licensed veterinarian shall be authorized to vaccinate dogs or cats against rabies; provided, that at the time of such vaccination said veterinarian shall furnish a vaccination tag issued by the state department of human resources, bearing an official serial number to the owner. Such veterinarian shall furnish a certificate certifying to the vaccination of each dog or cat, shall send one copy of the record of vaccination to the county animal services director, and shall keep a copy for said veterinarian's files. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag or license tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-3-2) 
Sec. 8-54. - Duty to report. 
It shall be the duty of any person and any animal control officer knowing of a rabid animal or of an animal showing rabid symptoms, to immediately report such animal to the animal control shelter and give as much pertinent information as possible. The animal control officer and employees of the animal control shelter shall immediately notify the rabies control officer of the county board of health and assist the same in quarantining such rabid and suspected rabid animals. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-3-3) 
Sec. 8-55. - Quarantine. 
(a)  Where rabies has been found to exist in any animal, or where its existence is suspected, quarantine of all such animals shall be maintained and all such animals shall thereupon be immediately confined to the premises designated by the director in a manner approved by state and county health officials. 
(b)  No animal shall be removed from or brought into a quarantined area or premises without prior approval of the director. 
(c)  A quarantine ordered by the director shall be maintained for such period as the director, in consultation with the county board of health, deems necessary to protect the public health. 
(d)  Quarantined areas or premises and areas where rabid animals or animals suspected of rabies remain at large, should be posted by the director with signs which read: "Rabies - Keep Away from Animals!" Such signs should be conspicuously displayed in a place designated by the director. 
(e)  The owner or custodian of each animal subject to a quarantine invoked by the director under terms of this chapter should be notified of the quarantine. 
(f)  The heads of all animals having had rabies or suspected of having had rabies at the time of death shall be submitted to the director for examination by a veterinarian or other authorized person. When necessary, the director can sacrifice an animal for the purpose of submitting brain tissue for rabies analysis. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-3-4) 
Sec. 8-56. - Enforcement. 
While the county board of health shall have primary responsibility for the control of rabies, to the extent such board of health appoints or consents to any the county animal control officer as a rabies control officer, such person shall be empowered to enforce the rabies vaccination requirement and, for purposes of this chapter, continue to be referred to as an animal control officer. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-3-5) 
Secs. 8-57—8-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT, ADOPTION AND EUTHANASIA 

Sec. 8-86. - Impoundment. 
The county animal control officers are hereby authorized to impound any: 
(1)  Vicious dog or guard dog not confined, chained or muzzled as herein provided; 
(2)  Female dog while in estrus (in heat, in season) not confined within an enclosure which can reasonably be expected to keep away or not attract male dogs; 
(3)  Animal not wearing on its collar the rabies inoculation tag required by the laws of the state; 
(4)  Dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog found in violation of article V of this chapter; and 
(5)  Animal unrestrained in the county. 
The animal shall be confined in the animal shelter or handled as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-4-1) 
Sec. 8-87. - Notification; disposal. 
(a)  Upon impounding any dog or other animal, the animal services board, by and through its director, animal control officer, county code enforcement officer, or other authorized representative, shall cause to be made a prompt and reasonable effort to locate the animal's owner, possessor or custodian. Upon location thereof, notification of impounding shall be sent to this owner, possessor or custodian. For the purpose of this section, it shall be deemed sufficient notice if a notification of impounding is sent by certified mail to the owner named on the most recent rabies certificate on file at the address indicated thereon. 
(b)  If the dog or animal is not claimed by the owner, possessor or custodian thereof within the time hereinafter specified, or if the impounded dog or animal is not wearing a rabies tag and identification tag or microchip identifying the name, address and telephone number of the owner, possessor or custodian, then and in that event, the director or his authorized representative may dispose of the dog or animal as provided herein. Animals deemed in pain and suffering or to be diseased with contagious pathogens may be sacrificed expeditiously. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-4-2) 
Sec. 8-88. - Return/adoption of animals. 
(a)  The personnel of the animal control shelter shall not return to the owner any animal impounded until the owner of said animal has paid the fees and charges assessed, and until the owner has prepaid for a rabies tag as required by state law, county health department rules, and this chapter. 
(b)  If an animal is not claimed within four calendar days of confinement and is subject to adoption by a private citizen, the following fee schedule shall be utilized: 
(1)  A private citizen may adopt any legally adoptable, unclaimed animal by prepaying for a rabies tag as required by state law and by county health department rules; and 
(2)  The citizen shall be given a choice to either prepay for spay/neuter at the time of adoption and receive a certificate for such service from veterinarians who have agreed to perform such service; or 
(3)  The citizen may enter into a written agreement with the county animal control guaranteeing that sterilization will be performed by a licensed veterinarian within 30 days after acquisition of such animal in the case of an adult animal or within 30 days of the sexual maturity of the animal in the case of an immature animal; 
however, in the instance of either subsection (b)(2) or (3) of this section, the citizen is required to provide a signed statement from the licensed veterinarian performing the sterilization required within seven days after such sterilization attesting that such sterilization has been performed. 
(c)  If an animal is not claimed within four business days of confinement and is subject to adoption by a rescue or rehabilitation organization (as defined/approved in section 8-89), the following fee schedule shall be utilized: 
(1)  A rescue or rehabilitation organization (as defined/approved in section 8-89) may adopt any legally adoptable, unclaimed animal by prepaying for a rabies tag or tags as required by state law and by county health department rules; and 
(2)  The rescue or rehabilitation organization may enter into a written agreement with the county animal services board guaranteeing that sterilization will be performed by a licensed veterinarian within 30 days after the acquisition of such animal in the case of an adult animal or within 30 days of the sexual maturity of the animal in the case of an immature animal; 
however, in the instance of either subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section, the rescue or rehabilitation organization is required to provide a signed statement from the licensed veterinarian performing the sterilization required within seven days after such sterilization, attesting that such sterilization has been performed. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-4-3) 
Sec. 8-89. - Euthanasia; fees. 
(a)  Any animal, which has been impounded and is not reclaimed by its owner within four calendar days of the date impounded, shall be subject to adoption or rescue. However, any animal not claimed within seven calendar days may be subject to euthanasia by humane methods by a licensed veterinarian or qualified personnel of the animal shelter. 
(b)  If such animal is adopted by a person other than its owner, it may be released upon the prepayment of the cost of rabies vaccination, tags and/or adoption fees as may be assessed by the animal shelter. 
(c)  Surrendered animals may be made available immediately for adoption or rescue and the fees detailed above shall apply. 
(d)  However, if any such animal is adopted by a group or entity which is noncommercial in nature, is licensed by the state, other licensed/regulated by any other appropriate government authority or is a recognized nonprofit 501(C)3 specializing in the rescue and/or rehabilitation of animals, then said impoundment and/or boarding fees shall not apply, but the cost of rabies tags shall be paid unless proof of rabies vaccination is produced. 
(e)  Licensed/regulated rescue or rehabilitation groups or entities which desire to have the aforementioned impoundment and/or adoption fees waived shall make written application with the animal control department requesting the waiver of fees. This application shall consist of a cover letter containing the request and a copy of the relevant licensing, regulation 501(C)3 status. The county manager, or their designee, shall have authority to determine the validity of requests made under these provisions and shall further have the authority to deny requests made by groups or entities that lack the appropriate documentation. 
(f)  The fees for adoption and ancillary services shall be set by the county manager, upon recommendation of the board. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-4-4) 
Secs. 8-90—8-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DANGEROUS DOGS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 8-107. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
However, see exception to this definition in section 8-119. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the county. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that, without provocation, bites a human being on public or private properly. However, see exception to this definition in section 8-119. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over, under, or around the fence or any gates thereto. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Records of an appropriate authority means: 
(1)  Records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; 
(2)  Records of any county or municipal animal control agency; 
(3)  Records of any county board of health; 
(4)  Records of any federal, state, or local court; or 
(5)  Records of a dog control officer as provided in this article and by the laws of the state. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-5-1) 
Sec. 8-108. - Violation. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog who violated the applicable provisions of section 8-112 or 8-113, or whose dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under section 8-114(a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under section 8-114(a), for the second conviction a fine of not less than $500.00 shall be imposed, and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $750.00 shall be imposed. 
(b)  The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who violated the applicable provisions of section 8-112 or 8-113, or whose potentially dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under section 8-114(b) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under section 8-114(b), for the second conviction a fine of not less than $300.00 shall be imposed, and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $500.00 shall be imposed. 
(c)  No owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be held criminally liable under this article for injuries inflicted by said owner's dog to any human being while on the owner's property. 
(d)  Any animal control officer shall make a report to the county sheriffs department, or other authorized law enforcement agency, all pertinent facts pertaining to an owner of a dangerous dog who knowingly and willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(d) and (e) if the dangerous dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of a human being. In such cases, the animal control officer shall confiscate the owner's dangerous dog and place the same in quarantine and thereafter destroyed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28(e). 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-5-8) 
Sec. 8-109. - Exclusions. 
The terms "dangerous dog" and "potentially dangerous dog," as defined in section 8-107, shall not include the following: 
(1)  A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties; and 
(2)  A dog who inflicts an injury within the meaning of this article if the injury was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-5-2) 
Sec. 8-110. - Investigation; notice; hearing. 
(a)  Any animal control officer, upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to determine the validity of such report and whether the dog should be classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or reclassified as a dangerous dog if previously classified as a potentially dangerous dog. 
(b)  Should the animal control officer determine that a dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, such animal control officer shall classify such dog accordingly. Such officer shall then notify the dog's owner of such classification. Said notice to the owner shall: 
(1)  Be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
(2)  Include a summary of the dog control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)  Be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; if the 15th day falls on a weekend or county legal holiday, then the owner shall have until the next business day to file his request for a hearing; 
(4)  State that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the county animal services board; 
(5)  State that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)  Include a form to request a hearing before the county animal services board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the board. 
(c)  When the animal services board receives a request for a hearing as provided for in subsection (b) of this section, the board shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence. In addition, the board shall receive at the hearing such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(d)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the animal services board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-5-3) 
Sec. 8-111. - Record of hearing. 
The county animal services board shall conduct the hearings provided for in section 8-110. The secretary shall keep minutes of each hearing, board members present, witnesses who present evidence, and the findings of the hearing. The secretary shall maintain the record of the notice or notices mailed to the owners and custodians of animals. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-5-4) 
Sec. 8-112. - Requirements for possession. 
(a)  No one shall have, own, or possess within the county a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued by the county animal services board. 
(b)  An animal control officer employed by the county shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the animal control officer or the animal control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; and 
(2)  The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall receive such sign from the animal control office at the time the owner pays the annual registration fee as required in subsection (d) of this section. Such dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog sign shall conform to the design implemented by the state department of natural resources. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the dog control officer evidence of: 
(1)  A policy of insurance in the amount of $25,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
(2)  A surety bond in the amount of $25,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business is this state payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog. 
(d)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual registration fee at the time the annual certificate of registration is issued. The annual registration fee shall be in the amount of $100.00 for potentially dangerous dog, and $200.00 for dangerous dogs. Certificates of registration shall be renewed in the month of the initial registration. 
(e)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify an animal control officer employed by the county if the owner is moving to, from, or within the county. 
(f)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the county shall register such dog within 30 days of becoming a new resident. 
(g)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves to the county from any other county within the state shall register such dog as required by this article within ten days after becoming a resident of the county. 
(h)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if such dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-5-5) 
Sec. 8-113. - Restrictions on permitting outside of proper enclosure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-5-6) 
Sec. 8-114. - Confiscation; grounds; disposition. 
(a)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by an animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or any other person so authorized if: 
(1)  The owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or surety bond required in section 8-112(c); 
(2)  The dog is not validly registered; 
(3)  The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(4)  The dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 8-113(a). 
(b)  A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if: 
(1)  The dog is not validly registered; 
(2)  The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(3)  The dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 8-113(b). 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provision of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article as determined by the animal control officer and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs of $200.00. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog is confiscated, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-5-7) 
Secs. 8-115—8-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 8-142. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions and violations of this chapter may be enforced by the following persons: 
(1)  The county animal services director; 
(1)  The county animal control officer; 
(1)  The county code enforcement officer; 
(1)  Any certified law enforcement officer having jurisdiction within the unincorporated portion of the county; and 
(1)  With the consent of the county attorney, any other persons so designated by the board. 
(b)  Violators may be issued citations as provided by O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62 and 15-10-63, and upon citations approved by the county attorney. Violations of this chapter may be prosecuted by the county attorney and/or any person employed by the county as the director, animal control officer, code enforcement officer, any other persons so designated by the board upon approval of the county attorney, and any certified law enforcement officer. Citations for violations shall be filed in the county magistrate court, and in such other courts as permitted by law. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-6-1) 
Sec. 8-143. - Right of officer to defend himself; interference; right of entry. 
(a)  In the performance of his duties pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, any animal control officer or any law enforcement officer assisting in enforcing this chapter may use such force as is necessary to defend themselves from attack by an animal; provided, however, that all efforts should be made to impound an animal without undue harm, injury or danger to the animal, the officer, or to other persons and property. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest an animal control officer or other authorized officer in the performance of their duty, or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control department. 
(c)  Any animal control officer is hereby authorized to enter upon any property for the purpose of investigating alleged violations of this chapter, and/or to seize and impound any animal found to be in violation of chapter. Animal control officers may use any appropriate means necessary to remove an animal in apparent distress which is a closed vehicle. The operator of the said vehicle may be charged with cruelty to animals. Any animal control officer rescuing an animal shall not be liable for damage to private property caused by such officer's reasonable efforts in rescuing any animal in distress. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-6-2) 
Sec. 8-144. - Fine; imprisonment. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six months; provided, however, the judge shall probate not less than 120 days of any sentence imposed, except as otherwise provided by general law. 
(b)  In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 60 days in a county jail. 
(c)  The court may suspend the service imposed in the case upon such terms and conditions as it may prescribe for the payment of the fine, for performance of community service in lieu of a fine or incarceration, for the payment of restitution to a victim, or other condition relating to the underlying offense. Service of the sentence, when so suspended, shall not begin unless and until ordered by the court having jurisdiction thereof, after a hearing as in cases of revocation of probated sentences, because of the failure or refusal of the defendant to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of a sentence was suspended. Service of all or any part of any sentence suspended upon such conditions may be ordered to commence by the trial court any time before the expiration of one year from the date of the sentence after a hearing and a finding by the court that the defendant has failed or refused to comply with the terms and conditions upon which service of the sentence was imposed. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-6-3) 
Sec. 8-145. - No liability for damages. 
Consistent with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-30, it is the intent of the county board of commissioners that the owner of a dangerous dog and/or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for injury, death, and damages caused by such dogs. Under no circumstances shall the county board of commissioners, any animal services board member, nor any employee of the county be liable for the act or omission to act in apprehending, seizing, apprehending, quarantine, impounding, or proving care for any dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. The immunities and protections provided by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-30 are incorporated herein by reference to such state statute and shall extend to benefit and protect the county, its agents, employees, and boards. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-6-4) 
Sec. 8-146. - Disclosure of vaccination records. 
Rabies vaccination records shall be subject to inspection by the director and animal control officers for determination of the ownership and mailing address of the owners of animals. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-6-5) 
Secs. 8-147—8-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FEES AND REVENUES 

Sec. 8-176. - Fees. 
(a)  All fees and revenues received by the county animal services board shall be the property of the county and shall be accounted for upon receipts and disbursement ledgers. 
(b)  Proceeds from the sale of licenses, impoundment fees, shelter fees, and other fees shall be applied to the annual operating budget of county animal services for the control of rabies, animal control, enforcement and the operation of the animal shelter. 
(c)  A license fee of $50.00 shall be charged for the certificate of registration as required by state law for a potentially dangerous dog. 
(d)  A license fee of $100.00 shall be charged for a certificate of registration as required by state law for a dangerous dog. 
(e)  After the owner has prepaid for a rabies tag, and become fully compliant with state law, county health department rules, and this chapter, animal control officers shall release any impounded animal upon the owner paying the following fees: 
(1)  Upon capture of a dog or cat, but prior to transporting the dog or cat to the animal control shelter: $15.00. 
(2)  Following capture and transport of the dog or cat to the animal shelter: $30.00. 
(3)  Excluding the day of capture and impoundment, the owner shall also pay the sum of $10.00 per day board for each day of confinement. For the purposes of this article, any portion of a day, except the actual day of capture, shall constitute a full day of confinement. 
(4)  For all other animals impounded other than dogs or cats, the owner or custodian shall be charged the base fee in this section, plus actual expenses of care and boarding. 
(Ord. of 4-8-2008, § 1-7-1) 
Secs. 8-177—8-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - McINTOSH COUNTY ANIMAL SHELTER ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 11, 2011, amended the Code by the addition of § 8-177, arts. I—VII; however, at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been redesignated as art. VIII, §§ 8-201—8-207, for purposes of maintaining Code format and allowing future expansion of the Code. 

Sec. 8-201. - Creation; authorization. 
(a)  McIntosh County Animal Shelter Advisory Board created. This organization shall be the animal shelter advisory board, hereafter referred to as the board. 
(b)  Authorization. The board exists by the authority of the McIntosh County Commission and may be modified or abolished by action of the county commission. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011, art. I) 
Sec. 8-202. - Purpose and function. 
(a)  Purpose. The board is an advisory board to the county commission, appointed by the county commission, in support of the McIntosh County Animal Shelter (hereafter referred to as animal shelter). 
(b)  Function. For this purpose, the board shall: 
(1)  Assist in the development of animal shelter's mission and policies; 
(2)  Review and recommend long range planning and budgeting for animal shelter services; 
(3)  Provide research, guidance, advice, sponsor reports and contribute information relevant to animal shelter's program development, policies and procedures; 
(4)  Serve as liaisons to the community, increasing support and awareness of animal shelter services and assisting in the resolution of citizen concerns, issues, and grievances. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011, art. II) 
Sec. 8-203. - Membership. 
(a)  Members. The board shall be comprised of seven members appointed by the county commission. 
(b)  Eligibility. 
(1)  Members of the board shall be county or city residents. 
(2)  The county may choose to appoint members of Hart to the board. 
(c)  Appointments. 
(1)  Term of office shall be for two years. Members shall not serve more than two consecutive terms. 
(2)  Appointments to the board shall be made by the county commission, who will receive letters of interest from those wishing to apply. 
(d)  Vacancies/removal. 
(1)  A member's position shall become vacant when the board chair determines that: 
a.  A member is absent from 33 percent of the regularly scheduled meetings in a given calendar year, regardless if such absence is excused or unexcused. All absences will be duly recorded in the meeting minutes. Absences from emergency or special called meetings will not be recorded against a member in calculating the percent of absences. Special exceptions on the removal of members for absences may be made by the board chair when the absences are due to health or time-limited extenuating circumstances and the absences do not affect the ability of the board to maintain a quorum; or 
b.  A member's term expires; or 
c.  A member resigns. 
(2)  The board chair shall immediately, upon receipt of a resignation or determination of a vacancy, notify the county clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011, art. III) 
Sec. 8-204. - Organization. 
(a)  Officers. 
(1)  The board shall elect a chair, vice-chair, and a secretary. 
(2)  Officers shall be elected for a term of one year at the first meeting of the year. Vacancies shall be filled by a majority vote of the board at which a quorum is present. 
(3)  The chair, or, in his absence, the vice-chair, shall preside at all meetings of the board. 
(b)  Duties. 
(1)  Chair. 
a.  The chair shall preside at all meetings of the board, call special meetings, draft and send correspondence and otherwise perform all duties incident to the office of the chair and all other duties which may be prescribed by the board. 
b.  The chair shall appoint chairs of all committees, standing and special. 
c.  It is the chair's responsibility to ensure compliance with the policies and procedures manual. The chair will notify members of removal from board for noncompliance with the policies and procedures manual's requirements. Specific questions of conflict of interest will be addressed by the county attorney or his designee. 
d.  The chair shall immediately, upon receipt of a resignation or when advised of a vacancy, notify the county clerk. 
e.  The chair may approve special exceptions on the removal of members for absences at regularly scheduled meetings when the absences are due to health or time-limited extenuating circumstances and the absences do not affect the ability of the board to maintain a quorum. 
f.  The chair may attend county commission meetings as deemed appropriate by the board. 
(2)  Vice-chair. The vice-chair shall perform the duties in the absence of the chair and will also perform such duties as shall be assigned by the chair. 
(c)  Quorum. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum to hold a meeting or take any action, including election of officers. The officers of the board shall be elected by a majority of the board members present, provided a quorum is present at such meeting. 
(d)  Voting rights. 
(1)  Each member shall be entitled to one vote and shall cast that vote on each item submitted. Proxy votes and absentee ballots shall not be permitted. Members shall only abstain from a vote when there is a valid conflict of interest addressed to the board. 
(2)  Board members shall avoid conflicts of interest while serving on the board. 
a.  Conflicts of interest occur when a member makes a decision which may affect their personal financial interests. Therefore, members are prohibited from participating in the decision making on issues which inures to his or her special private gain or loss, or which would insure the special private gain or loss, or which would insure the special gain or loss of any principal by whom he or she is retained. 
b.  Board members are required to publicly disclose their conflicting financial interests, since the disclosure process reminds all members of their obligation to put the public interest above personal considerations. If a conflict is unknown or not disclosed prior to the meeting, the board member must disclose the conflict at the meeting when the conflict becomes known. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011, art. IV) 
Sec. 8-205. - Board operations. 
(a)  The board shall have no authority other than as stipulated by the policies and procedures manual and approved by the county commission. 
(b)  The board will meet routinely based upon an adopted meeting schedule, at least quarterly, and will notice all meeting in the legal organ. 
(c)  All meetings will be open to the public. For advertising purposes, the board will provide to the county clerk a schedule of meetings. 
(d)  Special meetings of the board may be called by the chair, or at the request of a majority of board members. The time and place of any special meeting shall be designated by the chair or the board members calling the meeting. The purpose of the meeting will be stated to the board members, and except in cases of emergency, at least three days' notice shall be given each member of a special meeting. Special meetings may be held by the utilization of telephone conference or other similar telecommunication device. The procedures applicable to regular meetings shall govern the conduct of special meetings. 
(e)  All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order. 
(f)  The board may establish committees, as needed, composed of board members and non-board members, for the purpose of supporting the board. 
(1)  Standing committees, intended to perform various functions to be determined by the board, serve year-round. 
(2)  Ad hoc committees may be established for a specific short-term goal and then cease to exist. 
(3)  Committees will submit a written report to the board chair at the end of the assigned project. 
(4)  The board chair shall appoint each committee's chair. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011, art. V) 
Sec. 8-206. - Staff services. 
(a)  The animal shelter department shall consist of staff appointed by the county manager or his or her designee and shall assist the board and the county manager in the following manner: 
(1)  Maintaining the minutes of the meetings; preparing and distributing appropriate information related to the meeting agenda. 
(2)  Informing the board of events, activities, policies, programs, etc., occurring within the scope of the board's function and informing the board of all county commission or department requests for information or assistance. 
(3)  Ensuring the county clerk is informed of all vacancies, expired terms, changes in officers, or any other changes to the board. 
(4)  The responsibility for continuous flow of information to the county manager, and when appropriate, to the county commission, including providing reports, actions, and recommendations of the board. 
(b)  A formal, standard orientation program will be provided by staff to all new members; the program will address, but not be limited to, the policies and procedures manual, and conflict of interest. Staff will ensure responses are provided to any concerns the new members may have regarding the duties and responsibilities of the board and the members. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011, art. VI) 
Sec. 8-207. - Policies and procedures manual and effective date. 
Any changes to the policies and procedures manual will be reviewed and approved by the board and the county commission and filed first with the office of the county manager for review. 
(1)  The policies and procedures manual shall become effective upon adoption by the county commission and the board. 
(2)  The policies and procedures manual may be amended at any regular meeting by a majority vote of the membership provided that the amendment(s) has (have) been submitted in writing at the previous regular meeting and provided that they are subsequently approved by the county commission. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011, art. VII) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, §§ II, III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 10-19. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be guilty of an offense. 
(b)  A conviction of a violations of any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall automatically suspend the business license of the offending contractor. The license may be reinstated by an application to the county upon a showing of good cause. 
Sec. 10-20. - Adopted. 
The county adopts by reference the requirements of the International Building Code (IBC), 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected to or attached to such buildings or structures. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International Residential Code (IRC), 2012 edition. New editions of both the IBC and the IRC are promulgated by the ICC every three years and will be automatically adopted by the county upon publication. A copy of each will be maintained in the office of the building inspector and will be available for review by the public during normal business hours. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2013) 
Sec. 10-21. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the construction or erection of any building, whether commercial, business or residential unless such construction is accomplished in strict compliance with the various construction codes adopted by this article. 
Sec. 10-22. - Enforcement. 
When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in the various construction codes adopted by this article, the designated county official shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the enforcement of such codes. 
Sec. 10-23. - Permit and inspection fees. 
Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be as established by resolution of the board of commissioners, from time to time, and available for public examination in the office of the county clerk. 
Secs. 10-24—10-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - E911 ADDRESS 

Sec. 10-30. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved address sign refers to a sign that is clearly visible from the nearest public street or roadway and contains the numerical designation given the residence. Nothing contained herein shall serve to prevent the placement of such a sign on a residence or other building. 
Board means the board of commissioners of the county, which is a political subdivision of the state. 
Citation authority means the following persons: 
(1)  The building inspector and deputy building inspectors of the county; 
(2)  Any code enforcement officer of the county; and 
(3)  The sheriff of the county and any of his deputies. 
County attorney means the person appointed by the board to represent the county. 
Home means any dwelling place, whether occupied or vacant, and includes any site-built dwelling, mobile home, manufactured home, and any other type of structure used in whole or in part as a dwelling. 
Magistrate court means the magistrate court of the county. 
Owner means each and every person or an entity, other than a lienholder or security interest holder, having any interest in a home, place of business, or structure. For corporations, limited liability companies, and other entities formed under the laws of any state, the term "owner" refers to each corporate officer, manager, or partner listed in the records of the secretary of state of the state where the entity was formed. Where a home, place of business, or other structure is owned by an estate, the term "owner" refers to the executors and administrators of such estate. 
Place of business means any structure whatsoever, used in whole or in part to conduct any commercial, industrial, or other activity. 
Proper address numbers means the property owner or tenant affixing the correct numbers to correctly identify the address of any home, place of business, or other structure, which numbers and location shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Mailboxes. A mailbox which is located in front of the home, place of business, or structure and on the same side of the roadway, shall have numbers at least two inches in height, which numbers shall be of contrasting color to the color of the mailbox and located on both sides of the mailbox so as to be visible from either direction of travel. 
(2)  House numbers. Numbers may be placed on the exterior wall of any house, place of business, or structure, so long as the address numbers placed on such house, place of business, or structure: 
a.  Are clearly visible from the roadway; 
b.  Are located within 150 feet of the roadway; 
c.  Are of contrasting color to the color of the exterior wall to which the numbers are affixed; and 
d.  Are at least three inches in height. 
(3)  Number post or sign. Numbers may be placed on any other sign or post so long as: 
a.  The address number sign or post is placed on the owner's (tenant's) property, immediately adjacent to the driveway leading to the home, place of business, or other structure; 
b.  There exists an unobstructed view from the nearest roadway; 
c.  The numbers are of contrasting color to the color of the post or sign background; and 
d.  Such numbers are at least three inches in height. 
Structure means any manner of construction with a roof and walls, regardless of the material from which it is constructed. 
Tenant means any person or entity which leases a home, place of business, or structure. For corporations, limited liability companies, and other entities formed under the laws of any state, the term "tenant" refers to each corporate officer, manager, or partner listed in the records of the secretary of state of the state where the entity was formed. 
(Ord. of 3-9-2010, § 3) 
Sec. 10-31. - Prohibited conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant to fail to properly identify and number as required herein their home, place of business or other structure within the unincorporated areas of the county, according to this article. 
(Ord. of 3-9-2010, § 4(1)) 
Sec. 10-32. - Posting required. 
Every owner and tenant of a home, place of business, or structure shall cause an approved address sign or proper address numbers to be properly posted at each home, place of business and structure located in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-9-2010, § 4(2)) 
Sec. 10-33. - Official numbers. 
The address sign required herein shall indicate the correct official address street numbers (or alphanumeric address) of each home, place of business, or structure. 
(Ord. of 3-9-2010, § 4(3)) 
Sec. 10-34. - Display. 
(a)  Display and location of approved address sign. The approved address sign with official numbers shall be placed on the exterior of the owner's and tenant's property, at a location which is: 
(1)  On the owner's (tenant's) property; 
(2)  Immediately adjacent to the driveway leading to the home, place of business, or other structure; and 
(3)  Unobstructed from view from the nearest public roadway. 
(b)  Display of proper address numbers. Should the owner or tenant opt to comply with this article by use of identifying numbers other than an approved address sign, then such numbers shall be posted as required in the definition section for the term "proper address numbers." 
(Ord. of 3-9-2010, § 4(4)) 
Sec. 10-35. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by issuance of a citation or accusation which complies with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63. This article shall be enforced with or without a prosecuting attorney (which is the county attorney). 
(Ord. of 3-9-2010, § 4(5)) 
Sec. 10-36. - Citation authority. 
The county agents who may issue citations for violations of this article are: 
(1)  The building inspector and deputy building inspectors of the county; 
(2)  Any code enforcement officer of the county; and 
(3)  The sheriff of the county and his deputies. 
(Ord. of 3-9-2010, § 4(6)) 
Sec. 10-37. - Prosecution. 
(a)  This article may be prosecuted in the magistrate court, pursuant to article 4, title 15, chapter 10 (O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.). 
(b)  Violations of this article may be prosecuted by the citation authority, with or without the assistance of the county attorney, who may serve as the prosecuting attorney. 
(Ord. of 3-9-2010, § 4(7), (8)) 
Sec. 10-38. - Penalties. 
(a)  Every owner or tenant convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of up to $50.00 or one day in jail, or both, together with the terms and conditions of probation as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60. However, any term of imprisonment shall be held in abeyance for a period of 45 days. Any person found to have violated this article shall be entitled to purge himself of any imposed period of incarceration if, within 45 days of the imposition of any sentence, such person (i) pays the fine in full and (ii) purchases and installs an approved address sign as required by this article. The court presiding over any violation of this article shall suspended any ordered period of incarceration if the violator of this article shall provide satisfactory proof that such person has purchased and installed an approved address sign and paid any fine imposed in full. 
(b)  Each day that any owner or tenant is in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-9-2010, §§ 4(9), 5) 
Sec. 10-39. - Cost of approved address sign. 
Each owner and tenant of a home, place of business, or other structure in the county shall purchase an approved address sign, in the amount established by the board or county manager. 
(Ord. of 3-9-2010, § 6) 
Sec. 10-40. - Dismissal of citation. 
Once a citation or accusation has been served upon an owner or tenant for a violation of this article, said owner or tenant shall be entitled to have the citation or accusation dismissed if such owner or tenant does all of the following before the appearance date and time in the magistrate court: 
(1)  The owner or tenant produces satisfactory proof that an approved address sign was purchased and has been properly installed at the location for which the citation or accusation was issued; or the owner or tenant produces satisfactory proof that proper address numbers have been installed pursuant to the definition of the term "proper address numbers" in section 10-30 and section 10-34; and 
(2)  The owner or tenant pays court costs in the amount of $100.00. 
(Ord. of 3-9-2010, § 7) 
Secs. 10-41—10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 10-51. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of McIntosh County, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of unincorporated McIntosh County Georgia are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(d)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2015(1)) 
Sec. 10-52. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of unincorporated McIntosh County, Georgia. 
(b)  Basis for area of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated June 1, 1984 (i.e., most current FIRM map), with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS, supporting data and any revision thereto, for McIntosh County, Georgia ("unincorporated county"), dated June 1, 1984 (i.e., most current FIRM map of county), are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the building inspector's office at 100 Madison Street SE, Darien, Georgia 31305. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article PRIOR to the commencement of any development activities. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of McIntosh County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 per offense or imprisoned in accordance with Georgia law of up to one year, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2015(1)) 
Sec. 10-53. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The floodplain manager or qualified staff is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the floodplain manager on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 10-54(b)(2) and (d)(2); 
d.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of section 10-54(e)(5); and 
e.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Where a structure is subject to the provisions applicable to coastal high hazards areas, after placement of the lowest horizontal structural members. Any regulatory floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The floodplain manager shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the floodplain manager shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, and the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 10-52(b), then the floodplain manager shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of section 10-54. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 10-54(b)(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 10-54(b)(2) and (d)(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the floodplain manager shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 10-53(b)(1)c. and section 10-54(b)(2) or (d)(2). 
(8)  Obtain design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of section 10-54(f). 
(9)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(10)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(11)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(12)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the floodplain manager shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(13)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the floodplain manager and shall be open for public inspection. 
(14)  If a portion of the structure is located in a SFHA, the entire structure shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(15)  If a structure is located in multiple flood zones and/or BFEs, the entire structure shall comply with the most restrictive requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2015(1)) 
Sec. 10-54. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Elevated buildings: All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. (Not applicable in coastal high hazard areas.) 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, A (with engineered or estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and substantial improvement of any structure including manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 10-54(a)(4), elevated buildings. 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and the substantial improvement of any structure including manufactured housing, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. (Not applicable for coastal high hazard areas.) The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 10-53(c)(6). An operation and maintenance plan shall be prepared to assure the continued viability of floodproofing measures. 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 48 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See section 10-54(a)(6).) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of section 10-54(b)(3)a.—c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 10-52(b) are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting analysis, technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if section 10-54(b)(4)a. above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 10-54. 
(c)  Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 10-52(b), where streams exist but no base flood data and floodway data have been provided (A-zones), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  For subdivisions and developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(2)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 10-52(b), then the floodplain manager shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 10-54. Only if data is not available from these sources, the provisions of section 10-54(c)(2) and (3) shall apply. 
(3)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(4)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 10-54(a)(4), elevated buildings. 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The floodplain manager shall certify the lowest floor elevation and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(d)  Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations and without designated floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 10-52(b), where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 10-54(b). 
(e)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). Areas of special flood hazard established in section 10-52(b), may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above as high as the flood depth number specified (in feet) on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 10-54(a)(4), elevated buildings. 
The floodplain manager shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction and the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified flood level in section 10-54(e) plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 10-53(b)(1)c. and (b)(2). An O&M plan shall be submitted to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Coastal high hazard areas (V-Zones and Coastal A (LiMWA)). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 10-52(b) are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas (V-Zones). These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave action and storm surge, therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide; 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be elevated on piles, columns, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water so that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal structural member (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation level. All space below the lowest supporting member shall remain free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls. Open wood lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action and in accordance with section 10-54(f)(6); 
(3)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be securely anchored on pilings, or columns; 
(4)  All pile and column foundations and the structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the combined effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components, both nonstructural and structural. Water loading values shall equal or exceed those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values shall be in accordance with the most current edition of the Georgia State adopted Standard Building Code. 
(5)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in section 10-54(e)(2), (3) and (4). 
(6)  All space below the lowest horizontal supporting member must remain free of obstruction. Open wood lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action without causing structural damage to the supporting foundation or elevated portion of the structure. The following design specifications are allowed: 
a.  No solid walls shall be allowed; 
b.  Material shall consist of open wood lattice or insect screening only; and 
c.  If aesthetic open wood lattice work or screening is utilized, any enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. 
(7)  Prior to construction, plans for any structures having open wood latticework or insect screening must be submitted to the floodplain manager for approval. 
(8)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to any structure shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor except with open wood latticework or decorative screening, as provided in this section. 
(9)  There shall be no fill used as structural support, or to elevate areas used for septic tank drain fields. Limited non-compacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge (thereby rendering the building free of obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. The floodplain manager may approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect or soil scientist, which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully evaluated: 
a.  Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction; 
b.  Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave deflection to adjacent properties; and 
c.  Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping. 
(10)  There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, which would increase potential flood damage. 
(11)  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured homes park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of section 10-54(b)(3) are met. 
(g)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(h)  Standard for critical facilities. 
(1)  No new critical facilities and substantial improved critical facilities shall be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(3)  Hazardous materials shall not be stored in the SFHA. The following materials are prohibited in the SFHA. Acetone, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide, carbon disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, prussic, magnesium, nitric acid, oxides of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, sodium and sulfur. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2015(1)) 
Sec. 10-55. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The planning and zoning board as established by ordinance of the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the community development department in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning board may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of McIntosh County, as provided in accordance with Georgia state law. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning and zoning board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The floodplain manager shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning and zoning board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2015(1)) 
Sec. 10-56. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain manager's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 10-52(b). 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means any portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building. See definition for "structure." 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials. 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events. 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, or piers adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during the base flood event. 
Existing construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced before June 1, 1984 (the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted for that community). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 1, 1984 (i.e., the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge and culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced after June 1, 1984 (the effective date of the initial FIRM), and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced after June 1, 1984 (the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community), and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 1, 1984 (i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2015(1)) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Coin-operated machines and vending machines. 
(a)  No person, firm or legal entity shall have upon his premises for the use of the public any coin-operated vending or amusement machine of any kind, character or description unless and until said entity shall obtain a master license as issued by the state and a permit for each such machine which shall be thereupon affixed to said machine in such manner that it is readily visible to inspection. 
(b)  Any person, firm or entity who violates the provisions hereof shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. 
(Res. of 2-14-1959; Ord. of 9-14-1982(1), §§ 1—3) 
State Law reference— State regulation of coin operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 
Sec. 12-2. - Peddlers and solicitors. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "peddler" includes any person, whether a resident of this county or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden produce, farm products or provisions who offers and exposes the same for sale, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance. 
(b)  For each license year, or any fractional part thereof, until changed or modified by action of the board of commissioners, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each peddler doing business within the county, without the corporate limits of the City of Darien, a tax or license of $25.00 per day. Said license shall be presented upon request and shall clearly indicate the days in which the holder is licensed to do business within the geographic boundaries of McIntosh County. 
(c)  Application for said license shall be made to the clerk of the board of county commissioners. Such application shall set forth such information as may be required by the commission. The applicant shall give his complete identification, his signature, the name of his employer, the nature of the products or services in which he is interested, the names of the manufacturers or such products, or the organization which he is representing, and the proposed method of operation in the county. 
(d)  The county sheriff shall be informed of these actions, and instructed to enforce the same as provided by law. 
(Res. of 6-1-1937; Res. of 3-6-1956, §§ 1—3) 
Secs. 12-3—12-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC AMUSEMENT AND ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES 

Sec. 12-25. - License—Required. 
Every person, firm or corporation who shall maintain, operate or establish any public dance hall, hall, boxing or wrestling arena, tourist camp, barbecue stand or place of public amusement or entertainment in the county outside of the corporate limits of the municipalities that may now or hereafter exist in the county shall make application for a license for each of such businesses as such person, firm or corporation seeks to maintain, operate or establish. Such application shall be made in writing upon a form to be provided by the clerk of the commissioners, and shall give all of the information requested by such form and shall be under the oath of the applicant or a duly authorized officer of the applicant, and the same shall be filed with the said clerk and thereafter be submitted to the commissioners for their consideration. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1937, § 1) 
Sec. 12-26. - Same—Issuance. 
If, in the discretion of the commissioners, it is found that the establishment, maintenance or operation of such business will not be injurious to the public good they shall order that a license be issued therefor upon the payment of the license fee provided in section 12-31. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1937, § 2) 
Sec. 12-27. - Same—Revocation. 
Such license so issued shall be held by the licensee at the pleasure of the commissioners and may be revoked by them at any time when in their opinion it is to the public interest or because of any violation by the licensee of the provisions of any ordinance of the county or of any state or federal law; and in no event shall such license extend beyond January 1 of any year. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1937, § 3) 
Sec. 12-28. - Same—Renewal. 
Prior to the expiration of any license so granted, any person, firm or corporation that shall expect to operate any of the said businesses beyond the time of expiration of the said license, shall make application in writing as aforesaid for the issuance of a new license therefor, which application shall be submitted to the commissioners for their action as aforesaid. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1937, § 4) 
Sec. 12-29. - Compliance with county board of health. 
In accepting such license the person, firm or corporation to which it is issued shall be held to have agreed that he will be bound and abide by all of the regulations of the county board of health pertinent to such businesses, and that such business will be conducted at all times in accordance with the laws of this state. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1937, § 5) 
Sec. 12-30. - Loud noises prohibited. 
Any licensee who shall permit any dancing, playing of musical instruments or noise upon or about his premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday night to 12:00 midnight on Sunday night shall immediately forfeit his license, except that on occasions in their discretion the commissioners may grant permission for musical concerts upon said premises between said times. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1937, § 6) 
Sec. 12-31. - Fee. 
A license fee or occupational tax is hereby levied upon each such place of business for which a license may be granted, and such fee or tax shall be paid to the clerk of the commissioners. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the board of commissioners from time to time, and available for public examination in the office of the county clerk. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1937, § 7) 
Secs. 12-32—12-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TIMBER HARVESTING 

Sec. 12-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building inspector means the building inspector of McIntosh County. 
Chief appraiser means the chief appraiser of the office of tax assessor of McIntosh County. 
Harvester means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, limited liability company, and any other entity or organization of any character, and the agents and employees thereof carrying out harvesting activities contemplated by this article. 
Harvesting means those activities contemplated by this article, including, without limitation, the cutting, loading and transporting of timber. 
Road superintendent means the superintendent of roads of McIntosh County. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 1) 
Sec. 12-51. - Penalty. 
(a)  Each violation of the requirements of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the county jail for up to six months, or both. Each day any violation under this article continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  The building inspector, the board's designated agent, and the chief assessor shall have a right to issue a cease and desist order for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 8) 
Sec. 12-52. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the desire of the county, to adopt a reporting requirement for the start up of timber harvest activity is to allow for compliance with the notices to appropriate public officials to allow taxation of timber harvesting at a fair market value. 
(b)  This article, will allow for the monitoring of timber harvest activities so as to allow efficient collection of the timber harvest tax. 
(c)  This article will also provide for the safety of the traveling public from some associated dangers inherent in timber harvesting. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), intro.) 
Sec. 12-53. - Bond required. 
(a)  Any person or firm engaged in the cutting, removing or harvesting of standing timber in the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, wood chips or other wood product to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state shall deliver to the building inspector or to the board's other designated agent (as determined by the county manager) a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state, protecting the county, against any damage caused by any harvester in the amount of $5,000.00. At the option of the harvester seeking a permit to harvest timber, such harvester may in lieu of such bond, may deliver a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, approved by the county manager, as such letter of credit is defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the amount of $5,000.00. 
(b)  The surety bond and/or irrevocable letter of credit required under this section shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is delivered. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 2) 
Sec. 12-54. - Notice required. 
(a)  No person or firm shall begin to cut, remove or harvest standing timber in the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, wood chips, or other wood product to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state without first: 
(1)  Providing notice of such harvesting operations to the building inspector, or other designated agent; and 
(2)  Obtaining and displaying in accordance with this article a timber harvest permit. Such permit shall be properly displayed prior to the start of any harvest activity. 
(b)  Prior written notice shall be required of harvester for each separate tract to be harvested. The harvester's written notice and application for a timber harvest permit shall consist of the following: 
(1)  A tax map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, the points of ingress and egress to such tract from each public road; 
(2)  A statement as to whether the timber will be harvested pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale or owner harvest for purpose of determining ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5. All harvest activities, regardless of the taxing status of the underlying land, requires that a timber harvest permit be obtained and all reporting requirements met. Ad valorem taxing status will be determined by the board of tax assessors; 
(3)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber. 
(c)  Notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via facsimile or such other means as approved by the building inspector, or by mail to the building inspector, providing that such notice shall be mailed sufficiently in advance to assure receipt by the building inspector, receipt of bond, and issuance of the permit, all of which must be completed prior to the commencement of the harvesting operation. 
(d)  The failure of any harvester to provide the surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit required under section 12-53, shall render the notice required in this section ineffective. 
(e)  Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within the county upon receipt of the bond by the county commission or its designated agent and, if applicable, compliance with the requirements of section 12-53 and until such time as the harvester giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for the purposes of such notice shall be reported to the building inspector or the board's designated agent within one business day after such change. 
(f)  Upon receipt of the completed application for a timber harvest permit, the building inspector's office shall immediately forward a completed copy of the timber harvest permit to the county tax commissioner, chief appraiser, and the road superintendent. 
(g)  At the completion of harvesting of the timber tracts identified in the timber harvest permit application, the harvester shall give written notification of said completion and the number of tons harvested by product type to the county tax commissioner's office and to the chief appraiser. The chief appraiser will then notify the building inspector that the specified timber harvest permit has reported completion of the harvest and that the permit is no longer valid. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 3) 
Sec. 12-55. - Driveways. 
(a)  Any harvester engaged in the cutting, removing or harvesting of standing timber in the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, wood chips, or other wood product to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state shall create and/or maintain a driveway in compliance with the state department of transportation standards. 
(b)  Culverts shall be installed at temporary entrances at the expense of the harvester, to facilitate proper drainage flow. Exceptions may be granted by the road superintendent, in his sole discretion. Said driveway shall be properly maintained so as to avoid interfering with the county storm water drainage system so long as timber harvesting operations are ongoing. 
(c)  Gravel shall be installed by the harvester, at harvester's sole expense, in compliance with the state department of transportation standards, for a distance of at least 50 feet and for the entire width of the access road leading to the paved public road. 
(d)  Upon termination of the timber harvesting operation, the harvester shall remove the temporary driveway, including the culvert, and restore the ditch and its banks to their original condition as they existed before the harvesting operation began. The harvester shall notify the road superintendent when the timber harvesting has been terminated and restoration of the ditch and banks has been completed. The surety bond as required in section 12-53 shall not be released until the harvester has satisfactorily restored the ditch and banks to their original condition as approved by the road superintendent. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 4) 
Sec. 12-56. - Access sites. 
(a)  County roads and ditches, at the access sites, shall be kept serviceable and clear of all debris and excess mud as determined by the road superintendent to ensure safe passing of emergency vehicles, school buses, mail carriers and the public at all times. 
(b)  The harvester shall not load pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, wood chips, or other wood product on the shoulders of any paved right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 5) 
Sec. 12-57. - Harvesting or loading timber. 
All harvesting, loading or unloading of timber shall be conducted at a loading site off the county rights-of-way and behind the established ditch line of county roads. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 6) 
Sec. 12-58. - Warning signs. 
Any firm, company or person harvesting at a location off of county roads shall post warning signs at least 500 feet on both sides of the driveway in order to adequately warn oncoming traffic of persons, vehicles, equipment or machinery entering the roadway. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 7) 
Sec. 12-59. - Enforcement. 
Jurisdiction for the enforcement of this article shall be in the magistrate court of the county. This article shall be enforced by the building inspector, the board's designated agent, the chief appraiser, and any law enforcement officers of the county by citation requiring appearance in magistrate court. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 9) 
Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES 

Sec. 14-1. - Cemetery protection. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-72-10, the cemetery disturbance permit application fee is set at $2,500.00 and must be presented with the application before consideration of the application is made. Such fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(Ord. of 7-13-1993) 
Chapter 15 - COURTS 
(RESERVED) 
Chapter 16 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Restrictions on operation, installation, maintenance, etc., of electronic security systems by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 provides for local organizations and emergency powers for use in emergencies and disasters, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 

Sec. 16-70. - Georgia Mutual Aid Resource Pact. 
(a)  The county resolves to join the Georgia Mutual Aid Resource Pact. 
(b)  The chair of the county board of commissioners or his designee is designated to act on behalf of the county on all matters relating to the activities and functions of the Georgia Mutual Aid Resource Pact. 
(c)  The county may withdraw its membership by delivering written notice to an officer of the Pact giving 90 days' notice. 
(d)  There shall be no liability imposed on the county for any action or failure to act as a party of the Georgia Mutual Aid Resource Pact. (Ga. L. 25-6-5) 
(Res. of 6-11-2002(2)) 
Sec. 16-71. - Adoption of NIMS. 
The county board of commissioners hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in the county train and exercise and use these systems in their response operation. 
(Res. of 11-15-2005) 
Chapter 17 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-1, §§ 1—7, adopted March 12, 2013, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as ch. 1. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, and for purposes of maintaining Code format, the provisions have been redesignated as ch. 17 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 17-1. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, home land security, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2013-1, § 1, 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 17-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the county and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the board of commissioners may declare a local emergency for McIntosh County. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (c) of this Code section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the chairman may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the county to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the chairman finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the chairman shall execute and file with the county administrator a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the chairman. The board of commissioners may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(b)  Effect of declaration of emergency. 
(1)  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the chairman shall automatically activate the county emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
a.  The McIntosh County Emergency Management Agency (LCEMA) Director shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred upon the emergency management agency, including implementation of the emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency response of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disasters sites. 
b.  In responding and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the director or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting sites involved with emergency management functions. The director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the county; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification at a meeting of the board of commissioners. 
c.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the county who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
(2)  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the chairman is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the chairman may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: section 17-5 (registration of building and repair services) to become effective if the governor declares a state of emergency; and section 17-6 (closed or restricted areas and curfews). If any of these sections is included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the county administrator and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
(3)  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to declaration of emergency, the board of commissioners is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 17-4 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the county administrator. 
(4)  Additional emergency powers. The chairman of the board of commissioners shall have, and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
a.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
b.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation, and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
c.  To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and flammable liquids and substances; 
d.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
e.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any county departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
f.  To utilize all available resources of the county and subordinate agencies over which the county has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
g.  To commandeer or utilize public or private property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare, and/or the property of citizens; 
h.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of county business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any county agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
i.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
j.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(c)  Form of declaration of local emergency. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the county administrator and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
_____
"DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY" 
WHEREAS, McIntosh County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [description of event] on [date]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Chairman of the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners, with advice from the McIntosh County Emergency Management Agency, there exist emergency circumstances located in [describe geographic location] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of McIntosh County, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event. 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the McIntosh County Emergency Management Agency activates the Emergency Operations Plan; 
(2)  That the following sections of the McIntosh County Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: section 17-5, registration of building and repair services; and/or section 17-6, closed or restricted areas and curfews]; and 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented:[If deemed appropriate, select items from section 17-2(b)(3) or (4) or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [time] on [date]. 

_____
(d)  Contracts with municipalities. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
(Ord. No. 2013-1, § 2, 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 17-3. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the county sheriff's office shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the chairman or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the chairman or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 120 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. The owner of land upon which a violation occurs, and each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMA director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the county sheriff's office, the EMA director and chairman of the BOC. 
(Ord. No. 2013-1, § 3, 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 17-4. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  County business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the board of commissioners, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the board of commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. [Note: Local legislation should reviewed to determine whether there are restrictions upon moving the meeting location if it is only locally declared emergency and not a state of emergency declared by the governor.] 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public's health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the board of commissioners, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. County officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners or designees may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the county on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the county pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or chairman of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-1, § 4, 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 17-5. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the unincorporated area of the county designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the McIntosh County Development Board and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the county without complying with this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $50.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal Employer Identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required; 
(9)  Copy of license from the Secretary of State if required. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency by the governor and local declaration stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the board of commissioners, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. No. 2013-1, § 5, 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 17-6. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the chairman until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the chairman shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The chairman shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the county; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by the EMA director or the sheriff. 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2013-1, § 6, 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 17-7. - Regulation continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, homeland security, emergency management and disaster relief that are not in conflict with this chapter are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the county administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2013-1, § 7, 3-12-2013) 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; local land disturbing ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; local erosion programs O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the coastal soil and water conservation district. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which the land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. Also known as "the plan." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 18-20(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Operator means the party that has: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Qualified personnel means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the coastal soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the national pollution discharge elimination system general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § II) 
Sec. 18-20. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in the Mineral Resources and Caves Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72); 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 18-21 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.). In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 18-21 and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include those practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; and the construction of farm buildings; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 18-21(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, state waters excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1) through (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § III) 
Sec. 18-21. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this article shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  Stringent practices. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the published by the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, that the buffers or at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy as is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § IV) 
Secs. 18-22—18-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION AND PERMIT PROCESS 

Sec. 18-46. - Review of plans and ordinances which regulate the development of land. 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § V(A)) 
Sec. 18-47. - Application requirements. 
(a)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the county building inspector or his designee to perform such activity. 
(b)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the county building inspector and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 18-48. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 18-21. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
(c)  A fee shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. The amount of the permit fee shall be set by resolution of the board of commissioners from time to time, and available for public examination in the office of the county clerk. 
(d)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. 
(e)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by this article and bonding, if required, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(f)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(g)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for a hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § V(B)) 
Sec. 18-48. - Plan requirements. 
(a)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 18-21. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(b)  Data required for the site plan. 
(1)  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or a narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
(2)  Description of existing land use at project site and description of the proposed project. 
(3)  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
(4)  Name and phone number of a 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
(5)  Size of the project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
(6)  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that: "The installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities." 
(7)  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
(8)  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
(9)  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(10)  Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." 
(c)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion control and sedimentation control. All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection of any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
(1)  Graphic scale and north point or completion. 
(2)  Vicinity maps showing location of the project and existing streets. 
(3)  Boundary line survey. 
(4)  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
(5)  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
(6)  Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
(7)  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
(8)  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
(9)  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
(10)  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6. 
(d)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § V(C)) 
Sec. 18-49. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 18-21(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 18-47(g), are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(c)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(d)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § V(D)) 
Sec. 18-50. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The county building inspector will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The county building inspector shall have the power to conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § VI) 
Secs. 18-51—18-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PENALTIES AND INCENTIVES 

Sec. 18-74. - Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. 
If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § VII(A)) 
Sec. 18-75. - Stop work orders. 
(a)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
(b)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
(c)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(d)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § VII(B)) 
Sec. 18-76. - Bond forfeiture. 
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of this article. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § VII(C)) 
Sec. 18-77. - Monetary penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which a violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § VII(D)) 
Sec. 18-78. - Education and certification requirements. 
All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § VIII) 
Secs. 18-79—18-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL JUDICIAL REVIEW 

Sec. 18-100. - Administrative remedies. 
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the county board of commissioners within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
Sec. 18-101. - Judicial review. 
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § IX) 
Secs. 18-102—18-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LIABILITY 

Sec. 18-131. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2005, § X) 
Secs. 18-132—18-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATERWAYS AND WETLANDS 

Sec. 18-161. - River corridor protection plan. 
The county adopts the regional river corridor protection plan as an amendment to the county's comprehensive plan and it shall be considered a component of the local plan. 
(Res. of 3-8-1994(2)) 
Chapter 19 - MEDIA PRODUCTION 

Sec. 19-1. - Generally. 
The Code of McIntosh County, Georgia is hereby amended by enacting a new chapter 19, media productions, to provide for permitting of commercial media productions and standards governing media activities within said county, as follows. 
(Ord. of 05-08-2018(1)) 
Sec. 19-2. - Purpose. 
It is the public policy of the State of Georgia to market the state as a location for media productions, recognizing the economic impact this industry provides, as well as the tourism it generates for local jurisdictions, such as McIntosh County. The county is further fortunate to have a diverse number of unique locations to attract movies and television productions to the county. Despite the many positive benefits, a media production may offer, certain inconveniences may result if the production company and the county cannot work in concert to assure minimum standards are met and to assure a thoroughly-planned production schedule is followed. These concerns are best addressed through a regulatory permit. 
(Ord. of 05-08-2018(1)) 
Sec. 19-3. - Scope of coverage. 
The permit required by this chapter shall be required of all movies, television or video series, pilots, feature films and documentaries, commercials, music videos, photo shoots, infomercials and public service announcements, whether the final product is intended for commercial use or not, unless the activity shall wholly occur on private property within an otherwise licensed facility (such as a film or television studio). Any media production on public property, intended to be closed to participation by the public, or restricting access to public property or facilities normally accessible by the public, shall require a permit. For purposes of this chapter, media production activity shall include areas designated for parking trucks and equipment on public or private property, base camps used during the production activity, and food service areas. No public highway, street or road shall have its public access restricted or limited except by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 05-08-2018(1)) 
Sec. 19-4. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  This permit is allowed with conditions in all zoning districts. Whenever a permit is sought for activities in primarily residential neighborhoods, extra consideration shall be given to conditions imposed to ameliorate as much as possible inconvenience to the residents. 
(b)  Two classifications of media production permits are allowed: 
(1)  Low-impact activities are generally those activities having an intended duration of no more than 14 days, with little or no disruption to normal and customary use of the site and adjacent and nearby properties and uses; and, 
(2)  High-impact activities are generally those activities having an intended duration of more than 14 days, which do not comply with the low-impact standards of this chapter, and/or will disrupt normal and customary use of the site and adjacent and nearby properties and uses. Any filming involving automobile crashes or chases, gunfire, pyrotechnics, explosives, the use of aircraft, stunts, and similar activities are examples of high-impact activities. 
(c)  General standards. Prior to making application for a permit, it shall be incumbent on the applicant to meet with the county manager and director of public safety, or their designees, to review locations and the general scope of activities planned during the production. A copy of the script shall be made available, upon request, to allow the county staff to better understand the applicant's needs. 
The following general standards shall apply to all permits: 
(1)  No tents, temporary sanitary facilities, trash collection or food service facilities shall be located within 100 feet of the property line of any property used for residential use, unless the owner or tenant gives written consent; 
(2)  Tents, depending on their square footage, and other temporary structures may require a separate building permit from the county; any food preparation of food service provided at the location shall require a food service permit from the county health department, or evidence of an exemption; 
(3)  Lighting for filming should be oriented away from adjacent or nearby properties as much as possible and shall not interfere with the safe movement of vehicular traffic; 
(4)  Temporary signage must be approved in writing, in advance, prior to erection, by the public safety director, or his designee; approval of temporary signage is conditioned on restoration of permanent signage following completion of the media activity; 
(5)  No regulatory traffic control signage within a public right-of-way shall be removed without the prior written consent of the director of public safety; 
(6)  No modification of any existing traffic signage, street light, traffic control device or other officially installed facility or improvement shall be made without the prior consent of the director of public safety; 
(7)  No street, road, alley, or sidewalk shall be closed, barricaded or other obstruction erected within a public right-of-way, and no access shall be denied or restricted to public or private property or facility unless the closure or restriction is approved as a condition of the permit; reasonable alternative access shall be arranged whenever possible; 
(8)  No trees, vegetation (including grasses) or ornamental shrubs shall be cut or removed from public property without the prior written consent of the county manager. A land disturbance permit may be separately required depending on the nature and extent of the activity. 
(9)  Traffic management plan. The applicant shall submit to the director of public safety a traffic management plan to address traffic flow in the vicinity of the location where production activity is to occur, even if normal traffic flow is not to be obstructed or interrupted. Detours shall be determined and approved by the director of public safety; temporary traffic control devices and signage as required by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be provided at the sole expense of the applicant; the county manager shall also review and approve such plans. 
(10)  The McIntosh County Board of Commissioners shall be listed in the production credits for all permits required. 
(Ord. of 05-08-2018(1)) 
Sec. 19-5. - Minimum standards for low-impact standards. 
In addition to the general standards, the following minimum standards shall be met in order to be permitted as a low-impact activity. Due to the varying requirements of media productions and the nature of the industry, these standards are not intended to be all inclusive and additional conditions may be reasonably imposed, as warranted, to minimize anticipated adverse effects. 
(1)  No permit shall be effective for more than 14 consecutive dates from its date of issuance. Permits may be extended by the county manager, for reasonable cause, providing a daily filming fee shall apply. A single application shall include all locations for the same production within the county. Application shall be made no less than ten days prior to the first scheduled event or day of filming. The permit shall be available, on location, at all times while production activity is occurring and shown to County inspectors upon request. 
(2)  Normal hours of activity shall be 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily; all preparation and wrap-up shall occur within one hour of this time frame. Noise shall be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  No street closure, obstruction or interference with normal traffic flow, including pedestrian use of sidewalks and public rights-of-way shall occur, including use of on-street parking spaces or parking in alleys or side streets. 
(4)  Facilities and locations to be used for base camps, food service and parking shall be approved as a condition of the permit; any other required permit(s) shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 05-08-2018(1)) 
Sec. 19-6. - Minimum standards for high-impact standards. 
In addition to the general standards, the following minimum standards shall be met in order to be permitted as a high-impact activity. Due to the varying requirements of media productions and nature of the industry, these standards are not intended to be all inclusive and additional conditions may be reasonably imposed, as warranted, to minimize anticipated adverse effects. 
(1)  No permit shall issue for a term of less than 14 consecutive days from its date of issuance; the duration of the permit shall be based upon an agreed production schedule submitted by the applicant. Permits may be extended by the county manager, for reasonable cause, provided a daily filming fee shall apply. A single application shall include all locations for the same production within the county. Application shall be made no less than ten business days prior to the first scheduled event or day of filming. The permit shall be available, on location, at all times while activity is occurring and shown to county inspectors upon request. 
(2)  Normal hours of activity shall be 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily; all preparation and wrap-up shall occur within one hour of this time frame. Noise shall be kept to a minimum [and] any activity occurring outside of the above hours involving planned noises in excess of 65 dB at a distance of 100 feet from the point of origin shall be addressed in the application. If activity is planned within 500 feet of a residential area outside the hours specified, or will involve noises in excess of 65 dB, notice shall be given by the [best] means available to residents as far in advance as reasonable. 
(3)  Street closures, obstruction or interference with normal traffic flow, including pedestrian use of sidewalks and public rights-of-way shall be detailed in the application, including any use of on-street parking spaces and/or parking in alleys or side streets. 
(4)  Facilities and locations to be used for base camps, food service, and parking shall be approved as a condition of the permit; any other required permit(s) shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit under this chapter. 
(5)  Based upon the proposed scope of production activity and in consideration of any potential danger to the safety, health and welfare of the community, particularly private property and residents near the location, the public safety director may require on-site security (qualified private security or use of off-duty law enforcement officers) and/or may require personnel and equipment be placed on standby for portions of the high-impact activity at the expense of the applicant. The application shall detail the planned time, place, and manner of any of the following production activities: pyrotechnics, demolition, discharge of firearms or other weapons, motor vehicle chases, physical stunts and similar activities. 
(Ord. of 05-08-2018(1)) 
Sec. 19-7. - Application and permit procedure. 
(a)  Applications. All applications shall be made in writing on forms provided by the county. Applications shall be submitted in duplicate originals. No application shall be deemed accepted unless accompanied by payment of the requisite application fee in U.S. funds, which is set at $250.00. 
(b)  Every application shall state the name and contact information of a responsible representative of the applicant, who shall be available at all times during actual production activity within the county and for a period of not less than one year thereafter; more than one point of contract may be required. 
(c)  The application shall contain a detailed narrative of the scope of production activities, and include drawings, maps or plats to illustrate locations, property boundaries, existing material improvements, planned temporary improvements, curb cuts and driveways, adjoining streets, traffic patterns, and similar information helpful to assess the impact of the proposed activity. 
(d)  When activity is to occur in or near residential areas, personal notice of intent to secure a permit and the place, date and time of the proposed media activity shall be provided by the applicant, within five days of the filing of the application. To the extent feasible, written acknowledgement of the notice shall be obtained from the resident or resident's agent. For purposes of this section, all residential properties within 500 feet of the outside boundaries of the location(s) where production activity is to occur shall be notified. 
(e)  A signed indemnification and hold harmless agreement, in a form acceptable to the county attorney, shall accompany the application, together with a certificate of insurance naming the county as an additional insured. The minimum limits of insurance coverage shall not be less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
(f)  All applications shall be filed with the county manager, or his designee, who may require such additional information as needed to assess the proposed extent and intensity of the production within the County. 
(g)  Permits. All applications shall be approved with specific terms and conditions, or denied, by the county manager, or his designee, in writing. If approved, the county shall issue a permit to the applicant, in writing, with all terms and conditions clearly set forth therein. Low-impact activity applications shall be approved within ten business days of the submission of a complete application and the requisite documents; high-impact activity applications shall be approved within 20 days of the submission of a complete application and the requisite documents. If the application is denied, the county manager, or his designee, shall state in writing, the reasons for denial. An aggrieved applicant may appeal to the board of commissioners at the next regular meeting occurring more than five days following receipt of a written denial. 
(h)  Permits may be denied, in whole or in part, due to prior scheduled events or activities sanctioned or permitted by the county under other provisions of this Code. 
(i)  Any material variation from the approved scope of work permitted shall be grounds for permit revocation, unless the permit is modified in advance by the permittee. 
(Ord. of 05-08-2018(1)) 
Sec. 19-8. - Fees and waivers. 
(a)  Initial application fees for activity permits, regardless of the level of impact, shall be $250.00. Application fees are non-refundable and must be paid, in full, at the time of application. 
(b)  Daily permit fees of $100.00 for each calendar day on which production activity physically occurs within the county shall be paid upon the last day of the scheduled activity. If a production is scheduled for a duration in excess of a calendar month, the accrued daily fee shall be due and payable on the last day of each month in which production activity occurred. 
(c)  Additional fees and charges may be assessed based upon specific or special services by a county department, based upon labor, time and equipment necessary to provide the service. When using county-owned buildings or property other than public road rights-of-way, for production activities, a separate rental fee or charge may be negotiated. 
(d)  Application fees and daily permit fees for use of county services or facilities may be reduced or waived for charitable or non-profit organizations holding Section 501(c) status from the United States Internal Revenue Service. All waivers shall require approval of the county manager, which may delay permit issuance. 
(Ord. of 05-08-2018(1)) 
Sec. 19-9. - Media production liaison. 
The county manager is hereby expressly authorized to designate an individual as the county's media production liaison to work with and be the county's point of contact with media productions, to assist in coordinating the permitting process for the county, and to promote the county as a "camera ready community" under a program with the Georgia Office of Film, Music and Digital Entertainment. In making such designation, the county manager shall define the duties, compensation and benefits of such individual. 
(Ord. of 05-08-2018(1)) 
Sec. 19-10. - Severability. 
Should any provision of this chapter be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining provisions shall continue in force and effect until amended or repealed by action of the county governing authority. 
(Ord. of 05-08-2018(1)) 
Chapter 20 - FLOODS 

Sec. 20-1. - Appointments. 
(a)  The county planning and zoning commission is vested with the responsibility, authority, and means to: 
(1)  Delineate or assist the administrator at his request, in delineating the limits of the areas having special flood hazards on available local maps of sufficient scale to identify the location of building sites. 
(2)  Provide such information as the administrator may request concerning present uses and occupancy of the floodplain. 
(3)  Cooperate with federal, state and local agencies and private firms which undertake to study, survey, map, and identify floodplain or mud slide areas, and cooperate with neighboring communities with respect to management of adjoining floodplain and/or mud slide areas in order to prevent the aggravation of existing hazards. 
(4)  Submit on the anniversary date of the community's initial eligibility an annual report to the administrator on the progress made during the past year within the community in the development and implementation of floodplain management measures. 
(b)  The county planning and zoning commission appoints the chief tax appraiser of the county to maintain for public inspection and to furnish upon request a record of elevation of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved structures located in the special flood hazard areas. If the lowest floor is below grade on one or more sides, the elevation of the floor immediately above must also be recorded. 
(Res. of 9-3-1975, §§ 1—4) 
Sec. 20-2. - Building inspector and zoning board of appeals appointed. 
The building and zoning inspector is designated as the administrator of the flood plan. The board of zoning appeals is designated to hear and decide appeals under the flood regulations. 
(Res. of 3-20-1984) 
Chapter 22 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 12, 2016, repealed the former ch. 22, §§ 22-1—22-4, and enacted a new ch. 22 as set out herein. The former ch. 22 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ I—IV of an ordinance adopted Jan. 30, 1987. 

Sec. 22-1. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  There are currently in existence certain rules and regulations adopted by the McIntosh County Board of Health with the purpose of preserving the public health, safety, and welfare of citizens or those individuals found within the boundaries of McIntosh County, Georgia. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or other entity to operate a food or tourist establishment, body art studio, septic system, individual water supply system or public and semi-public swimming pool, spa or recreational park or approve a subdivision in McIntosh County without a valid permit or approval issued by the McIntosh Board of Health, in accordance to applicable rules and regulations. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food or tourist establishment, body art studio, septic system, individual water supply system or public or semi-public swimming pool, spa or recreational park during any period of time that a permit for such operation has been suspended or revoked by the McIntosh Board of Health. 
(3)  No building permit for the construction of any residence, building or other facility which is to be served by a septic tank shall be issued by or pursuant to the authority of the McIntosh Board of Commissioners unless a septic tank construction permit has been issued by the McIntosh County Board of Health. 
(Ref: The Zoning Ordinance of McIntosh County Georgia, Article Nine, Section 901, B(1)(a). 
(4)  Further, no business license or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any public health regulated establishment or operation unless an approval by the McIntosh Board of Health has been issued. 
(Ref: The Zoning Ordinance of McIntosh County Georgia, Article Nine, Section 901, B(1)(b). 
(b)  This chapter specifically incorporates by reference the provisions of the following rules and regulations and fee schedules which are in force at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived: 
(1)  Rules and regulations pertaining to food service adopted by the department of public health and the McIntosh County Board of Health and being Chapter 511-6-1 as subsequently amended and updated, and policies of the McIntosh County Board of Health pertaining to food service; 
(2)  Rules and regulations pertaining to tourist accommodations adopted by the department of public health and the McIntosh County Board of Health and being Chapter 511-6-2 as subsequently amended and updated, and policies of the McIntosh County Board of Health pertaining to tourist accommodations; 
(3)  Rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems and guidance manual adopted by the department of public health and the McIntosh County Board of Health and being Chapter 511-3-1 as subsequently amended and updated, and policies (minimum lot sizing added June 13, 2006) of the McIntosh County Board of Health pertaining to on-site sewage management systems; 
(4)  Rules and regulations for portable sanitation contractors adopted by the department of public health and the McIntosh County Board of Health and being Chapter 511-5-6 as subsequently amended and updated, and policies of the McIntosh County Board of Health pertaining to portable sanitation contractors; 
(5)  Rules and regulations pertaining to drinking water supply adopted by the McIntosh County Board of Health (September 4, 1986) as subsequently amended and updated, and policies of the McIntosh County Board of Health pertaining to drinking water supply; 
(6)  Rules and regulations pertaining to public and semi-public swimming pools, spas, and recreational water parks adopted by the McIntosh County Board of Health (May 7, 2007) and policies of the McIntosh County Board of Health pertaining to public and semi-public swimming pools, spas, and recreational water parks; 
(7)  Rules and regulations pertaining to tattoo/body piercing studios and tattoo/body piercing artists adopted by the McIntosh County Board of Health (August 28, 2007) and being Rules and Regulations for Body Art Studios and Artists as subsequently amended and updated, and policies of the McIntosh County Board of Health pertaining to tattoo/body piercing studios and tattoo/body piercing artists; 
(8)  McIntosh County Board of Health Rules and Regulations for the Control of Rabies (August 30, 2005) as subsequently amended and updated and policies of the McIntosh County Board of Health pertaining to rabies control; and the Georgia Rabies Control Manual; 
(9)  McIntosh County Environmental Health Fee Schedule approved by the McIntosh County Board of Health and adopted by the McIntosh County Commission as subsequently amended and updated, and policies and resolutions of the McIntosh County Board of Health pertaining to fees; 
(10)  Rules and regulations pertaining to "hand watering" gray water regulations adopted by the Department of Public Health (O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2) and the McIntosh County Board of Health (February 25, 2009) as subsequently amended and updated, and policies of the McIntosh County Board of Health pertaining to "hand watering" gray water; 
(11)  Rules and regulations pertaining to Georgia Smokefree Air Act of 2005 adopted by the department of public health (Chapter 511-3-7) and the McIntosh County Board of Health being rules and regulations for Georgia Smokefree Air Act of 2005 as subsequently amended and updated and policies of the McIntosh County Board of Health (October 19, 2005) pertaining to the Georgia Smokefree Air Act of 2005. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016(1)) 
Sec. 22-2. - Implementation and enforcement. 
The duty of implementation and enforcement of these regulations rest with the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners and by virtue of this chapter is hereby expressly delegated to the McIntosh County Board of Health who is hereby charged with promulgation of sufficient procedures for insuring compliance with these rules and regulations by the citizens of McIntosh County or those individuals found within the boundaries of McIntosh County. The McIntosh County Board of Health is directed to implement procedures which will insure that the citizens of McIntosh County or those individuals found within the boundaries of McIntosh County will receive all procedural rights to which they are entitled under the laws of the State of Georgia: 
(1)  When the duly authorized agent of the McIntosh Board of Health determines that a violation of this chapter exists, he shall send by regular mail, certified mail or personally deliver a written notice of the violation to the owner of the property or his representative, the tenant or his representative and any other party who has control or ownership of the property. The notice of violation may also be personally served or served notoriously by placing on or adjacent to the front door in a conspicuous location. 
(2)  The notice shall state the location of the property, the nature of the violation, a provision for remedying the violation and a timeframe for compliance. The notice shall also state that if the violation is not remedied within the timeframe, a citation for the violation may be issued to all parties controlling or owning the property. 
(3)  Following the expiration of the time set forth in the notice, the duly authorized agent of the McIntosh Board of Health shall re-inspect the property to determine if the violation still exists. 
(4)  If the violation has not been remedied at the time of re-inspection, a citation/summons to court may be issued by a code enforcement officer or law enforcement personnel pursuant to (O.C.G.A § 15-10-63). However, in lieu of a citation, an accusation may be drafted and personally served. 
(5)  If the district environmental health director, district program director or district health director determines that an emergency exists such that there is imminent harm or peril to life or property, he may authorize the immediate issuance of a citation or accusation without the notice that is specified in subsection (1) of this section. Furthermore, lack of the notice letter specified in subsection (2) of this section shall not invalidate a citation or accusation. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016(1)) 
Sec. 22-3. - Violations and penalties. 
Any violation of the rules and regulations hereby referenced shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be a misdemeanor offense. Any violator shall be subject to the imposition of a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days or both. Any failure of payment of inspection or other environmental service fees listed within the fee schedule approved by the McIntosh County Board of Health and adopted by the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners within 60 days of the first notice may result in suspension of permit. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016(1)) 
Sec. 22-4. - Magistrate's court jurisdiction. 
The Magistrate's Court of McIntosh County shall have jurisdiction over violators of this chapter and all procedures for enforcement of such ordinance shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. Complaints of violation of any provision of this chapter shall be brought before the magistrate's court by a designated representative of the McIntosh County Board of Health and shall be prosecuted through that court. A complaint shall be brought before the magistrate's court only after all notices and rights to a hearing before a hearing officer of the board of health (or their designee) have been provided and/or all applicable McIntosh Board of Health and/or Department of Public Health compliance procedures have been exhausted. 
(Ord. of 1-12-2016(1)) 
Chapter 24 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Building official means the building official of McIntosh County. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the county historical preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historical property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Commission means the county historic preservation commission. 
Designated districts and sites means a historic district or historic property. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to the kind of texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environment features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of the site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, works of art, or a combination thereof, which exhibit a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the county board of commissioners. 
Historic property means an individual structure, site, or work of art which exhibits a special historical, architectural or environmental character as designated by the county board of commissioners. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a property within a designated district or site and may include any one of the following: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade and existing building or structure of a historic property, including any of its architectural elements or details. 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a building or a structure. 
(3)  Commencement of excavation. 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way. 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure. 
(6)  The construction or removal of exterior environmental features. 
(7)  The application of paint, varnish, stain or other coating to an existing building or structure visually different from the type presently in use. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. XI) 
Sec. 24-2. - Violations. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. VII, § 141) 
Sec. 24-3. - Purpose. 
(a)  In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that historic/aesthetic resources of the county are among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people. 
(b)  In order to provide a uniform process for providing guidance to owners of historic property in making material changes through the approval of certificates of appropriateness. 
(c)  In order to stimulate revitalization and reinvestment in the central business district and residential areas of the county and to protect and enhance local and historic/aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business. 
(d)  In order to enhance the opportunities for federal tax relief of property owners under relevant provisions of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-514) allowing tax investment credits for rehabilitation of certified historic structures. 
(e)  The board of commissioners for the county hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, and works of art having a special historic/aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. I, § 101) 
Sec. 24-4. - Creation of the commission. 
There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "the McIntosh County Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter referred to as "commission"). 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. II, § 102) 
Sec. 24-5. - Commission position within the county government. 
(a)  The county historic preservation commission shall be considered a part of the planning functions of the county. 
(b)  The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the board of commissioners, who shall be residents of the county, who demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
(c)  Members shall serve three year terms. 
(d)  Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. 
(e)  In order to achieve staggered terms, the initial appointment shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two members for one year; 
(2)  Two members for two years; and 
(3)  Three members for three years. 
(f)  Members do not receive a salary although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. II, § 103) 
Sec. 24-6. - Statement of the commission's powers. 
The county historic preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare an inventory of all property within its respective jurisdiction having the potential for designation as historic property. 
(2)  Recommend to the board of commissioners for the county specific places, sites, buildings, works of art and districts to be designated by ordinance as historic proportion or historic districts. 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Recommend to the board of commissioners for the county that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, or work of art as an historic property or as an historic district be revoked or removed. 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the county. 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the county of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976 (1976 Ga. L. (1280), page 1181). 
(7)  Conduct an educational program on historic properties located within its historic preservation jurisdiction. 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the local governing body or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources. 
(9)  Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the county concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired. 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation section (HPS) of the department of natural resources (DNR) a list of historic properties or historic districts designated and provide the HPS whatever information is needed to nominate these to the National Register of Historical Places. 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the county preservation program. 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; the commission shall not obligate the county without prior consent. 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property, and to acquire and sell historic properties. The commission shall not obligate the county without prior consent. 
(14)  Review and make comments to the state historic preservation office concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historical Places. 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the board of commissioners enter into agreements to do the same. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. II, § 104) 
Sec. 24-7. - Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. 
(a)  The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this division. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(b)  The latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall determine the order of business at all meetings. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. II, § 105) 
Sec. 24-8. - Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. 
The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. The commission will not financially obligate the county with the approve of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. II, § 106) 
Sec. 24-9. - Records of commission meetings. 
A public record shall be kept of the commissions resolution, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. II, § 107) 
Sec. 24-10. - Conflict of interest. 
At any time the commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, the member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. II, § 108) 
Secs. 24-11—24-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND HISTORIC PROPERTY 

Sec. 24-27. - Preliminary research by the commission. 
(a)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall have the authority to compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the county. Information gathered previously in national register nominations and in earlier surveys may be used. 
(b)  Commission's power to recommend districts and property to the board of commissioners for designation. The commission shall present to the board of commissioners recommendations for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(c)  Preparation of a report on proposed historic districts and historic properties. The commission shall prepare formal reports when recommending historic districts or properties for designation. These reports shall consist of three parts: 
(1)  A list of property classifications as outlined in this chapter. 
(2)  A physical description. 
(3)  A description of the cultural, architectural, and/or the historic/aesthetic significance of the historic district/property. 
These reports will be used to educate the public and provide a permanent record of local designation. A nomination to the national register of historic places and a list of property classifications may suffice as one of these reports. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. III, § 109) 
Sec. 24-28. - Designation of historic districts. 
(a)  Designation. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains structures, sites, works of art, or a combination thereof, which satisfies one or more of the following: 
(1)  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest. 
(2)  Is important to the history of the county, state, or coastal area. 
(3)  Have a majority of structures which are 50 years or older. 
(4)  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the county. 
(b)  Boundaries of an historic district. Boundaries of an historic district shall be specified on tax maps and on the official zoning map. These boundaries will be included in a separate ordinance designating local historic districts and boundaries specified in legal notices shall coincide with the boundaries finally designated. 
(c)  Evaluation of properties within designated historic districts. Areas within historic districts shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Historic. More than 50 years old and contributing to the district. 
(2)  Non-historic. Less than 50 years old yet possessing architectural character. 
(3)  Intrusions. Buildings of any age which detract from the historical character of the district. 
(d)  Affirmation of existing zoning. This chapter is not a use ordinance. Any zoning laws currently in existence in the county or passed in the future will not be affected by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. III, § 110) 
Sec. 24-29. - Designation of historic property. 
(a)  Criteria for selection of historic property. A historic property is a structure, site, work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the county, state, or the coastal area, for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era. 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style. 
(3)  It is a place or structure 50 years or older associated with an activity, an event, or person of historic or cultural significance to the county, state, or the coastal area. 
(4)  It is a property of historic/aesthetic interest that pertains to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the county, state, or the coastal area. 
(b)  Boundaries of a historic property. Boundaries of a historic property shall be specified on tax maps located on the official zoning map. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. III, § 111) 
Sec. 24-30. - General matters affecting the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(a)  Application for designation of historic district and landmarks. 
(1)  Historic district. A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners, may apply to the commission for designation; 
(2)  Historic property. A historical society, property owner or neighborhood association may apply to the commission for designation. 
(b)  Required public hearings. 
(1)  The commission and the county shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance for designation. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the legal organ of the county, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. 
(2)  All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to date set for the public hearing. A letter sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property, as recorded on the tax rolls in the county tax assessor's office, shall constitute legal notification under this chapter. 
(c)  Notification of property owners of proposed designation. Any ordinance recommending any property or district as historic for designation shall do the following: 
(1)  Describe each property to be designated. 
(2)  Set forth the names of the owners of the properties to be designated. 
(3)  After designation of the area a certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the county historic preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance to the property. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. III, § 112) 
Sec. 24-31. - Requirements regarding district boundaries. 
Any ordinance designating any property as a historic property, or as part of a historic district area shall require that the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the county and kept as public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. III, § 113) 
Sec. 24-32. - Notification of state department of natural resources historic preservation. 
(a)  Prior to the recommendation of the designation of any property or district as historic, the commission must submit a report on the historic, cultural architectural, or aesthetic significance of each place, district, site building/structure, or work of art, to the HPS of DNR, 30 days will be allowed to prepare written comments. 
(b)  Once a historic district or historic property has been designated by the board of commissioners, the commission shall work with the Coastal Georgia Regional Development Center (CGRDC), historical preservation planner to provide whatever additional information is needed by the HPS to nominate the designated district or site to the national register of historical places. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. III, § 114) 
Sec. 24-33. - Ordinance for final adoption of recommendation. 
Within 15 days of the public hearing, the historic preservation commission shall forward to the board of commissioners a recommendation on the proposed historic district. The board of commissioners shall have the authority to approve, reject or modify the proposed historic district. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. III, § 115) 
Sec. 24-34. - Notification of adoption of ordinances for designation. 
Within 30 days immediately following the adoption of the ordinance for designation, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the board of commissioners, which notice shall apprise all owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness for undertaking any material change in appearance of a property which is a part of a designated district or site. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. III, § 116) 
Sec. 24-35. - Notification of other agencies regarding designation. 
The county historic preservation commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the county of the ordinance for designation, including the board of commissioners, the office of the building official (inspector) and the zoning official. The commission will also notify individuals and agencies throughout the county, state and coastal area likely to be interested in the ordinance. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. III, § 117) 
Sec. 24-36. - Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. 
If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the county historic preservation commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. III, § 118) 
Secs. 24-37—24-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - APPLICATION TO PRESERVATION COMMISSION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 24-52. - Approval of alterations to the exterior architectural features of existing buildings in historic districts or historic properties. 
After the designation by ordinance of a historic district or a historic property, no material change in the exterior architectural appearance of any existing building within these areas shall be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless or until application for certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. The certificate of appropriateness will certify that the change in exterior architectural appearance is compatible with the historical features of the building altered and the adjoining properties. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 119) 
Sec. 24-53. - Approval of new construction within historic districts or properties. 
The county preservation commission shall issue certificate of appropriateness to new structures constructed within designated historic districts if these structures conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the design criteria developed by the commission. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 120) 
Sec. 24-54. - Guidelines and criteria for certificates of appropriateness. 
When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness to existing buildings, the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the commission. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 121) 
Sec. 24-55. - Submission of plans to commission. 
(a)  In order for an application for a certificate of appropriateness to be reviewed, it must be submitted at least 15 days prior to a scheduled meeting of the commission. 
(b)  An application for certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs or plans as may be required by the commission. 
(c)  Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans for the site. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 122) 
Sec. 24-56. - Acceptable commission reaction to application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(b)  The commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(c)  The commission may make approval of a certificate of appropriateness conditional upon complying to certain situations which may be listed in the certificate. Such stipulations are to be used only to diminish the adverse impact of the changes in material appearance proposed in the application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 123) 
Sec. 24-57. - Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices and right to be heard. 
At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected materially by the change in material appearance for which the application for certificate of appropriateness has been made and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. All meetings of the commission, at which application for certificates of appropriateness are being discussed, shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 124) 
Sec. 24-58. - Interior alterations. 
In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 125) 
Sec. 24-59. - Technical advice. 
When dealing with technical questions, the commission shall have the power to seek expert advice. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 126) 
Sec. 24-60. - Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
The commission should approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of an historic property within a designated historic district or site. Evidence of approval shall be a certificate of appropriateness issued by the county historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 127) 
Sec. 24-61. - Necessary actions to be taken by the county historic preservation commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. 
(b)  The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after so doing. 
(c)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building official, inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 128) 
Sec. 24-62. - Undue hardship. 
Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications, or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall be a situation not of the person's own making. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 129) 
Sec. 24-63. - Issuance of stop work orders as required by the commission. 
The building official shall issue stop work orders for projects within the preservation jurisdiction of the commission upon order of the commission if: 
(1)  Work has begun which requires a certificate of appropriateness without such certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  Work has begun with an expired certificate of appropriateness. 
(3)  It is not done in accordance with an issued certificate of appropriateness. 
In all such cases the owners of the projects involved may apply for a certificate of appropriateness and upon the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, the stop work order will be removed immediately. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 130) 
Sec. 24-64. - Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 131) 
Sec. 24-65. - Recording of applications for certificates of appropriateness. 
The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said applications. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 132) 
Sec. 24-66. - Acquisition of property. 
The commission may, where such action is authorized by the board of commissioners, and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 133) 
Sec. 24-67. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the county board of commissioners. The appeal must be applied for within 15 days after notification is sent by the commission. The county board of commissioners may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission if the board of commissioners finds the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision by violating procedures set forth in this chapter. Appeals to the county board of commissioners may be appealed to a superior court of the county in a manner provided by law for appeals from conviction or ordinance violations. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. IV, § 134) 
Secs. 24-68—24-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEMOLITION OR RELOCATION APPLICATIONS OF AN HISTORIC PROPERTY OR PROPERTIES WITHIN AN HISTORIC DISTRICT 

Sec. 24-84. - Authority to review demolition and relocation applications. 
The commission shall have the authority to grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness to demolish or relocate a structure within a historic district, or on a historic property. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. V, § 135) 
Sec. 24-85. - Considerations of post-demolition plans. 
The commission shall not grant a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the plans for the building or other development that would replace the structure. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. V, § 136) 
Sec. 24-86. - Demolition or relocation criteria. 
(a)  The commission shall evaluate the effect the demolition or relocation of a building will have on the historical character of the historic district or historic property affected. If the commission determines that demolition or relocation would have a negative effect, it will deny the certificate of appropriateness unless: 
(1)  The building in question is shown to be incapable of earning an economic return on its value after rehabilitation as determined by the commission with the advice of a qualified real estate appraiser. 
(2)  The building in question is classified as an intrusion. 
(3)  In the case of a nonprofit organization, that organization can prove that the structure cannot be successfully rehabilitated and used by the organization. 
(b)  Whenever a property owner shows that a building is incapable of earning an economic return on its value, or be successfully rehabilitated or used, such building may be demolished or relocated; provided, however, that the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall be subject to a delay of demolition or relocation and that notice of the proposed demolition or relocation shall be given as follows: 
(1)  For a buildings rated historic: 12-month delay. 
(2)  For a buildings rated non-historic: six-month delay. 
(3)  For a buildings intrusion: no delay. 
(c)  Notice shall be posted on the premises of the building or structure proposed for demolition in a location clearly visible from the street. In addition, notice shall be published in a newspaper or general local circulation at least three times prior to the date of the permit and the first notice of which shall be published no more than 15 days after the application for a permit to demolish is filed. The purpose of this section is to further the purpose of this chapter by preserving historic buildings which are important to the education, culture, traditions, and the economic values of the county, to allow interested persons, historical societies, or organizations the opportunity to acquire or to arrange for the preservation of such buildings. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. V, § 137) 
Sec. 24-87. - Emergency demolition permits. 
In the event the building official determines that a landmark or existing building in a historic district poses immediate threat to the safety of the community, he may request an emergency meeting of the commission. At such times the commission may authorize the emergency demolition of such structures. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. V, § 138) 
Secs. 24-88—24-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THE COMMISSION 

Sec. 24-104. - Ordinary repairs. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on an existing building that does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, is excluded from review. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. VI, § 139) 
Sec. 24-105. - Conformity to existing building codes. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing county building codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of their property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1993, art. VI, § 140) 
Sec. 24-106. - Elimination of local districts. 
The board of commissioners shall have the authority to modify or remove any local district without a resolution or request from the historic preservation commission. Any action taken by the board of commissioners relative to the districts shall be taken by ordinance. 
Chapter 26 - MANUFACTURED HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Standards and requirements for construction, installation, and licensing of manufactured homes and mobile homes, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-110 et seq., 8-2-130 et seq., and 8-2-160 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certificate of permanent location means a certificate properly obtained and filed with the clerk of superior court, as required by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-182. 
Certificate of removal from permanent location means a certificate properly obtained and filed, as required by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-184. 
Chief appraiser means the chief appraiser and any member of the appraisal staff in the office of tax assessors of the county. 
Clerk of superior court means the clerk of superior court of McIntosh County. 
Decal means the mobile home location permit obtainable from the tax commissioner and referred to in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. 
Home means a manufactured home or mobile home, but shall not include a home for which a certificate of permanent location has issued and been properly filed and shall not include any other home which is exempt from the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. 
Magistrate court means the magistrate court of the county. 
Manufactured home means a new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and/or electrical systems contained therein; such term also has the meaning specified in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160(4). 
Manufactured home statute refers to the ad valorem taxation of motor vehicles and mobile homes, article 10, title 48, chapter 5 (O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.). 
Mobile home means a new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and/or electrical systems contained therein; such term also has the meaning specified in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160(6). 
Owner means a person or an entity, other than a lien holder or security interest holder, having an interest in a home or being named on a title as an owner of a home. Such term shall also include the person or entity which leases a home. The term "owner" also has the meaning specified in O.C.G.A. § 40-2-21. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), intro. 4) 
Sec. 26-2. - Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person or entity convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq. Each day a home owner is in violation of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492 shall constitute a separate offense. The remedies and penalties stated in this chapter shall be in addition to the remedies and penalties stated in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-451. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 7) 
Sec. 26-3. - Adoption by reference. 
The ad valorem taxation of motor vehicles and mobile homes, article 10, title 48, chapter 5 (O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq.) is hereby adopted as an ordinance of the county with the effect as if restated herein verbatim. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 1) 
Sec. 26-4. - Display of decal. 
The owner of any home shall display the decal on the exterior portion of the home. Such display of decal shall be on the side of the home facing the nearest public roadway. If the home is not visible from a public roadway, then such decal shall be displayed on the side of the home facing the driveway which leads to or near the home. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 2) 
Sec. 26-5. - Enforcement. 
The chief appraiser of the county may enforce this chapter by issuance of a citation furnished by the board or by any other written means which complies with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, together with a notice informing the owner of the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492 and state department of revenue Rule No. 560-11-9-.05. The citation shall require the owner to appear in person before the magistrate court at a certain time and date, which date shall be not earlier than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date the citation is issued to the owner. If the name of the owner is not known to the chief appraiser, then such notice and citation shall issue to the occupant of the home. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 3) 
Sec. 26-6. - Owner to notify chief appraiser. 
The owner of any home which has obtained a certificate of removal from permanent location shall promptly notify the chief appraiser and the office of tax assessors of such certificate. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 4) 
Sec. 26-7. - Prosecution. 
This chapter may be prosecuted in the magistrate court, pursuant to article 4, title 15, chapter 10 (O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 5) 
Sec. 26-8. - Violation. 
Violations of this chapter may be prosecuted by the county attorney or by the chief appraiser. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2007(1), § 6) 
Chapter 28 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County authority to prohibit public and private littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; counties have the power to enforce, prevent, and punish violations of the state nuisance abatement laws, in addition to any provisions of its own local enabling act, charter, or local ordinances or regulations for the abatement of nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building regulations means and includes the building regulations and standard codes heretofore adopted by the county, building regulations in effect in the county prior to such date, and fire regulations in effect in the county. 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated. 
County health officer or official means the official representatives of the county health department charged with the responsibility of inspecting and reviewing health and environmental matters throughout the county, which includes, but is not limited to, issues deemed nuisances under state law, the provisions of this chapter, or the ordinances of the county. 
Dwelling, building, or structure means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial, or business uses or intended to be so used and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
Nuisance means anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of a dwelling, building or structure and all individuals, association, and corporations who have interest of record in such dwelling, building or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians, and trustees. 
Public officer means the building inspector, code enforcement officer, county manager, or any other county official who is authorized by law and this Code to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, or any agent of such officer or officers, or any other officer or officers designated by the county manager for purposes of this chapter. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building, or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Unfit building means any dwelling, building, or structure described as follows: 
(1)  Any building which is in violation of any of the provisions of the building, fire, health, sanitation or life safety code, regulation, or ordinance; 
(2)  Any building in which a loadbearing wall or other vertical structural member lists, leans or buckles to such extent as to weaken the structural support of such wall or member below the minimum required by the building regulations; 
(3)  Any building having an improperly distributed load on the floor or roof or some portion thereof; 
(4)  Any building in which there is damage or deterioration of 33 percent or more of the supporting members or 50 percent or more of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls, exclusive of the foundation; 
(5)  Any building with any part thereof so attached as to create a danger that it will fall or cause injury to person or property; 
(6)  Any building which is so dilapidated, decayed, deteriorated, or damaged from any cause or in any manner as to create a danger of injury to person or property; 
(7)  Any building likely to cause injury to person or property because it contains a weakened, defective, or deteriorated footing, foundation, flooring, floor support, ceiling, ceiling support, roof, or chimney; 
(8)  Any building which has visible soil erosion adjacent to or under any structural support; 
(9)  Any building in which any means of egress or portion thereof, including, for example, but not limited to, fire doors, closing devices, stairways, or fire escapes, is in disrepair or is in a dilapidated or nonworking condition or not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic; 
(10)  Any building in which there exists any of the general conditions itemized in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-10; or 
(11)  Any building where there is the improper keeping of pets and animals on the premises, and/or the improper disposal of human and/or animal wastes. 
Sec. 28-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. 
(b)  Action pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall not be a bar to enforcement of this chapter by injunction or other appropriate remedy, and the code enforcement officer shall have the power to institute and maintain in the name of the county any and all such enforcement proceedings. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abridge, limit, or otherwise impair the right of any person to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding for damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property. 
Sec. 28-3. - Working with other officers. 
The county code enforcement officer shall have the authority to work in conjunction with and rely upon the advice, expertise or recommendation of the county health officer, regarding the inspection and review of issues throughout the county deemed nuisances under state law, the provisions of this chapter, or the ordinances of the county. This authority shall include the ability to issue summons or citations for violations of and to enforce the provisions of this chapter, based upon a complaint received from the county health official. 
Secs. 28-4—28-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNFIT BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County may adopt ordinances requiring the repair, closing, or demolition of dwellings or other structures intended for human habitation which are unfit or imperil the health, safety, or morals of the community, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11. 

Sec. 28-25. - Structures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, operate, create, perform or maintain, after notice, any structure or activity in the county which constitutes a public nuisance or to do or perform any activity expressly declared in any of the ordinances of the county to be a nuisance per se; and upon conviction thereof in the magistrate court, such offender shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. 
Secs. 28-26—28-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT 

Sec. 28-54. - Abatement of nuisances. 
The magistrate court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the question of the existence of nuisances alleged to exist in the county, and if a nuisance is found to exist, to order its abatement. 
Sec. 28-55. - Procedure for abatement of public nuisances. 
(a)  Investigation and notice of complaint. Upon recommendation of the board of health or the health officer, police officer or employee of the county charged with enforcing the ordinances of the county, or the complaint of any resident of the county in writing, as to the existence of anything in the county constituting a public nuisance, the public officer charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific nuisance. If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies circumstances constituting a nuisance, then the public officer or county attorney shall cause a written notice of the complaint setting out the alleged nuisance to be drawn up and served on the person alleged to be responsible for the nuisance and the owner of the property where the nuisance is alleged to exist, in accordance with the further provisions hereof. For the purpose of this chapter, the person returning such lot for county taxes for the year in which notice is given shall be taken to be the owner thereof. 
(b)  Time-frame for response. The notice shall be directed to the person alleged to be maintaining, erecting, creating or keeping the alleged nuisance and to the owner of the property where the nuisance is alleged to exist; shall set out facts sufficient to show the nature of the alleged nuisance; identify the subject real property where the nuisance is located by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance, and shall give the person to whom the notice is directed notice to abate the nuisance within not more than 30 days from the date of service of the notice or to show cause before the county court at a date and time stated, which date shall be not less than 30 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the magistrate court, why said alleged nuisance should not be abated. The notice here provided for shall bear teste in the name of the magistrate or his designee and be signed by the county clerk. A copy of the notice shall be served instanter upon each person to whom it is directed. 
(c)  Service of notice. The method of service of the notice above provided for shall be as follows: 
(1)  If the person to be served is a resident of the county, by personal service by any constable of the county. 
(2)  If the person to be served is a nonresident of the county but is a resident of the state, by personal service by any officer of the state authorized to serve process in civil cases under the Georgia Civil Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 9-11-1 et seq.). 
(3)  If the person to be served is a nonresident of the state, by publication of the notice once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper in which the sheriff of the county publishes its legal notices. If the address of the person to be served is known, the clerk of the county shall mail a copy of the notice, as given to the publisher, to the person to be served at his known address within three days of the first publication of the notice. In the case of service by publication, the date of the newspaper in which the last publication appears shall be considered the date of service and the date required for abatement or appearance shall be not less than five days from the date of such newspaper. 
Sec. 28-56. - Proceedings in the magistrate court. 
(a)  Judicial hearing. On the date and at the time set for the hearing before the county court, or as soon thereafter as the case can be reached for trial, the judge of the county court shall hear and determine the question of whether or not a nuisance exists and whether or not the same has been abated as required by the notice and shall make such further order as may be required by the circumstances under the further provisions hereof. 
(b)  Presentation of witnesses and evidence. The code enforcement officer or county attorney shall be responsible for presenting the case on behalf of the citizens by proper witnesses and evidence. The person charged with the nuisance shall be entitled to present witnesses and other evidence as allowed by law. 
(c)  Judicial order. If after hearing the evidence the acts complained of shall be adjudged a nuisance, the judge of the magistrate court shall issue an order upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing, stating either of the following: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property; or 
(3)  If abatement of the adjudged nuisance does not involve the above circumstances, then abatement of the same within a reasonable time as set by the court. 
(d)  Failure to comply. If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to abate the nuisance, or vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, and do not seek an injunction under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13, the code enforcement officer may cause such nuisance to be removed or such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished; and the public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
The amount of the cost of removing the nuisance or demolition in general, including all court costs, appraisal fees, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
Sec. 28-57. - Other procedure for abatement of nuisances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 28-1, 28-2, 28-25, 28-54, and 28-55, where a nuisance complained of consists of acts expressly declared to be unlawful and to constitute nuisances under any other ordinance of the county, proceedings in the magistrate court may be by summons as for the violation of any county ordinance, and upon conviction in the magistrate court, the person convicted shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. 
Secs. 28-58—28-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— County authorized to enact ordinances for removal of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 28-90. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disabled, wrecked, junked, or abandoned motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license plate or plates, and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, or discarded. 
Sec. 28-91. - Prohibited conduct. 
No person shall park, store, place, or allow to remain on the public streets, alleys, or other public places in the county, or in the open upon private property, unless necessary for operation of a business enterprise lawfully situated upon such private property, any disabled, wrecked, junked, or abandoned motor vehicle or parts of motor vehicles, or other major appliances, machinery or other junked objects, and the parking, storing, placing, or allowing to remain upon such designated places of such disabled, wrecked, junked, or abandoned property is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
Sec. 28-92. - Enforcement; notification and hearing; impoundment. 
(a)  Removal and impoundment of vehicles, etc. The county manager or code enforcement officer is authorized to tow away or cause to be towed away or removed any disabled, wrecked, junked, or abandoned motor vehicle or parts of motor vehicles or other major appliances, machinery, or other junked objects found on the public streets, alleys, or other public places within the county in violation of section 28-91, and to store and impound the same until the expenses of towing and storage shall be paid by the owner of such property. The expense of such towing and storage shall be paid by the owner of such property and such expenses may be assessed against such owner and collected as county taxes are assessed and collected. 
(b)  Notification to remove. Upon notice of the presence in the open on any private property within the county of any disabled, wrecked, junked, or abandoned motor vehicle or parts of motor vehicles or other major appliances, machinery, or other junked objects in violation of section 28-91, except where necessary in the operation of a business enterprise lawfully situated upon such property, the county manager or code enforcement officer shall at once notify the owner of such premises in writing to relocate such property to an enclosed garage or other building or to remove same from the premises. 
(c)  Failure to comply. Upon the failure of any person to relocate or remove such disabled, wrecked, junked, or abandoned property after notice as provided under state law, the code enforcement officer shall report such failure to the county manager. Upon knowledge of the failure of the person to correct the nuisance within the given period of time, the county manager may then issue a summons or direct the county attorney to issue a summons to the offending property owner requiring him to be and appear before the magistrate court to show cause why the existence of such condition on his property should not be abated as a nuisance, as provided under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
(d)  Abatement by authorities; expenses assessed against owner. After such notice and hearing thereon, the county manager may properly order the abatement of such nuisance, which order shall be directed to and executed by the county manager, constable or sheriff, and such order shall include the right to impound and tow away or otherwise remove or destroy the offending property. All of the expenses of the abatement of such nuisance may be assessed against the owner of the property upon which the nuisance was located and may be collected as county taxes are assessed and collected. 
Sec. 28-93. - Sale and proceeds. 
(a)  Sale of impounded property. The owner of any property impounded under the provisions of this article shall have 30 days from the date the same was impounded to redeem the same by paying the cost of removal and storage. After 30 days from the date of the impounding of any property under the terms hereof, the constable, or his designee, may sell or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the procedures in O.C.G.A. § 9-13-140 et seq. and after giving opportunity for competitive bidding. 
(b)  Advance notice to be given. Notice by mail shall be sent at least ten days prior to such disposition to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed. 
(c)  Details of notice. The notice of the sale shall state: 
(1)  The sale is of abandoned property in the possession of the county; 
(2)  A description of the vehicle, including make, model, license number and any other information which will accurately identify that vehicle; 
(3)  The terms of the sale; 
(4)  The date, time, and place of the sale; and 
(5)  Any other information required by state law. 
(d)  Disposition of proceeds. The proceeds of such sale shall be applied first to pay the expenses of sale, towing, removal, and storage, and the balance, if any, paid to the owner of the property, if known. If the owner of such property is not known, then the balance of such proceeds, if any, shall be paid into the county treasury. 
Secs. 28-94—28-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AIR QUALITY CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 28-115. - Emissions of gases, vapors, and odors. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, or allow any emissions of gases, vapors, or odors beyond the property line from which such emissions occur to be in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as is or is likely to be injurious to the public welfare; to the health of human, plant, or animal life; or to property; or which interfere with the enjoyment of life and property. 
(b)  Detectable odors emitted from the following sources of emission are hereby declared to be objectionable, provided, however, that this listing shall not be deemed as exclusive: 
(1)  Ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine manufacture; 
(2)  Asphalt manufacture or refining; 
(3)  Blood processing; 
(4)  Bag cleaning; 
(5)  Celluloid manufacture; 
(6)  Coal tar products manufacture; 
(7)  Compost heaps; 
(8)  Crematory; 
(9)  Creosote treatment or manufacture; 
(10)  Disinfectants manufacture; 
(11)  Distillation of bones, coal, or wood; 
(12)  Dyestuff manufacture; 
(13)  Fat rendering; 
(14)  Fertilizer manufacture and bone grinding; 
(15)  Glue or gelatin manufacture; 
(16)  Incineration or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal, or refuse; 
(17)  Oiled rubber or leather goods manufacture; 
(18)  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, or varnish manufacture; 
(19)  Paper and pulp manufacture; 
(20)  Rubber or gutta percha manufacture; 
(21)  Sauerkraut manufacture; 
(22)  Seafood processing; 
(23)  Shoe-blackening manufacture; 
(24)  Soap manufacture; 
(25)  Stockyards; 
(26)  Sulfuric, nitric, or hydrochloric acid manufacture; 
(27)  Tanning, curing, or storage of hides or skins; 
(28)  Tar distillation or manufacture; 
(29)  Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture; and 
(30)  Any other air contaminant discharged into open air of a character and in a quantity which is detrimental to or endangers the public health. 
Sec. 28-116. - Open burning. 
(a)  Generally. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person shall kindle an open fire in any public or private place outside any building. Fires started in violation of this section shall be promptly extinguished by the person responsible for same upon notice by the fire chief or his duly designated agent. During the existence of an air pollution alert, as may be declared by the county manager, all exceptions are void and no open fires shall be kindled. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Open burning may be done under permit as follows: 
a.  Application for burning permits shall be on forms provided by the fire chief; 
b.  No permit shall be issued unless the issuing officer is satisfied that: 
1.  There is no practical available alternate method for the disposal of the material to be burned; 
2.  No hazardous condition will be created by such burning; 
3.  No salvage operation by open burning will be conducted; and 
4.  No leaves will be burned in those areas where provision is made for public collection thereof; 
c.  Any permit issued may be limited by the imposition of conditions to: 
1.  Prevent the creation of excessive smoke; or 
2.  Protect property and the health, safety, and comfort of persons from the effects of the burning; 
d.  If it becomes apparent at any time to the fire chief that limitations need to be imposed for any of the reasons stated in subsection (b)(1)c of this section, the fire chief or his duly designated agent shall notify the permittee in writing and any limitations so imposed shall be treated as conditions under which the permit is issued. 
(2)  Open burning may be done without permit as follows: 
a.  In those areas where provision for public collection of leaves is not made, the opening burning of leaves is permitted; 
b.  In those areas where regular refuse collection is not provided, open burning of ordinary household trash by householders is permitted, provided that: 
1.  The fires are located no closer than 500 feet to any neighboring habitable dwelling or place where people work or congregate; 
2.  Garbage, dead animals, and animal waste are not burned; and 
3.  Materials which create dense or excessive smoke or emissions injurious or noxious to people or property are not burned. 
(c)  Open fires may be set in performance of an official duty of any public officer if the fire is necessary for one or more of the following reasons or purposes: 
(1)  For the prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other means; 
(2)  For the instruction of public firefighters or industrial employees under supervision of the fire chief; or 
(3)  For the protection of public health. 
(d)  Fires may be used for the cooking of food, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(e)  Salamanders or other devices may be used for heating by construction or other workers, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(f)  Fires may be set in the course of agricultural operations in growing crops or raising fowl or animals, provided no nuisance is created. 
(g)  Open fires may be set for recreational purposes, such as campfires, provided no smoke violation or nuisance is created. 
Secs. 28-117—28-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE REGULATION 

Sec. 28-148. - Anti-noise regulation. 
Subject to the provisions of this section, the creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity, or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare is prohibited. 
Sec. 28-149. - Miscellaneous prohibited noises enumerated. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar, or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently out of control, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio, phonograph, or any musical instrument or sound device, including but not limited to loudspeakers or other devices for reproduction or amplification of sound, either independently of or in connection with motion pictures, radio or television, in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any person in any hospital, dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity. 
(4)  Pets. The keeping of any animal, bird, or fowl which, by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such a manner as to cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise. 
(6)  Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper county authorities. 
(7)  Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any hospital or adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same is in session. 
(9)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or device emitting noise for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, or sale, or display or merchandise, unless a permit for the use of such device shall have been obtained under the regulations hereinafter provided. 
(10)  Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes, unless a permit for the use of such device shall have been obtained under the regulations hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 28-150. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Noise permit. The reasonable use of amplifiers, loudspeakers, drums, or other instrument or device emitting noise for the purpose of any public address or for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale, or display of merchandise shall be permitted providing a permit therefor is secured from the county manager. 
(b)  Application and terms for permit. An application for the use desired shall be submitted in writing to the county clerk, which application shall set out the nature of the noise-making activity, the purpose thereof, the place where the activity is to be carried on, and the dates and hours during which the use is to be made. The county manager shall act upon each application so submitted, and shall, before granting a permit, place such restrictions upon the use as to the extent, hours, and location as to prevent undue annoyance to the public or any resident. Any denial of a permit by the county manager may be appealed to the board of commissioners at the next regularly scheduled board meeting. 
(c)  Violation of terms. It shall be unlawful to use any device or to create any undue noise in violation of the terms of any permit issued under this section. 
Secs. 28-151—28-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRASH, WEEDS, AND LITTER 

Sec. 28-169. - Duties of property owners. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each and every owner of a lot of land whether occupied or unoccupied within the county to remove therefrom any trash, rubbish or filth that may be thereon. Allowing any lot of land to have thereon trash, rubbish or filth shall constitute the maintaining of a nuisance per se. 
(b)  Every owner or person in charge of any lot of land in the county located within 200 feet of any human habitation or place of business who shall allow such lot to be in any of the conditions described under subsection (a) of this section, who shall fail or refuse to remedy the condition after notice of such shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 28-170. - Prohibited storage of property. 
All nonfunctioning motor vehicles, appliances, machinery or equipment stored, kept or maintained out of doors is declared to be a public health hazard. Any trash, rubbish, garbage or putrescible matter stored out of doors for a period of more than six months, whether in a container or not, is declared to be a public health hazard. The placing, keeping or maintaining of any such items on any property out of doors within the county shall be a violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 28-171. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to any motor vehicle, kept, stored or maintained upon private property, which has a current up-to-date motor vehicle license tag thereon, nor shall it apply to any vehicles, appliances or equipment kept and maintained in connection with or as a part of any duly licensed appliance, machinery or automobile repair shop or junkyard. 
Sec. 28-172. - Administration; notice of violation; appeal. 
(a)  This article shall be administered by the county manager or his designee, and if and whenever it shall appear to the county manager or his designee that it is being violated, he shall issue a citation returnable to the county court charging the owner or occupant of the property with a violation of this section. 
(b)  If the owner or occupant of property of which or upon which material is stored has been found in violation of this section two or more times, the county manager may notify, in writing, the owner of the property or the tenant in possession of the land on which the violation exists to abate such violation by removing the material or materials to a conforming location or into some enclosed garage or other storage house, within ten days from the date of such notice. Such notice shall be mailed to the owner or occupant of the property, if known, and placed on or adjacent to the door of any structure on the property in question. 
(c)  Any person disagreeing with the decision of the county manager or his designee under subsection (b) of this section shall have ten days from the date of the notice in which to appeal the decision of the county manager or his designee to the magistrate court, requesting that the county court make a determination as to whether or not a violation actually exists, which appeal shall be heard after due notice and as soon as practical, and the decision of the county court shall be final. 
(d)  Any person who fails to comply with the notice given by the county manager or his designee in compliance with this section within the ten days after the notice is given or within ten days after the final decision is made by the magistrate court (in cases where appeals are filed), shall be in violation of this section. 
Sec. 28-173. - Removal of nonfunctioning vehicles, appliances, machinery or equipment. 
(a)  After the time provided in section 28-172 for the removal of nonfunctioning motor vehicles, appliances, machinery or equipment has expired, the county manager or his designee may seek an order of the magistrate court to permit entry onto the property for the purpose of removing and disposing of the items stored in violation of this section. If the magistrate court judge finds that nonfunctioning motor vehicles, appliances, machinery or equipment is stored, kept or maintained out of doors in violation of this section and the requirements of this section have been fulfilled, he shall issue an order permitting entry onto the property for the purpose of removing and disposing of the items stored in violation of this section. If the magistrate court judge finds that any trash, rubbish, garbage or putrescible matter has been stored out of doors for a period of more than six months in violation of this section and the requirements of this section have been fulfilled, he shall issue an order permitting entry onto the property for the purpose of removing and disposing of the items stored in violation of this section. No order shall be necessary to remove and dispose of items stored in violation of this section when that property is located on any public street. 
(b)  The county manager or his designee is also directed to remove any abandoned or nonfunctioning motor vehicles, appliances, machinery or equipment from any public street in the county, the expense of which shall likewise be charged to the owner. 
Sec. 28-174. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article may be charged in the magistrate court of the county and punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9 in addition to or instead of any other action set forth in this article. 
Chapter 30 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of counties with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY 

Sec. 30-19. - Short title. 
There is hereby created and established within the unincorporated area of the county, an ordinance to prohibit conduct which is offensive and adverse to public safety, which shall be cited and known as the "the McIntosh County Disorderly Conduct Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. MC5, § 1) 
Sec. 30-20. - Definition of disorderly conduct. 
Conduct which shall be deemed to be offensive and adverse to public safety and thereby classified as disorderly conduct is exhibited or occurs when a person: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Without provocation, uses to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; or 
(4)  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
(Ord. No. MC5, § 3) 
Sec. 30-21. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating these provisions, or any provisions hereof upon conviction, shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. 
(b)  The magistrate shall have the authority and discretion to suspend or probate any part of the sentence. Further, the magistrate may permit the sentenced party to perform community service in lieu of payment of fine at then current minim wages as established by the U.S. government. The performance of such community service shall be in compliance with such conditions as the magistrate may order. 
(Ord. No. MC5, § 5) 
Sec. 30-22. - Disorderly conduct prohibited. 
No person shall engage in or exhibit disorderly conduct within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Ord. No. MC5, § 2) 
Sec. 30-23. - Enforcement. 
The sheriff of the county, the deputies thereof, constables, and all other law enforcement officers authorized to issue citations to violators of any provision of this article. Such citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offence with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity and the date of service, shall be signed by the officer who completes and serves the citation. 
(Ord. No. MC5, § 4) 
Sec. 30-24. - Court proceedings. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citation as described in of this article and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusation. The county attorney or the solicitor of the state court of the county, shall serve as prosecuting attorney. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county, and shall be tried in accordance with state law. 
(c)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. MC5, § 6) 
Sec. 30-25. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant reasonable concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  The following circumstances may be considered in determining whether concern is warranted: 
(1)  The fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a policeman; 
(2)  The fact that the person refuses to identify himself; 
(3)  The fact that the person fails or refuses to give a reasonable and truthful explanation of his presence and conduct; or 
(4)  The fact that the person endeavors to conceal himself or any object. 
(Ord. No. MC5, § 1) 
Sec. 30-26. - Loitering. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he idles, loafs or loiters in, on, upon, about or around any street, highway, sidewalk, alley or other public right-of-way or any public building or other building or premises open to the general public so as to interfere with the use thereof or free passage by other persons. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he remains in, on, upon, about or around any public building or place or other building or premises open to the public or any lounge or barroom for the purpose of procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. 
(c)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he fails to disperse upon notification by a county officer, a member of the police force, the property owner of the parking area or his designated representative, and he continues to assemble or congregate with others in the parking area of any commercial business, shopping center or shopping mall for any purpose other than working, shopping or doing business related to the goods or services available at the commercial business, shopping center or shopping mall, without specific license from any person authorized to grant permission to use the premises for such assembly or congregation. 
(Ord. No. MC5, § 2) 
Sec. 30-27. - Public drunkenness. 
A person commits the offense of public drunkenness by being in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, in an intoxicated condition caused by alcohol or any other mood-altering drug or combination of such drugs, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(Ord. No. MC5, § 3) 
Sec. 30-28. - Littering. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means all kinds of garbage, trash, debris and junk, including kitchen waste, glass, cans, plastic or paper containers, newspapers, magazines, slag, gravel, construction materials, dead animals, abandoned motor vehicles and parts thereof, discarded furniture and appliances, leaves and other lawn or garden waste and other refuse and discarded matter of every kind and description. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any street, highway or alley, any public building and the grounds thereof, marshland and any body of water or watercourse and the shores thereof, any park, playground or recreational area, and private property which is open to view from public property or other private property. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of littering by dumping, depositing, throwing or leaving litter on any public or private property within the county. 
(c)  Subsection (b) of this section shall not apply under the following circumstances: 
(1)  If the litter is placed in a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; 
(2)  If the litter is being stored temporarily in an orderly and unobtrusive manner on private property in the course of routine commercial, institutional or industrial business operations; 
(3)  If litter such as discarded furniture and appliances or other items too large to be placed in a receptacle or container are being stored temporarily in an orderly and unobtrusive manner on residential property, not to exceed ten days; or 
(4)  If leaves and other lawn and garden waste are left on or near the public right-of-way and not on any paved area of the right-of-way, awaiting routine pickup by city employees. 
(Ord. No. MC5, § 5) 
Chapter 32 - SIGNS 

Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advertising sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, profession, idea, product, service, activity or entertainment not conducted, sold or offered on the premises upon which the sign is located. It may either be freestanding or be attached to a building. 
Business identification pylon sign means a sign erected on a single pole or multiple poles which contains only the name or the nature of the business conducted on the premises on which it is located. 
Business identification sign means a sign that contains the name of the business enterprise located on the same premises as the sign and the nature of the business conducted there. Not more than one-third of the area of a business identification sign may be devoted to commodity or service advertising. 
Directional sign means a sign containing directional information about public places owned or operated by state, federal or local governments or their agencies; publicly or privately owned natural phenomena, historic, cultural, scientific, educational, and religious sites, and areas of natural scenic beauty or naturally suited for outdoor recreation, deemed to be in the interest of the traveling public. 
Freestanding sign means a sign or signs on one side only, or it may be on a V-shaped structure, or one containing signs back-to-back. A freestanding sign structure is one sign, not attached to a building and supported by any other structure in or upon the ground, excluding mobile signs. 
Illuminated sign means when artificial illumination techniques are used in any fashion to project the message on a sign, that sign shall be an illuminated sign. 
Individual letter business sign consists of individual letters that spell the name of the business and are placed on the wall of the business. 
Information sign means a sign containing information other than directions, traffic or warning erected by a public agency. 
Mobile sign means a sign designed and constructed in such a manner as to readily allow changes of location. 
Monument sign means a sign structure that is either single-faced or double-faced located near the front property line indicating the name of the center's or site's general activity and may include the names of business occupants therein. 
Projecting sign means a sign extending outward not more than eight feet from the wall of a building and located overhead not less than the height of the first story ceiling. 
Roof sign structure means one business sign either single-faced or double-faced located on the roof of the business advertised by the sign and extending upward not more than eight feet high. 
Sign means and includes every sign, billboard, poster panel, freestanding ground sign, roof sign, projecting sign, pylon sign, illuminated sign, sign painted on a wall, window, marquee, awning or canopy, and shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, ribbon, banner, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when the same is placed in view of the general public, traveling along a public street right-of-way. 
Sign area means the area of the face of the sign formed by a perimeter consisting of a series of straight lines enclosing all parts of the sign. The area of a freestanding sign structure is the area of the face on each side only. 
Traffic sign means a sign containing information for direction of all moving traffic/vehicles erected by a public agency. 
Wall sign means a sign attached to the wall of a building and not projecting more than 12 inches from the building. 
Warning sign means a sign containing information to alert traffic to special conditions on the street/highway erected by a public agency. 
(Ord., § 802) 
Sec. 32-2. - General provisions. 
(a)  No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this chapter. 
(b)  Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not permitted to become dilapidated. 
(c)  All signs located on sites abutting or visible from the I-95 right-of-way shall conform with section 95A-916 of the state outdoor advertising code and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under said code. In instances where the sign controls of this chapter are more strict, these regulations shall apply. The creation, construction or maintenance of signs in areas adjacent to and/or visible from primary and interstate highway system rights-of-way shall be limited to: C-N neighborhood commercial, C-G general commercial, C-I interchange commercial, I-R restricted industrial, and I-G general industrial land use districts. 
(d)  No signs, except as otherwise specified, shall exceed the height limit of the district in which they are located. 
(e)  Any sign which advertises an activity, business, product, or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six months of the discontinuance of said activity. 
(Ord., § 801) 
Sec. 32-3. - Permit required. 
(a)  A sign permit is required before a sign or banner may be erected or attached to, suspended from or supported on a building or structure; and before an existing sign may be enlarged, relocated or materially improved, except for painting of the structure or sign frame or the replacement of lights or mechanical parts. 
(b)  A sign permit shall be issued by the building and zoning inspector when the plans specifications and intended use of the applied sign conforms in all respects to the applicable provisions of this chapter and in accordance with article IX of appendix B to this Code, and any other applicable law or ordinance. 
(c)  The building and zoning inspector is hereby authorized to issue a temporary permit for a special event sign to be placed along the rights-of-way, county-owned properties, or privately owned properties zoned commercial or industrial whereby the public will be informed about an upcoming event or directed to the location of an event. Said temporary permit shall require a $100.00 cash bond and shall allow the signs to be posted no earlier than 14 days on private property or five days on county property prior to the event nor longer than five days after the event, regardless of the property's ownership. Signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in area. The location and size of any sign must be approved by the building and zoning inspector and road superintendent before a temporary permit is issued. 
(d)  The building and zoning inspector is hereby authorized to issue a temporary permit for political signs during any normal campaign period for any election for public office. Political signs located on private property shall not exceed the area limitations set forth in each particular zoning district. Said temporary permit shall require a $100.00 cash bond and shall be from last day of qualification (as established by applicable federal, state or local law) till five days after the election date. 
(e)  All temporary signs must be removed by the permittee or erector of the sign by the fifth day after the occurrence of the event, including but not limited to any special event, election, sale or lease of real estate, or the conveyance of 75 percent of the subdivision lots. If such temporary signs are not removed by the fifth day, the permittee of those signs requiring permits shall forfeit the $100.00 cash bond. Upon forfeiture of the bond by the permittee, the county public works department shall be authorized to remove and dispose of the affected signs. Those temporary signs not requiring permits shall be removed according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Signs must be maintained in good condition and not permitted to become dilapidated. Each application and sign permit shall contain an agreement to indemnify and hold the county harmless of all damages, demands or expenses of every character which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure, either permanent, or temporary. 
(g)  Permits shall not be required for official signs, real estate signs, construction signs, temporary subdivision signs, temporary window signs, instructional/informational signs, official notices issued by any court, public agency or officer, and allowed home occupation signs under the regulations set forth in section 32-5(a). 
(h)  A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six months after the date of issuance. For purposes of this section, an outdoor advertising sign shall be completed if the sign base has been constructed. 
(i)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the ordinary servicing, repainting of an existing sign message, cleaning of a sign, nor to changing of advertising on a sign specifically designed for periodic change of message without change in structure, such as a billboard, or similar type of sign. 
(j)  No permit shall be issued until fees have been paid as established by the county board of commissioners and a sketch plan showing the following information has been filed with the building and zoning inspector: 
(1)  Sketch plan showing the exact location of signs, setbacks from rights-of-way, and proximity to driveways, curbs, buildings, and other structures; and 
(2)  Elevation drawings showing height, width, and style of signs and other structures. 
a.  No permit shall be issued for signs to be located in excess of 20 feet in height from ground level until the applicant provides signed and sealed engineering results certified by a professional engineer registered in state that such signs can withstand a 100-mile-per-hour wind load. 
b.  A permit fee shall be paid to the county for each permit required by this chapter. The fee shall be increased in direct relation to the increase in the dollar value of the sign according to the rate schedule in the office of the building and zoning inspector. 
(Ord., § 803) 
Sec. 32-4. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Signs imitating warning signals are prohibited. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles; nor shall any signs use the terms, slogans, dimensional shape and size, or colors of the governmental traffic signs. 
(b)  No signs, except traffic signs and signals and informational signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
(c)  Signs painted or attached to natural features (such as trees or rocks), telephone poles, utility poles, or fence posts are prohibited. 
(d)  Fluttering ribbons and banners are prohibited. 
(e)  Signs within 300 feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument are prohibited. 
(Ord., § 804) 
Sec. 32-5. - Regulations for specific types of signs. 
(a)  Home occupation signs. One non-illuminated professional or business nameplate not exceeding two square feet in area, affixed to the facade, is permitted. 
(b)  Signs of work under construction. One non-illuminated sign, not exceeding 40 square feet in area displaying the name of the building, the contractors, the architects, the engineers, the owners, the financial selling and development agencies is permitted upon the premises of any work under construction, alteration, or removal. Such sign shall be removed from the site within 30 days after the completion of the project. 
(c)  Temporary subdivision signs. Temporary signs, not exceeding 40 square feet in area announcing a land subdivision development, are permitted on the premises of the land subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced not less than 300 feet apart. They shall be removed when 75 percent of the lots are conveyed. 
(d)  Private directional signs. Signs indicating the location and direction of premises available for or in the process of development, but not erected upon such premises, and having inscribed thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder, or agent may be erected and maintained provided: 
(1)  The size of any such sign is not in excess of six square feet, and not in excess of four feet in length; and 
(2)  Not more than one such sign is erected on each 500 feet of street frontage. 
(e)  Roof signs. Not more than one roof sign structure may be erected on the roof of any one building. No roof sign structure shall extend more than 25 feet above the elevation of the roof. 
(f)  Wall signs. Signs on the walls of a building (including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs and projecting signs) shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Signs on the front surface of a building. The total area of signs on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed 25 percent of the front surface of the building, so long as the figure does not exceed the total amount of sign area permitted within the zoning district where the sign or signs are to be located. 
(2)  Signs on the side and rear surface of a building. The total area of signs on a side or rear surface of building shall not exceed 50 percent of the exterior side or rear surface of the building respectively, so long as this figure does not exceed the total amount of sign area permitted within the zoning district where the sign or signs are to be located. 
(3)  Sign area. The combined sign area on the front, side and rear surface of a building must not exceed the total sign area permitted within the zoning districts where the signs are to be located. 
(4)  Projecting signs. Wall signs attached flat to a wall may not extend more than 24 inches from the wall. 
(5)  Signs attached at an angle. Signs attached at an angle to a wall may extend outward from the wall of a building not more than five feet. 
(g)  Illuminated signs. Illumination devices shall be so placed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast into any residential district, sleeping rooms in any district or the eyes of an automobile or vehicular driver. 
(h)  Outdoor advertising signs. If visible from the Interstate 95 right-of-way and appropriately zoned, signs shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Illumination. All illuminated signs shall use base-mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting including, but not limited to, neon, animation and running lights is prohibited. 
(2)  Height above interstate grade. All signs shall be a minimum of ten feet above adjacent interstate pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. Signs shall not exceed 30 feet in height. Two signs in the same location (back-to-back or "V" formation) shall be the same height above the interstate's surface. 
(3)  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
(4)  Number of signs per location. Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back-to-back or "V" formation signs but prohibits two signs (side-by-side) facing the same direction. 
(5)  Spacing. Sign locations shall be no less than 500 feet apart measuring from the two closest points. 
(6)  Proximity to property. Sign structures shall be no less than ten feet from any property or right-of-way line. 
(7)  Locations limits per quadrant. A maximum of three sign locations shall be permitted per interchange quadrant provided that spacing requirements can be met. 
(8)  Marsh and historic area locations prohibited. No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of a marshland area or an area of designated historic interest. 
(9)  Advertisement limitations. Outdoor advertising shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Travel service facilities including lodging, gas, food, camping; 
b.  Areas of scenic beauty; 
c.  Public attractions including historic, natural, scientific or recreational amenities; and 
d.  Any combination of the facilities listed in this subsection (h)(9). Further, the content of all advertising shall be directional in nature. 
(10)  Shall be located in an interchange commercial (C-I) zoning district. 
(i)  Spotlights. The use of spotlights and other similar illumination devices may be permitted in commercial zoning districts upon issuance of a special use permit, subject to the following additional restrictions: 
(1)  No spotlight may be directed at lower than 22½ degrees. For purposes of determining the degree of angle, zero degrees shall be considered directly up and above the spotlight. The lowest illuminated portion of any such light shall not shine lower than 22½ degrees. 
(2)  No spotlight shall shine or illuminate the atmosphere directly above any portion of a residential district. Therefore, neither the light nor the illuminated atmosphere or clouds shall not be visible using the naked eye from any residential district while looking straight up within a residential district. 
(3)  By seeking a special use permit for a spotlight, applicants are hereby placed on notice that the issuance of a special permit for use of a spotlight shall be revocable by the county board of commissioners, with or without the consent of the zoning board, at any time after issuance. Said applicants are hereby placed on notice that the nuisance caused by such a spotlight may not be determinable in advance of issuance of such permit. 
For purposes of this subsection, the term "spotlight" shall include any other similar illumination device. 
(Ord., § 805) 
Sec. 32-6. - Signs permitted in A-F district. 
(a)  For permitted home occupations, one non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area. 
(b)  For uses other than dwellings, a single illuminated or non-illuminated institution or business identification sign or bulletin board not exceeding 20 square feet in area. Such sign shall be set back not less than 15 feet from the street right-of-way line unless attached to the front wall of a building. 
(c)  Temporary subdivision signs and private directional signs, under the provisions set forth in section 32-3(c) and (d). 
(d)  Off-premises signs, provided such signs are not visible from the rights-of-way of I-95 and U.S. 17 and do not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(Ord., § 806) 
Sec. 32-7. - Districts. 
(a)  For permitted home occupations, one non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area. 
(b)  For uses other than dwellings, a single illuminated or non-illuminated institution or identification sign or bulletin board not exceeding six square feet in area. 
(c)  Temporary subdivision signs and private directional signs, under the provisions set forth in section 32-5(c) and (d). 
(Ord., § 807) 
Sec. 32-8. - Signs permitted in MH districts. 
One non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area mounted flat against the wall of a building in which there is conducted a permitted home occupation. Signs, illuminated or non-illuminated; not to exceed a combined total sign area of 100 square feet per mobile home park; and that where a mobile home park abuts a federal primary or interstate highway, only one business identification sign, illuminated or non-illuminated, not to exceed a total sign area of 100 square feet per mobile home park. 
(Ord., § 808) 
Sec. 32-9. - Signs permitted in C-N districts. 
(a)  All signs permitted in section 32-6 and section 32-7. 
(b)  The number of signs shall be limited to three for each street on which the establishment fronts. The maximum size of a sign for any business establishment shall be 64 square feet. 
(c)  Roof signs and wall signs must comply with the requirements of section 32-5(e) and (f). 
(Ord., § 809) 
Sec. 32-10. - Signs permitted in C-G, C-I, and I-G districts. 
(a)  All signs permitted in A-F, A-R, R-1, R-2 districts are permitted in commercial and industrial districts. 
(b)  On any occupied zoning lot in a commercial or industrial district, not more than four signs of any type having a total area of not more than 750 square feet shall be permitted. 
(c)  Commercial or industrial uses located on or adjacent to major streets or controlled access thoroughfares in commercial or industrial districts may include as part of their total permitted sign area, one business identification pylon sign which shall be erected so that no portion of the sign shall be less than ten feet back from the street right-of-way line. 
(d)  Roof signs or wall signs shall, in no case, exceed the requirements of section 32-5(e) and (f). 
(e)  Additional sign structures, each of which does not exceed 600 square feet of combined total sign area per direction, are permitted providing they are spaced not closer than 500 linear feet from any other sign structure on the same side of an interstate highway or 300 linear feet on a federal primary highway. 
(f)  Signs in any commercial or industrial district may be illuminated. 
(g)  Each commercial use in a C-I district shall be allowed one business identification sign not to exceed 80 feet in height as part of its total permitted sign area. 
(Ord., § 810) 
Sec. 32-11. - Signs permitted in CP districts. 
One non-illuminated business identification sign not exceeding 20 square feet in area may be erected for each use permitted in a conservation-preservation district. Other directional or historical signs approved by the planning commission and county commission shall also be permitted. 
(Ord., § 811) 
Sec. 32-12. - Signs permitted in maritime districts. 
One non-illuminated business identification sign not exceeding 20 square feet in area may be erected for each use permitted in the maritime district. Other directional or historical signs approved by the planning commission and county commission shall also be permitted. 
(Ord., § 812) 
Sec. 32-13. - Signs permitted in the Hog Hammock (HH) District. 
(a)  Signs shall be in conformance with section 32-7. 
(b)  Other directional or historical signs approved by the planning commission and county commission shall also be permitted. 
(Ord., § 813) 
Sec. 32-14. - Signs permitted in the Waterfront View Overlay (WVO) District. 
One non-illuminated business identification sign not exceeding 20 square feet in area may be erected for each use permitted in a waterfront view overlay district. Other directional or historical signs approved by the planning commission and county commission shall also be permitted. 
(Ord., § 814) 
Chapter 34 - SOLID AND HAZARDOUS WASTES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Garbage and solid waste collection and disposal are authorized as a home rule power of the counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-19. - Short title. 
This article shall also be known and cited as the "Clean Community Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-40) 
Sec. 34-20. - Declaration of intent. 
It is the intention of the board of commissioners in enacting this article to provide for uniform collection of solid waste in the unincorporated area of the county; to provide for the uniform prohibition throughout the unincorporated area of the county of any and all littering on public or private property, and to curb thereby the desecration of the beauty of the county which is harmful to the health, welfare and safety of its citizens. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-41) 
Sec. 34-21. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
Building material means any material such as lumber, roofing material, brick, concrete block, plaster, gutters sand, gravel or other substances used in repairs or alteration of existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing structures. 
Bulk container means a metal container of not less than four cubic yards and not larger than eight cubic yards, watertight, with lids opening on top and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by specifically equipped trucks used by the county. The bulk container, while in service and use, shall be equipped with a lid or cover. All new bulk containers used in the unincorporated areas of the county shall comply with these specifications. 
Business trash means any waste accumulation such as dust, paper, cardboard, excelsior, rags or other substances, except for garbage or household trash, which are usually attendant to the operation of stores, offices, commercial buildings and similar type activities. 
Commercial establishment means any building devoted to the retail or wholesale sales uses, warehousing uses, institutional uses, religious uses, governmental uses, or other nonresidential uses at which garbage or trash may be generated. 
Director or superintendent means the principal officer of the department of environmental services of the county. 
Disposal site or landfill means a tract of land or a facility designated by the county for the use as a site for the disposal of solid waste, putrescible waste, hazardous waste or other waste, except this term shall not be deemed to include land or a facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling by the owner, occupant or lessee thereof. 
Domestic refuse means any solid waste defined herein as garbage, business trash, yard trash, and household trash. 
Garbage means the byproduct of animal, or vegetable food resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to putrefaction, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding areas or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Hazardous refuse or hazardous waste means any waste containing any substance listed as a hazardous constituent in regulations promulgated pursuant to the federal act by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency which are in force and effect on February 1, 1990, codified as Appendix VIII to 40 CFR 261, Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste. This includes materials such as poisons, acids, caustics matter or solutions, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, explosives, sewage sludge, radioactive materials and highly flammable substances and all pathological wastes. 
Household furniture means appliances and furnishings including sofas, chairs, beds, refrigerators, washers, dryers, hot water heaters, and similar items, but not including furnaces. 
Household trash means forms of waste such as paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans, or all other materials of any kind, other than garbage, which is normally attendant to the occupancy of a building for dwelling purposes; except this term shall not include an appliance or furniture. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semi-solids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing concerns. 
Junk means any old and dilapidated automobiles, trucks, tractors, and other such vehicles and parts thereof, wagons and other kinds of vehicles and parts thereof, scrap building material, scrap piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery, rags, paper, excelsior, hair, mattresses, beds or bedding; or any other kind of furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, or building materials that are, wholly or partially, discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or abandoned, including any inoperative motor vehicles without a valid license plate attached thereto or heavy equipment or parts thereof that are scrap or waste material which is stored, kept, handled, or displayed. 
Litter means all garbage, refuse, waste, materials, sand gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals, abandoned vehicles, appliances, scrap metal, or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in the accordance with the provisions of this article, or any discarded materials of every kind and description which are not solid waste as such term is defined herein. 
Loading and unloading area means space or area used by any moving vehicle or other form of transportation for the purpose of receiving, shipping, and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons, which shall be established pursuant to the county zoning ordinance. 
Multifamily dwelling means a dwelling designed for and occupied by two or more families living independently of each other as separate housekeeping units, including apartment houses, apartments, duplexes, townhouses, or condominiums, and flats, but not including auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels, or resort-type hotels. 
Multifamily projects means a group of multiple family dwellings, as defined in the county zoning ordinance, consisting of more than two units located on the same premises. 
Rowhouse condominium means a multifamily dwelling complex as which all individual units are owned as undivided real estate parcels and each unit has a ground level entrance directly onto the street. 
Scavenge or scavenging means unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
Single-family or one-family dwelling unit means a private residential building used or intended to be used as a home or residence in which all living rooms are accessible to each other from within the building, and in which the use and management of all sleeping quarters, all appliances for sanitation, cooking, ventilating, heating, cooling, or lighting are designed for the use of one family only on a minimum of a single lot. The term "single-family or one-family dwelling unit" includes modular homes. 
Small dead animals means dead cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size having weight of less than 50 pounds. 
Solid waste or refuse means an accumulation of garbage, household trash, yard trash, and business trash as defined in this section. 
Solid waste or refuse receptacle means a metal or plastic container of substantial construction, with tight-fitting lid, and equipped with handles sufficient for the safe and convenient handling thereof; or plastic bags for dry refuse and yard trash only. 
Yard trash or yard trimmings means waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, lawn, grass, tree or shrubbery cuttings or clippings and dry leaf rakings, free of dirt, rocks, large branches and other bulky or noncombustible material, other natural waste; except this term shall not include such accumulations of waste created as a result of mining, agricultural, and silvicultural business operations. 
(Ord. of 4-10-1984, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-42) 
Sec. 34-22. - Transportation of refuse. 
All persons who desire to haul refuse over roads which are a part of the county road system shall use a vehicle provided with a cover and operate it so as to prevent refuse from being dropped, blown, or spilled therefrom. 
(Res. of 11-8-1977, § I(2); Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-43) 
Sec. 34-23. - Maintenance of property. 
(a)  Property. All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a litter-free condition. 
(b)  Sweeping into sidewalks or street. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk the accumulation of litter from any building or property. 
(Res. of 11-8-1987, §I(3); Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-44) 
Sec. 34-24. - Special refuse disposal. 
(a)  Contagious disease refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from some or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be decontaminated prior to removal under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in receptacles or bulk containers for county collection until decontaminated. 
(b)  Hypodermic instruments. No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by wrapping or securing same in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(c)  Cardboard boxes and carton. Prior to depositing refuse for collection in authorized containers or receptacles or in commercial containers, the person disposing of any such boxes or cartons or the person in charge of the premises shall collapse all cardboard boxes and cartons. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-45) 
Sec. 34-25. - Nuisances designated. 
Within the county, it shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance on his property or property occupied by him, or to allow a nuisance to remain on his property or property occupied by him. Dead animals, stagnant water, decayed vegetables or fruits, filthy privies or unkept stables or anything having an offensive odor, or anything that causes injury or damage to the health or life of any other person, are declared nuisances. 
(Res. of 11-8-1977, § I(4); Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-46) 
Sec. 34-26. - Trash and weeds; duty of the responsible person. 
(a)  Within the county, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain his premises, including vacant lots or land, in such a way as to allow trash, garbage or miscellaneous refuse to accumulate if the condition of the property causes a nuisance, or causes injury to the health or welfare of residents in the vicinity, or causes injury to neighboring property. 
(b)  Within the county, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, cause or permit uncut grass or weeds on any property under such circumstances that the grass or weed becomes a breeding place for insects, rodents, or reptiles, or constitutes a fire hazard. 
(c)  Within the county, drive-in restaurants and other food establishments that permit carry-out food service shall maintain at all times on their premises sufficient receptacles for the disposal of trash, garbage, and miscellaneous refuse. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-47) 
Sec. 34-27. - Abandoned motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful to abandon any motor vehicle as provided by the Official Code of Georgia. Any motor vehicle abandoned within the county shall be disposed of by the proper authorities as provided by the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-48) 
Sec. 34-28. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw, leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(1)  The property is designated by the county or any agency of the state for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. of 4-10-1984, § 4; Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-49) 
Secs. 34-29—34-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 34-60. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this division dealing with an act which is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, or whenever this division declares the doing of any act to be unlawful, such person upon conviction shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-55) 
Sec. 34-61. - Superintendent of roads. 
The collection, transportation and disposal of refuse shall be under the supervision and control of the superintendent of roads in the county. In the performance of his duties, the director shall have the authority to establish routes and days of collection, types and locations of refuse containers, and such other matters as may pertain to the collection, transportation and disposal of refuse as he may deem necessary and reasonable. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-50) 
Sec. 34-62. - Collections. 
(a)  By county. All refuse, except building materials as defined in section 34-21, generated or accumulated in the unincorporated areas of the county shall be collected, transported and disposed of by the county. 
(b)  Private collection. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect refuse within the county, except from his own residence, business, or industrial plant, without first having obtained a proper permit from the state department of natural resources and the county and without first having obtained a county business license. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-51) 
Sec. 34-63. - Receptacles and containers. 
(a)  Required. Every person in possession, charge or control of any building or from which business trash, industrial waste or other waste is accumulated or produced shall be required by this division to provide and/or keep on site bulk containers in a suitable place readily accessible to the county's collection crews or other licensed private collector, receptacles and containers suitable for the storage of all such waste materials which will normally accumulate between the established collection dates. The superintendent shall determine the quantity and location of said bulk container and that containers are in a serviceable condition. 
(b)  Safety. All receptacles and containers that are required by this division shall be of safe construction and design and shall be maintained in good, orderly and serviceable condition at all times. Any publicly or privately owned receptacle or container which does not conform to the requirements of this division or the policies established by the director, or which have ragged or sharp edges or any other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents therefrom or the public generally, shall be promptly replaced by the user thereof. If said container, after appropriate notice, has not been replaced, the county road superintendent shall have the right to suspend further collection of such waste material until such time as the container is brought into compliance. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-52) 
Sec. 34-64. - Responsible enforcement agency; violation procedures. 
Enforcement of this division shall be the responsibility of the road superintendent, inspectors designated by him, the sheriff, and his lawful deputy sheriffs. Any person or persons authorized to enforce this division shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable times in order to inspect the property for violations of this division. 
(1)  The county commission, the road superintendent, or inspectors designated by him, shall investigate complaints or violations of any provisions of this division. They shall determine if there has been a violation and to initiate an attempt to obtain compliance with this division by the person in violation thereof. 
(2)  The superintendent or his designated inspectors shall be authorized to sign a complaint with the approval of the county attorney against said violator with the county law enforcement agency. 
(3)  Upon appropriate notice to the person violating this division, the county road superintendent may suspend any service or the use of any facility maintained by the county during the period such violation continues to exist. 
(4)  Any person violating the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. Any suspended or probated sentence shall substitute a symbolic restitution to replace that portion of the sentence, fine or confinement, suspended or probated. Such community service shall be performed under the supervision of the county magistrate court. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-53) 
Sec. 34-65. - Prima facie evidence rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of the provisions of this division, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance violated the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of the provisions of this division is discovered to contain any articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-54) 
Secs. 34-66—34-88. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISPOSAL 

Sec. 34-89. - Precollection practices—Generally. 
The following practices and procedures shall be employed by persons in the county in order to facilitate the disposal of solid wastes: 
(1)  Refuse. All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers as specified herein. 
(2)  Standard refuse disposal. Citizens shall place refuse in securely tied plastic bags. Tree and shrubbery trimmings not suitable for bagging shall be taken to the county landfill. 
(3)  Garbage. All garbage placed in containers for disposal shall first be drained of all liquids, and shall be wrapped, bagged, or enclosed in paper or plastic material. 
(4)  Household trash. All household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its being placed in refuse receptacles. Household trash may be combined with garbage. 
(5)  Injurious trash items. All waste material of an injurious nature, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes, and television tubes shall be securely packaged or wrapped for the purpose of preventing injury to the collection crews or other third parties. 
(6)  Hazardous refuse and building materials. No hazardous refuse or building materials shall be placed in any receptacle at any time, unless such refuse is to be disposed of by the person packaging said refuse. The county shall not be required to collect any hazardous refuse, or building material. All hazardous refuse shall be secured against the possibility of causing injury to any person and shall not be placed on public property or private property without the written consent of the owner thereof. 
(7)  Yard trash, tree and shrubbery trimmings in excess of that allowed for standard collection may be collected by the county as a special collection. Special collections are scheduled by appointment and are subject to a fee as established by resolution of the board of commissioners from time to time, and available for public examination in the office of the county clerk. 
(8)  Trees shrubbery branches, etc. Tree and shrubbery branches, limbs and trimmings cut by landscape or tree service contractors or other commercial workmen or resulting from land being cleared shall not be collected by the county, but shall be collected and removed to the county landfill by those who have performed the work or shall be removed by the person for whom the work was performed. 
(9)  Household furniture and furnishings must be transported to landfill. Upon request, the county may collect normal household furniture and appliances, including sofas, chairs, beds, refrigerators, washers, dryers, hot water heaters, and similar items, but not including furnaces. Persons requesting this service shall be notified by the superintendent as to the date collection will occur. The board of commissioners shall have the right to set and collect a fee for this service. This fee shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners from time to time, and available for public examination in the office of the county clerk. 
(Res. of 11-8-1987, §§ I(5), II(2), (6), (7); Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-56) 
Sec. 34-90. - Same—Prohibited activities. 
The following activities are hereby declared to be unlawful and in violation of this division: 
(1)  Public roads/streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulation of refuse and trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property except with the written consent thereof and then only in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(2)  Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any solid waste, trash, refuse, receptacle, or container on, over or near any storm drain or drainage ditches, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(3)  Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this division is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the director shall arise the presumption that such person intended to violate this division. 
(4)  Junk. It shall be unlawful for any person to take or leave outside any building or dwelling any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material, junked motor vehicle, or other items which is not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. Any such item or items which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of 30 days after notice of violation of this division, shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the county without further notice. The county may charge the owner or occupant a fee for the cost of removing said items. This section shall not apply to licensed junk dealers or currently licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvaging of equipment. 
(5)  Appliances. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing therefrom the lock or door. This section shall not apply to any appliance, refrigerator or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and which has been crated, strapped or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. 
(6)  Scavenging. No person shall disturb or interfere with any dumpster container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, or remove any contents therefrom. 
(7)  Scattering of refuse and littering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
a.  Throw or deposit any refuse on any public or private street or to scatter such refuse or litter on any public or private property. 
b.  Throw or deposit any refuse trash, or debris in any marsh area, stream, drainage ditch, body of water or beach area. 
(8)  Use of streets. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any county road to transport same without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle. This section shall not apply to the transportation of poultry, livestock, silage or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock. 
No person shall willfully damage a container, or alter the location of a container without consent of the board of county commissioners or the director. 
(Res. of 11-8-1977, §§ I(6), (7), II(8); Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-57) 
Sec. 34-91. - Same—Handbills and advertising matter. 
In addition to the activities declared to be in violation of this division as set forth hereinabove, the following activities are hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this division: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to place in or on any vehicle in the county any commercially oriented handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, or other literature except with the express permission of the owner or the occupant of such automobile. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place on any private property any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard, bulletin, newspaper or other literature, whether single page or multi-page, unless said literature is placed in a secure area of a building (such as a door jam, screen door, etc.) or attached to a building or structure by means which will not alter or damage the building or structure (such as hanging literature from a doorknob, placing literature in a container to hang from a doorknob, etc.). This section shall not apply to United States Postal Service deliveries (which are made to containers erected for the purpose of containment). Subscription newspaper (newspapers which are delivered under contract with the owner or occupant) shall be exempt as long as they are placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon other private property. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place on any private property any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard, bulletin, newspaper or other literature, whether single-page or multi-page, after the owner or inhabitant of the property has, either through direct communication with the publisher or distributor of the literature, or through posted and reasonably visible notice on the property, made known that any such delivery is prohibited. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tack, post or nail any paper, metal, wood, or other signs of character on trees, on any telegraph, telephone or electric light pole, located in any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-58) 
Sec. 34-92. - Temporary signs. 
The county commission or superintendent is authorized to issue permits for the erection and maintenance of temporary signs for a period not to exceed 30 days (except as provided for political signs), at the expiration of which period the permittee shall remove such temporary signs. The commission may levee fines for failure to comply with this division. Such signs include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Business signs calling attention to a special, unique, or limited activity, service, product or sale of limited duration. 
(2)  Signs advertising political candidates or parties, provided that such signs may not be erected or maintained more than 30 days prior to the next election to which such signs are applicable and shall be removed within ten days following such election. 
(3)  Signs giving notice of events and activities sponsored by civic, patriotic, or religious organizations for noncommercial purposes. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-59) 
Sec. 34-93. - Special refuse and wastes. 
(a)  Industrial waste. Any entity producing hazardous waste shall be required to register annually with the county health department. Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by any factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing said waste, shall be disposed of according to county health department and environmental protection agency standards. 
(b)  Hazardous refuse. No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any dumpster used for collection of refuse by the county. Any industry producing or creating hazardous waste shall coordinate disposal of such waste with industrial waste management. 
(c)  Dead animals. Small dead animals will be accepted by the county during operating hours of the county landfill provided the body is appropriately wrapped. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(d)  Building materials. The county shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling of building material originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of new building, alterations or additions to an existing building of whatever type or from demolition of existing structures. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. 
(e)  Hazardous or liquid waste. Hazardous or liquid waste or highly combustible industrial waste shall not be disposed of in the county landfill. 
(Res. of 11-8-1987, § II(5); Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-62) 
Sec. 34-94. - Disposal fees. 
The board of county commissioners shall from time to time establish disposal fees at the landfill by resolution of the county commission. Disposal fees shall not apply to solid waste, yard debris or construction and demolition debris brought to the landfill by county residents. The fees shall apply to anyone or business engaging in solid waste related commercial activities. 
(1)  No solid waste shall be accepted from outside of the county. 
(2)  In the event that a commercial entity is utilized for the abatement of a nuisance where the code enforcement officer has issued a citation, the county manager may waive the disposal fee if the cost is deemed a hardship for the abatement of said nuisance. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012, § 34-115) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 8, 2012, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 34-115. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 34-94 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 34-95—34-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 34-115. - Use of bulk containers. 
(a)  All commercial establishments and non-exempted multifamily dwelling projects shall use bulk containers for the collection and storage of household refuse. 
(b)  The bulk containers shall be installed so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about premises. Any spillage or overflow shall be immediately cleaned up by said establishment. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-63) 
Sec. 34-116. - Loading and unloading areas. 
All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The owner or occupant of the commercial establishment or multifamily project shall place a sufficient number of containers in said area to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. The number of such containers to be placed in service for a particular establishment or multifamily project shall be set by the director. The occupant of the premises shall maintain surveillance to ensure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. If the occupant violates this section, collection service may be suspended by the county superintendent until such time as the owner or occupant of the premises bring said premises into full compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-64) 
Sec. 34-117. - Parking lots. 
(a)  All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide refuse receptacles within the parking area. The director shall have the authority to determine the number and type of receptacles necessary to provide proper containerization. Such receptacles shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his agent to collect the refuse and trash deposited in such containers and store this material in a location until collected by the county. 
(b)  It shall be the obligation of all persons using the parking areas to place any litter in receptacles or containers, and it shall be unlawful for any person to dump, scatter, or throw on any parking lot, any refuse, garbage, of trash of any kind. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-65) 
Sec. 34-118. - Construction and demolition sites. 
All construction and demolition contractors shall remove all loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials, and other trash produced by those working at the construction site. The site shall be kept in a litter-free condition. Dirt, mud, construction materials, or other debris upon any public or private property belonging to a person other than the owner of the construction site shall be removed by the contractor upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-66) 
Secs. 34-119—34-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DISPOSAL SITES 

Sec. 34-150. - Use authorized; regulations. 
All household trash and other acceptable refuse shall be delivered and deposited at authorized public disposal sites in accordance with the directions and orders of the director or his representative in charge of operations except; however, privately operated sites may be used for the sanitary disposal of industrial wastes or other specified waste upon the approval of the director and upon the issuance of appropriate disposal permits, as required by the regulations of the state department of natural resources and/or the federal environmental agency. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-67) 
Sec. 34-151. - Designation of sites. 
(a)  Public sites approved for the disposal of refuse shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners, and identified by appropriate directional signs posted near the roadside at the location of the county landfill. 
(b)  Such sites shall be maintained in use until permanently closed, at which time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting and through public advertisements. 
(c)  The county board of commissioners may restrict certain sites or portions thereof to specific types of refuse. 
(d)  Commercial collectors, including yard maintenance men, may use the public-designated sites. 
(e)  Residents of the county, other than commercial collectors, may use public sites without charge, in accordance with the regulations for the particular site and under the instruction of the site attendant. 
(f)  No refuse generated outside the county will be accepted at any disposal site. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-68) 
Sec. 34-152. - Operating schedule. 
Authorized public disposal sites shall be operated during the hours designated by the director. Acceptable refuse generated in the county shall be received for disposal from any resident of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-69) 
Sec. 34-153. - When use authorized; deposited material becomes property of county. 
No person shall enter a disposal site except during the hours and days prescribed in this division. All materials delivered and deposited in a disposal site shall immediately become the property of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-70) 
Sec. 34-154. - Scavenging prohibited. 
No person shall be permitted to scavenge or reclaim any refuse which has been delivered to a public disposal site for disposal. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-71) 
Sec. 34-155. - Certain types of refuse accepted for disposal or recycling. 
(a)  Domestic refuse shall be accepted for disposal at the county landfill. 
(b)  Industrial waste and hazardous waste shall not be accepted for disposal at the county landfill. 
(c)  Building materials may be accepted for disposal at the county landfill upon such terms and conditions as may be determined by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Materials for recycling shall be separated for storage at each disposal site. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-72) 
Sec. 34-156. - Private disposal sites—Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited on land under his ownership and control any refuse without first having obtained a disposal area permit as required by regulations of the state department of natural resources, the federal environment protection agency and the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-73) 
Sec. 34-157. - Same—General maintenance. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-74) 
Sec. 34-158. - Same—Superintendent's right to enter to inspect. 
The superintendent or his designated representative shall have the right to enter a private disposal site at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting the site to determine whether or not the site is in compliance with this division and all other pertinent laws and regulations of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-75) 
Sec. 34-159. - Burning prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall set fire to, or burn any papers or other refuse deposited at any disposal site or on the grounds thereof, within the county. 
(b)  No garbage or other materials, from which offensive odors emanate during combustion shall be burned outside of any building, within the county. 
(Ord. of 6-13-1989, § 16-7-76) 
Secs. 34-160—34-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HAZARDOUS WASTES 

Sec. 34-186. - Title. 
This article shall also be known as the "McIntosh County Private Solid Waste, Biomedical and Hazardous Waste Ordinance." 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § I) 
Sec. 34-187. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Regulate the importation, for disposal purposes, of biomedical and hazardous waste and private solid waste into the county, in a manner so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to preserve the environmental resources of the county and to conserve the county landfill capabilities. 
(2)  Regulate the location, operation and management of treatment facilities dealing with the storage, transfer, treatment or disposal of biomedical, hazardous waste and private solid waste. 
(3)  Regulate the disposal of private solid waste, biomedical and hazardous wastes that require special handling, and those produced within the county, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(4)  Stipulate permits that are required and how to apply for such permits. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § II) 
Sec. 34-188. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Autoclave means a controlled process by which solid, liquid and gaseous wastes are sterilized, leaving a residue that is considered sterile. 
Autoclaving facility means all devices, combined at one single location under one ownership, intended or used for the autoclaving and sterilization of solid, liquid or gaseous wastes. 
Biomedical waste means and includes the following: 
(1)  Pathological waste, which means all recognizable human tissues and body parts which are removed during surgery, obstetrical procedures, autopsy, and laboratory procedures. 
(2)  Biological waste, which means bulk blood and blood products, exudates, secretions, suctionings, and other bulk body fluids which cannot be or are not directly discarded into a municipal sewer system. 
(3)  Cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals including cultures from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the production of biologicals, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate, and mix cultures. 
(4)  Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, their bedding, and other wastes from such animals that have been exposed to infectious agents, capable of causing disease in man, including but not limited to those produced during research, production of biologicals, or testing of pharmaceuticals. 
(5)  Sharps, which means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, items such as needles, IV tubing and syringes and needles attached, and scalpel blades. 
(6)  Chemotherapy waste, which means any disposable material that has come in contact with cytotoxic/antineoplastic agents (agents toxic to cells) and/or antineoplastic agents (agents that inhibit or prevent the growth and spread of tumors or malignant cells) during the preparation, handling, and administration of such agents. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, masks, gloves, gowns, empty IV tubing bags and vials, and other contaminated materials. The waste in this subsection must first be classified as empty which means such quantity that it is not subject to other federal or state waste management regulations prior to being handled as biomedical waste. 
(7)  Discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have not been decontaminated, that were in contact with infectious agents. 
Biomedical waste treatment facility means any property or facility that is intended for, or used for, storage, treatment or disposal of biomedical waste. 
Decontamination means the removal of contamination from biomedical waste during the microwaving process. 
Environmental quality board (EQB) means a board of five citizens, not serving on the zoning board, appointed by the county commission to assist in the administration of this article. 
Hazardous waste means and include any waste containing any substance listed as a hazardous constituent in regulations promulgated pursuant to the federal act by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency which are in force and effect on February 1, 1990, codified as appendix VIII to 40 CFR 261, Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste. 
Hazardous waste treatment facility means any property or facility that is intended for, or used for, storage, treatment, or disposal of hazardous waste. 
Incineration means a controlled process by which solid, liquid and gaseous combustible wastes are burned and changed into gases and a residue produced which is relatively free of combustible materials. 
Incineration facility means the combined incinerators under one ownership at a single location. 
Incinerator means all devices intended or used for the reduction or destruction of solid, liquid or gaseous wastes by burning. 
Incinerator ash means the residue remaining after the incineration of solid waste. 
Microwave facility means all devices, combined at a single location under one ownership, intended or used for the reduction or decontamination of solid, liquid or gaseous wastes by microwaving. 
Microwaving means a process using microwave technology by means of which solid, liquid and gaseous wastes are microwaved, and disinfected. 
Operator means the person having direct supervision of daily field operations of a private landfill, or a private solid waste or a biomedical or hazardous waste treatment facility to ensure that the site operates in compliance with the permit. 
Person means the state or any other state or any agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, political subdivision, public or private corporation, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership association or other entity in this state or any other state. The term "person" also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, special district empowered in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in the state or any other state. The term "person" also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. 
Principal use autoclaving facility means a medical autoclaving facility used to treat biomedical wastes prior to disposal in a landfill. 
Principal use incinerator facility means an incinerator at a single location where the incineration process is the primary business and where the facility has the total capacity of burning greater than 250 pounds per hour. 
Principal use microwave facility means a microwave facility used to treat biomedical or other waste prior to disposal in a landfill. 
Private solid waste means solid waste not intended for disposal in the county landfill and not under the direct control of the county commission. 
Sterilization means the destruction of living germs, especially bacilli and/or bacteria and/or microbes, from biomedical waste during the autoclaving process. 
Treatment means any method, technique, or process, including neutralization and incineration, designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological character or composition of any solid, hazardous or biomedical waste so as to neutralize such waste or so as to render such waste nonhazardous, safe for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for storage, or reduced in volume. Such term includes any activity or processing designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of hazardous waste so as to render it nonhazardous. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § III) 
Sec. 34-189. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued for construction of a principal use private solid waste, biomedical or hazardous waste treatment facility or private landfill unless the property owner shall have fully complied with the terms of this article. A landowner shall comply with the terms hereof in order to obtain a permissive use permit in the county. Any person, firm or corporation seeking permission to transport waste into the county shall be required to produce documentary evidence that all waste to be treated will be disposed of at a facility meeting the terms of this article. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. In addition, any facility operated in violation hereof shall subject its owner to a fine of $1,000.00 per day for each day of illegal operation, or imprisonment not exceeding 12 months, or both. Each day a violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate the provisions of this article shall on conviction be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. In addition thereto the county commission shall be authorized to seek injunctive relief to restrain further transportation of imported waste into the county by any person, firm or corporation that shall violate the provisions of this article. Provided further that any owner or operator of a solid waste landfill, or a putrescible waste landfill, or an incinerator or microwave facility who shall knowingly accept imported waste from any person, firm or corporation not properly permitted under the requirements of this article shall be subject to punishment under this section, including but not limited to the revocation of the violators permit and/or license. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § XVII) 
Sec. 34-190. - Permits required. 
(a)  Owners and operators of private solid waste, biomedical and/or hazardous waste treatment facilities shall be permitted as required by the rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources. Any violation of the conditions of the state department of natural resources permit shall also be a violation of the conditions of any the county permit. 
(b)  No person shall import private solid waste, biomedical and/or hazardous waste into the county without having a valid permit issued by the county commission. 
(c)  No person shall engage in the operation of a biomedical and/or hazardous waste treatment facility and no person shall construct or operate solid waste, biomedical and/or hazardous waste treatment facilities without having a valid permit issued by the county commission pursuant to these regulations. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § IV) 
Sec. 34-191. - Application—Requirements. 
(a)  A permit applicant shall prepare and file a permit application with the county commission. The permit application shall include all related documents submitted to the United States government and to the state. 
(b)  The county commission shall have, and may exercise, the authority to refuse to grant such permit if it finds by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant for a permit or, in the case of a corporation, partnership, or association: 
(1)  Has intentionally misrepresented or concealed any material fact in the application submitted to the county commission; 
(2)  Has obtained, or attempted to obtain, the permit by misrepresentation or concealment; 
(3)  Has been convicted by final judgment, and all appeals have been exhausted, in the state or any federal court of any felony involving moral turpitude within the three years immediately preceding the application for a permit; 
(4)  Has been convicted of any violations of any environmental laws punishable as a felony in any state or federal court within the last five years preceding the application for a permit; 
(5)  Has knowingly, willfully, and consistently violated the prohibitions specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.7; or 
(6)  Has been adjudicated in contempt of any court order enforcing any federal environmental laws of the state within the five years preceding the application for a permit. 
(c)  An application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A description of the company, information on its financial capability, and a detailed history of all its past activities in the field of waste treatment, including a synopsis of every other facility it has operated, and including a detailed account of all past and pending litigation, favorable and unfavorable. Include the record of any subsidiary or parent corporation having an interest greater than five percent of the outstanding shares of the applicant corporation. Also include a list of all past and present litigation, favorable and unfavorable, involving the subsidiary or parent corporation or any officers of the corporation when with this or any other corporation operating in the waste treatment or disposal field. Also include a statement about any felony committed at any time by officers of the corporation. 
(2)  Evidence of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for sudden and $10,000,000.00 for non-sudden coverage. Evidence of $10,000,000.00 liability insurance to run for five years subsequent to closure to cover post-closure costs. Also provide a history of any claims against the company at any site, including the record of any subsidiary or parent corporation or officers as defined in section 34-188. 
(3)  Justification for and anticipated benefits from the project. 
(4)  A description of the scope of the proposed project, including an estimated schedule of how much and what kinds of waste the facility would accept, where the material would come from, what pretreatment will be required of wastes unacceptable to the facility without such pretreatment, and how long the facility is expected to operate. 
(5)  Yearly site operation expenses and an estimate of the costs for the lifetime of the project. 
(6)  The proposed method of financing the project, including development, operation and closure stages. Include a list of the financial institution names that will be responsible for funding the construction. 
(7)  Provide resumes of management personnel and the proposed number of employees and types of positions, including information on their background, the training and experience required for each position, and safety precautions undertaken for the protection of personnel. 
(8)  The anticipated date to begin construction. 
(9)  The anticipated date to begin operation. 
(10)  A detailed estimate of the type and amount of local government services required by the operator in each year. 
(11)  A description of emergency procedures and safety and security precautions that will be in use at the facility. This information should include details on emergency assistance and emergency medical treatment that will be required from the area's medical facilities, the county emergency medical service and community fire departments. 
(12)  A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken by the applicant to prevent contamination in and around the facility site and the description of planned monitoring systems, with an estimated annual budget for each of these items. 
(13)  A description of the environmental protection measures to be used during transportation of materials to and from the facility, with an estimated annual budget for these arrangements and an estimate of the volume of material to be transported during each year of operation. 
(14)  A description of the site closure plan for the facility and the anticipated date of closure. 
(15)  A description of anticipated need for post-closure care. 
(d)  A map or other written material attached to the application shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
(1)  Ownership. 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of legal owners and/or agents of the subject property. 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of professional persons responsible for plat of survey. 
c.  Description of any existing rights-of-way or easements affecting the property. 
d.  Reference to any existing restrictive covenants on the property. 
(2)  Description. Location of property tax map and parcel number. This description should include a reference to the deed book and page or other evidence of title the current property owners may have. 
(3)  Features. Each map shall contain the following information: 
a.  Drawn to scale of not less than 200 feet to the inch. 
b.  Location sketch map showing relationship of the project to the surrounding area. 
c.  Graphic scale, date, north arrow, and legend. 
d.  Location of property with respect to surrounding property and roads, and the names and addresses of adjacent property owners according to county tax records. 
e.  Zoning classification of proposed project and adjacent property. 
f.  The location of all boundary lines of the property. 
g.  The total acreage of land in the project. 
h.  The location of existing and/or platted streets, easements, buildings, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, sewers, water mains, culverts, wells and gas and electric transmission lines. 
i.  The location of water bodies, water courses, groundwater aquifers, springs and other pertinent features. 
j.  The location, dimensions and acreage of all property proposed to be set aside for various uses on the applicant's property. 
k.  The location of all existing and proposed test wells and/or borings. 
l.  The location of the 500-year and 100-year floodplain, and records of flood, including inundation due to dam break or hurricane. 
m.  The location of historic properties and gravesites including any plans of relocation of graves and properties having historical significance. 
(4)  Geological map. A map showing location of faults, dikes, sills and other pertinent geologic features including bedrock type and strike and dip of any mappable bedding; the depth and degree of weathering (saprolite); identification and location of clay as to thickness, type and permeability; and location of the water table as to approximate depth, gradient and surface configuration. 
(5)  Topographic map. A topographic map with contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet at the same scale as the project site map shall be included. Date, method of preparation and preparer of said survey shall be stated. 
(6)  Transportation route map. A map showing proposed transportation routes to and from the facility site, including location of towns and emergency and safety facilities. Include an estimate of the volume of material to travel on each route. 
(e)  The application shall address the following factors with regard to, but not limited to, on-site storage and/or disposal: 
(1)  Contaminant flow to water table including leachate monitoring, collecting and withdrawal systems; clay and synthetic liners (extra thickness, multiple liners); spill prevention and containment measures. 
(2)  Contaminant movement with groundwater, including groundwater monitoring systems at the site and in potentially affected area; subsurface "slurry wall" barriers' control and other groundwater withdrawals in the area. 
(3)  Predictability of contaminant movement, based on preconstructed borings and groundwater modeling. 
(4)  Potential effect on surface waters; planned collection systems for surface water run-off; planned exclusion systems for surface water run-on. 
(5)  Potential effect on aquifers; planned provisions for alternate water supply systems and facilities for immediate pumping and treatment of contaminated water. 
(6)  Potential effect on public water supply; planned run-off collection and treatment and provisions for alternate supply systems and water recycling. 
(7)  Possibility of site flooding; planned special facility design, special control dikes, and buffer zone setback in a standard project flood area. 
(8)  Possibility of hurricane damage; planned special facility design, special contaminant control systems and provisions for hurricane wind and rain damage. 
(9)  Potential human exposure to incinerator ash and treated waste water, including planned safety procedures, clothing, instruction, and practice for employees; planned oversized or redundant treatment capacity, effluent monitoring and automatic shutdown systems. 
(10)  With respect to incineration, autoclaving and/or microwaving, the nature and predictability of pollution movement, including planned stack height for any incinerators or microwave facilities with continuous stack monitoring and recording, until emission levels are predictable. 
(f)  In addition to the requirements of this section, application for principal use biomedical and hazardous waste treatment facilities shall show the ability to comply with each provision of sections 34-195 and 34-196. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § V) 
Sec. 34-192. - Same—Fees. 
(a)  The county commission, shall require a permit application fee to reimburse the county for the costs of any needed professional assistance that may be required to evaluate the permit application and amendments, verify its contents and evaluate the impact of such a permit on the community, public health and environment. This assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, the assistance of lawyers, biologists, geologists, engineers, chemists, hydrologists, emergency response, transportation and public health experts, land appraisers and professional testing laboratories. Funds not so expended in the legitimate review of the permit application shall be returned to the applicant. This fee shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners from time to time, and available for public examination in the office of the county clerk. 
(b)  Failure to provide these funds within 30 days of demand thereof shall result in termination of the permit process or cancellation of the permit. The county commission may take legal action against the applicant for any costs incurred to the county up to the point of termination. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § VI) 
Sec. 34-193. - Same—Procedure. 
(a)  The permit applicant shall submit to the county commission 12 copies of all information required by federal and state agencies for the facility for which it requests a county permit at the time such information is submitted to the state and federal government. The review procedure shall not begin nor shall the application be designated as complete until such time as all required data are submitted and the appropriate fees are paid, or suitable arrangements for payment have been approved by the county commission. 
(b)  A designee of the county commission shall compile copies of all reports, applications, minutes of the EQB meetings, reports by consultants and similar materials. These shall be placed in one location with free access by the public and availability of copying any portion of all of any document at cost. 
(c)  Within 45 days of the submission of the application, the county commission shall set a time for a public hearing so that the applicant can present its plans to the EQB and answer questions regarding the same. 
(d)  After consultation with the EQB at the conclusion of the hearing, the county commission, shall have 60 days in which to determine if the application is complete and shall mail notice of its determination to the applicant. If it is not complete, the applicant will have six months to complete the application. However, the applicant may at the end of six months make a showing of cause to the county commission, and if the county commission finds that the delay is justified and in good faith, they can grant the applicant a maximum three-month extension. 
(e)  Each application shall require an analysis conducted by the county staff and consultants selected by the county commission upon the recommendation of the EQB. The analysis shall be completed within 90 days from the day the application is determined to be complete. In certain instances where the complexity of the application requires more than the usual 90 days, the county staff and/or consultant may request an additional 60 days from the county commission and the proponent has the option of requesting the county commission to extend the analysis period to allow time for responding to staff and/or consultant request for additional information on a completed application. In the event the integrated long-range solid waste management plan referred to in subsection (h)(6) of this section shall not be completed by the end of the analysis period, the consultant or staff may request an additional 90 days to allow for the completion of the plan. 
(f)  The county staff and each consultant shall make reports on the application to the EQB at their meetings. 
(g)  The EQB shall call a public meeting for public comment on the completed application along with the analysis of county staff and consultants. The purpose of this meeting shall be for public review of the application. The staff shall give notice by regular mail of the time and place of the public meeting to the owner and adjacent property owners as specified on the map. Said notice shall be mailed not less than 14 days prior to the date specified thereon. Notice of a public meeting shall be posted by the applicant on the proposed facility property on each and every street of access not less than 14 days prior to the date specified thereon. Said posted notice shall be at intervals of not greater than 1,500 feet. Notice shall also be placed by the applicant in the county newspaper not less than 14 days prior to the dates specified thereon. 
(h)  Within 45 days after receipt of the final analysis of the complete application and public comment, the EQB shall make a recommendation to the county commission at a public meeting whether to accept the application, deny it, or accept it with modifications. Before making a recommendation to the county commissioners to accept the proposal or accept it with modifications, the EQB shall make the following determinations: 
(1)  That there is a bona fide need for the facility and there is no reasonable alternative facility which will pose a lesser threat to the environment. 
(2)  That the construction and operation of the facility will not pose an unreasonable health or environmental risk to the surrounding locality. 
(3)  That the applicant or facility operator has the capability, and financial resources, to construct, operate and maintain the facility. 
(4)  That the applicant or operator has taken or consented in writing to take any and all reasonable measures to comply with the applicable federal, state and local regulations and ordinances. 
(5)  That the applicant's plan represents the best available technology for handling the waste for which the applicant has demonstrated that it will employ the best management practices in handling the waste at the proposed facility. 
(6)  That the waste treatment facility is compatible with an integrated long-range solid waste management plan, taking into account alternative methods of management such as recycling. 
(7)  That the applicant has a valid contract with the operator of a state licensed landfill for the disposal of the projected ash production of the incineration facility or residues from other methods of biomedical and hazardous waste treatment for a three-year period. 
(i)  At its next scheduled meeting, the county commission shall make its decision to grant the permit, deny it, or grant it with specified conditions. 
(j)  A permit shall be valid for no more than 24 months from the date it is granted by the county commission unless the applicant begins construction of the facility prior to the expiration of the permit and continues to operate the facility according to specified conditions, without assigning its granted permit to any other party. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § VII) 
Sec. 34-194. - Control of emissions. 
Emissions from all principal use incinerator facilities and all biomedical waste incinerator and microwave facilities shall not cause ambient pollution concentrations to exceed levels defined in Guidelines for Ambient Impact Assessment of Toxic Air Pollutants Emissions, issued by the state department of natural resources. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § VIII) 
Sec. 34-195. - Certification of operator. 
No person shall operate a principal use incinerator, microwave or autoclave facility unless such individual who operates or maintains the facility obtains a certificate of training in biomedical waste treatment or other applicable certificate issued by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers within nine months of the commencement of the training program. Copies of the training certificates for the operators and maintenance engineers shall be submitted to the EQB and shall be available for inspection at the facility along with the permit to operate. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § IX) 
Sec. 34-196. - Special procedures for transportation and handling of biomedical waste. 
No biomedical waste shall, for purposes of disposal in the county, be transported into the county or from place to place within the county except under the following conditions: 
(1)  All transports shall be in refrigerated trucks maintaining a temperature of not more than 40 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  All trucks transporting medical waste shall be used exclusively for the transport of medical waste and each truck shall have placed upon it at a prominent location a sign reading as follows: "Medical Waste Only - Not for Transportation of Other Materials." Such sign shall be in bright yellow letters readily discernable from a distance of 100 feet. 
(3)  All biomedical waste shall be transported in leak-proof, puncture-proof boxes of the following specifications: 
a.  Die cut body with lid attached. 
b.  Black sheet size of 62 7/8 -inch by 74 1/8 -inch finished product size with inside dimensions of 18 inches by 18 inches by 23 inches. 
c.  Board of 400 double-wall B/C flute, board combination 69/40/69/40/69 wet strength medium or stronger, water proof adhesive. 
d.  Board to be curtain coated with wax on both sides. 
e.  All mediums to be wax impregnated. 
f.  Box must have leak-proof corners. 
g.  Box will be self-locking, outer liner of box to be oyster white linerboard. 
h.  Box to be printed four panels, one color. 
i.  Print to include appropriate information on the contents and handling of the material contained in carton. 
j.  The liner requirements for the carton in this subsection are as follows: 
1.  Blank size of 39 13/16 inches by 74 5/8 inches. 
2.  No joint scored sheet to fit the carton to further ensure that it is leak-proof. 
3.  Board to be 400 double-wall B/C flute, board combination 69/40/69/40/69 wet strength medium or stronger, waterproof adhesive. 
4.  Board to be curtain coated with wax on both sides. 
5.  All mediums to be wax impregnated. 
(4)  No biomedical waste shall be transported for purposes of disposal into the county, in plastic bags having colorants which contain cadmium, arsenic, mercury, antimony, lead or selenium. The EQB may require random samplings of plastic bag material from any principal use biomedical treatment facility to assure compliance with this section. The EQB may also require any owner or operator of a principal use biomedical waste treatment facility to demonstrate that it has taken proper precautions and made proper arrangements with biomedical waste generators and handlers to ensure compliance with this section. 
(5)  No principal use biomedical waste treatment facility may be operated in the county, unless provisions have been made for storage of the waste in refrigerated facilities in accordance with state regulations. Such refrigerated storage facilities shall be served with a backup system of power generation preventing interruption by reason of electrical failure. The applicant shall show by calculation that adequate refrigerated space is provided for at least five days volume of medical waste at the average rate of delivery. 
(6)  No principal use biomedical waste incinerator facility shall be operated in the county, unless the facility shall have in operation a screening device which automatically removes unburned particles or globules of a size of two centimeters or more and returns them to the incineration process. 
(7)  Each owner or operator of a principal use biomedical treatment facility in the county shall, at such time as may be determined by the EQB, at least two times per year, obtain from an EQB-approved engineering firm, a putrescible matter determination test of the incinerator ash or autoclave or microwave residues, in accordance with method "A" prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Performance Test Codes, paragraph 7.3. The results of such testing shall be provided to EQB and should any test show that putrescible material is not being properly treated, the license for said facility shall be suspended until such time as the owner or operator thereof shall demonstrate to the EQB that appropriate corrective measures have been taken. 
(8)  No principal use biomedical waste incinerator facility shall be operated in the county, unless the incinerator ash produced by the facility contains no more than six percent by dry weight of combustible material as demonstrated at regular quarterly intervals. The incinerator ash shall be sampled and tested according to standard methods published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (PTC33) and American Society of Testing Materials. 
(9)  No biomedical waste incinerator facility operated in the county shall be allowed to accept imported biomedical waste unless such facility is presently equipped, or installs the necessary equipment before acceptance of such waste, to perform 24-hour monitoring of opacity and temperature. Opacity shall not exceed 20 percent on a continuous basis, but may be allowed five minutes per hour at 40 percent. Temperature in the secondary combustion chamber shall be maintained at a minimum of 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit and a minimum residence time of two seconds. The recording of opacity and temperature as monitored on a 24-hour basis shall be made available to the county clerk upon request. Any biomedical waste incinerator facility that fails to maintain the required opacity and temperature shall not be allowed to continue to accept imported biomedical waste until such time as the owner or operator thereof shall demonstrate to the county engineer that appropriate measures have been taken. 
(10)  The transportation of biomedical waste between medical facilities under one ownership for disposal purposes shall be exempt from the provisions of section 34-195; provided that the total biomedical waste disposal by the owner of the facilities does not exceed 125 tons per year. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § X) 
Sec. 34-197. - Transportation permit. 
(a)  No person shall transport, or cause to be transported, pursuant to contract whether oral or otherwise, imported private waste into the county for the purpose of disposing of such waste or in the case of biomedical or hazardous waste, for the purpose of incineration or microwaving and/or disposal, at a publicly or privately owned landfill and/or incinerator or microwave facility, unless a waste transportation permit is first obtained from the county commission. In the case of biomedical waste, the waste importation permit, if issued, shall be issued in the name of the medical facility responsible for the generation of such waste. The term "medical facility" includes, but is not limited to, ambulatory service centers, blood banks, clinics, county health departments, dental offices, funeral homes, health maintenance, organizations (HMOs), hospitals, laboratories, medical buildings, physicians offices, veterinary offices, research and manufacturing facilities, and nursing homes. 
(b)  In addition to the payment of the application fee established in section 34-192, every applicant for a waste disposal importation permit must submit a sealed envelope containing the original and six copies of its application to the county commission clerk. All applications timely submitted will be presented to the county commission at a regularly scheduled meeting within 25 days of being received by the county commission; at which time the county commission will open the applications and publish the contents thereof. 
(1)  Applications shall be made in writing, shall be signed by the applicant, and shall contain a sworn statement by the applicant that all the information in the application is true, complete and correct. The application shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The applicant's full name, address, and telephone number. 
b.  The total monthly tonnage of imported waste for which the permit is sought and in the case of biomedical waste, the total monthly poundage of the waste prior to incineration. 
c.  All counties within which the imported waste will be generated and/or collected. 
d.  A description of the imported waste. 
e.  The landfill which the imported waste will be placed, and in the case of biomedical waste, the site of treatment and the location of the landfill. 
f.  A description of each truck or other motor vehicle that may be used to transport the imported waste within the county, including the size, weight, load capacity, state of registration, motor vehicle tag number, and owner of each such truck or other motor vehicle. 
g.  The proposed routes by which the imported waste will be transported within the county, and the number of times each such route will be traveled per month by the trucks or other motor vehicles transporting the imported waste. 
h.  A description of the applicant's motor vehicle liability insurance, including the name of the insurance company, policy number, kinds of coverage, and policy limit for each kind of coverage. Liability limits for vehicles transporting biomedical waste shall be at least $3,000,000.00 per occurrence for death or bodily injury. Liability limits for other types of imported waste shall be at least $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for death or bodily injury. 
i.  If the applicant is a corporation, its state of incorporation, date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of its officers, directors, and registered agent for service of process in the state. 
j.  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all general partners. 
(2)  Every applicant for a waste importation permit shall have attached thereto the following: 
a.  Written verification from the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division (EPD) that each landfill and, in the case of biomedical or hazardous waste, each treatment facility, into which the imported waste will be placed, is being operated in compliance with all conditions of a valid waste handling and/or treatment facility permit issued by EPD, a design and operation plan approved by EPD, the state comprehensive waste management act, and all other applicable laws. 
b.  With respect to each landfill into which the imported waste will be placed, written verification from EPD that the proposed placement of imported waste into the landfill is within the scope of the operation allowed under the waste handling permit and design and operation plan for the landfill. 
c.  With respect to each incinerator or microwave facility into which biomedical waste will be placed, written verification from EPD that the proposed treatment is within the scope of operation allowed by the applicable EPD permit. 
d.  Written verification from EPD that the applicant has not been found by EPD to have been in violation of any state environmental statute, rule or regulation within the past ten years. 
e.  A sworn statement by the applicant stating that the applicant, officer, etc., has never been convicted of a felony of any kind or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
f.  With respect to each county in the state within which the imported waste will be collected, and with respect to each state if the imported waste is collected outside the state, written verification from the governing authority of the county or state, as the case may be, that the applicant has obtained permission from such governing authority to transport the imported waste into the county. 
(3)  Within 90 days after the presentment of an application by the county commission clerk to the county commission for a waste importation permit, the county commission shall hold a public hearing on the application. The county commission must publish notice of the application and of the date, time, location, and purpose of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation serving the county at least once per week for four weeks preceding the date of such hearing. One or more qualified representatives of the applicant must appear at the hearing, must make a complete copy of the application available for review by those in attendance, and must make every reasonable effort to provide information pertinent to the application that may be requested by the county commission and others in attendance. No action will be taken by the county commission on an application unless the requirements of this subsection have been satisfied. 
(4)  At the next regularly scheduled meeting, the county commission shall make its decision to grant the permit, deny it, or grant it with specified conditions. 
(c)  In determining what action to take on an application for a waste importation permit, the county commission will consider and balance all information presented by the citizens of the county and any additional information or factors deemed by the county commission to be relevant to its decision. With respect to every such application the county commission will consider, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Whether the proposed waste importation would consume landfill space that is needed for the disposal of waste generated and/or collected in the county. 
(2)  Whether the proposed waste importation could adversely affect the health or general well-being of the people of the county. 
(3)  Whether the proposed waste importation could diminish or degrade the quality of the county's air, soil, water, and other natural resources and environment. 
(4)  Whether the proposed waste importation would conflict with the county's short-term or long-term land use plans. 
(5)  Whether the proposed waste importation would conflict with any solid waste management plan or air quality control plan adopted by the county. 
(6)  Whether the proposed waste importation would conflict with any statute, rule, regulation or other law, or with any court order, or with the condition of any solid waste handling permit, or applicable incineration or microwave permit, or with the approved design and operation plan for the landfill in which the imported waste would be disposed. 
(7)  Whether the proposed waste importation would place an unreasonable, excessive, or disproportionate burden on the road maintenance and other public facilities provided by the county. 
(d)  A waste importation permit may be revoked by the county commission for any good cause, that shall include, without limitation, a finding by the county commission that: 
(1)  The holder of the permit, or any person acting on behalf of the holder, has violated the terms of the permit, including any of the rules and regulations set forth herein; 
(2)  The holder, or any person acting on behalf of the holder, has violated any other waste handling permit or any environmental law; 
(3)  The holder has failed to timely submit any report required herein; 
(4)  The holder has failed to make timely payment in full of the monthly permit fee; 
(5)  The holder has been convicted of a felony or of violation of any environmental or any other crime involving moral turpitude; or 
(6)  The holder's permit application contained false information or omitted material information. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § XI) 
Sec. 34-198. - Special procedures for transportation and handling of hazardous waste. 
No hazardous waste shall, for purposes of disposal in the county, be transported into the county or from place to place within the county except under the following conditions: 
(1)  All trucks transporting hazardous waste shall be used exclusively for the transport of hazardous waste and each truck shall have placed upon it, at a prominent location, a sign reading as follows: "Hazardous Waste Only - Not for Transportation of Other Material." Such sign shall be in bright letters readily discernable from a distance of 100 feet. 
(2)  All hazardous waste shall be transported in leak-proof vehicles. 
(3)  No principal use hazardous waste incinerator facility shall be operated in the county, unless the facility shall have in operation a screening device which automatically removes unburned particles or globules of a size of two centimeters or more and returns them to the incineration process. 
(4)  No principal use hazardous waste incinerator facility shall be operated in the county, unless the incinerator ash produced by the facility contains no more than six percent by dry weight of combustible material as demonstrated at regular quarterly intervals. The incinerator ash shall be sampled and tested according to standard methods published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (PTC33) and American Society of Testing Materials. 
(5)  No hazardous waste treatment facility may be operated in the county, unless provisions have been made for safe storage of the waste during natural disasters such as hurricanes or floods. Such storage facilities shall be served with a backup system of power generation preventing interruption by reason of electrical failure and the facilities shall be suitably constructed to prevent spillage, rupture or contamination of surroundings. 
(6)  Each owner or operator of a principal use hazardous waste treatment facility in the county shall, at such time as may be determined by the EQB (at least quarterly), obtain from an EQB approved engineering firm, a toxic matter determination test of the treatment residue, in accordance with prescribed methods. Should any test show that toxic material is being released into the surroundings at prohibited levels, the license for said facility shall be suspended until such time as the owner or operator shall demonstrate to the EQB that appropriate corrective measures have been taken. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § XII) 
Sec. 34-199. - On-site monitoring. 
The county shall monitor the site continuously at the permittee's expense and a designated representative of the county commission shall be permitted to inspect any operation of the facility at any time. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § XIII) 
Sec. 34-200. - Hurricane precautions. 
Immediately on receipt of a hurricane alert all waste deliveries to the site shall be stopped and all waste not covered in a landfill shall be removed. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § XIV) 
Sec. 34-201. - Permit fees; monthly report. 
(a)  The fees levied for permits issued under this article shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners from time to time, and available for public examination in the office of the county clerk. 
(b)  Each holder of a waste importation permit shall file with the county clerk a verified written report within ten days after the close of each month. That report shall identify: 
(1)  By exact dates, the period covered by the report; 
(2)  All counties and states from which the imported waste was collected during the reporting period; and 
(3)  The total tonnage or poundage, as the case may be, of imported waste transported into the county during the reporting period. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § XV) 
Sec. 34-202. - Waivers. 
There shall be no waiver of any of the requirements of this article. 
(Res. of 9-8-1992, § XVI) 
Chapter 36 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County has home rule powers regarding the construction and maintenance of streets, sidewalks, and curbs, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); general powers and duties of county regarding responsibility for a county road system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1—36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HEAVY HAULING 

Sec. 36-19. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Access site means any temporary roadway, drive, structure, fill or device, existing or constructed, that is used or employed for the purpose of crossing, travel upon or use of county road as defined in this section. 
County right-of-way means for the purpose of this article, the shoulder, front slope, ditch, drain, and back slope, facility or any appurtenance of any county road as defined in this section. 
County road means any county-owned or county-maintained highway, road, street, avenue, drive, detour or other way open to the public and intended or used for the passage of motor vehicles. 
Heavy equipment machinery and vehicles means any and all devices in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn including but not limited to semitrailers, trailers, tractor and truck-tractors; provided, however, that vehicles being used for the immediate control or extinguishment of wild fire shall be exempt from this article. 
Loading and unloading shall be defined by its everyday meaning but shall include any activity known as harvesting or mining or any product or material. 
Operations means those activities contemplated by this article, including the loading or transporting of raw material such as stone, timber, oil, fill dirt, produce and kaolin. 
Operator means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or private organization or any character, and the officer's agents, and employees thereof carrying out the activities contemplated by this article. 
(Ord. of 9-28-1993(1), § 2) 
Sec. 36-20. - Applicability. 
This article shall cover any person, association, or business entity that uses a county right-of-way in carrying out its business by loading, transporting, or unloading materials of any nature whether on the road surface or a county right-of-way or crossing the unpaved portion of the right-of-way including ditches or embankments. 
(Ord. of 9-28-1993(1), § 1) 
Sec. 36-21. - Commencement of operations. 
All persons loading, unloading or transporting materials in excess of three tons per load across a county road or right-of-way must provide in writing to the county board of commissioners' clerk the following information within 48 hours before commencing operations on county right-of-way: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number of the party which will be loading or unloading; 
(2)  The approximate location of access sites to the county road; 
(3)  The date worked commenced; and 
(4)  Name of titles owner of tract. 
(Ord. of 9-28-1993(1), § 3) 
Sec. 36-22. - Release of liability. 
Operator shall give oral or written notification upon completion of operations to the clerk of county commissioners within 48 hours. Upon site inspection by a designated county official, the clerk of county commissioners shall provide written notice of release of liability to operator within eight days of notification from operator. Should said notification by the clerk of county commissioners not be made on a timely basis, operator shall not be held responsible or liable under this article. 
(Ord. of 9-28-1993(1), § 4) 
Sec. 36-23. - Arbitration. 
(a)  If it is determined by the designated county official either during or at the conclusion of operations that the county road and access site are not in a proper state of repair, the operator shall have ten days to correct the site or appeal the decision. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a written appeal, the board of commissioners shall have five days to impanel an arbitration board. The arbitration board shall consist of three people: one person selected by the board of commissioners; one person selected by the operator; and one person mutually agreed upon by the two persons selected. 
(c)  Once the arbitration board has been selected, the arbitration board shall have no more than 30 days from the receipt of the letter of appeal in which to reach a decision. The decision of the arbitration board shall be final. 
(Ord. of 9-28-1993(1), § 5) 
Sec. 36-24. - Bonding requirement. 
If repairs are not made by operator within ten days of the decision of the arbitration board, or within ten days of notification from the appropriate county official, then repairs shall be made at operator's expense. If this occurs, the board of commissioners shall be authorized to required posting of a security bond or letter of credit in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 by designated firm, company, or individual for future operations on county right-of-way. Said bond will remain in force until the conclusion of operations with access points and roads being in satisfactory condition as prescribed by this article; at which time said bond will be returned to operator within ten days. 
(Ord. of 9-28-1993(1), § 6) 
Sec. 36-25. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Harvesting, mining, or loading materials. All harvesting, mining, or loading shall be conducted at a loading site off the county rights-of-way and behind the established ditch line of county roads. 
(b)  Ditches. Ditches within 50 feet of a temporary driveway or right-of-way crossing shall be kept clear of all debris or residue at all times to allow for proper drainage. Culverts shall be installed at temporary entrances, as needed, to facilitate proper drainage flow. 
(c)  Warning signs. Any firm, company, or person operating on county rights-of-way shall be required to post warning signs at least 500 feet on both sides of the temporary driveway adequately warning oncoming traffic of persons, vehicles, equipment or machinery entering roadway. 
(d)  Roadway. County roads shall be kept serviceable at all times for school buses, emergency vehicles, mail carriers and traffic of the general public. 
(Ord. of 9-28-1993(1), § 7) 
Secs. 36-26—36-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 36-54. - Smoking—Prohibited in courthouse. 
Smoking is prohibited in the courthouse. 
(Res. of 2-19-1993) 
Sec. 36-55. - Same—Prohibited within 30 feet of county building entrance. 
Smoking is prohibited within 30 feet of the entrance of the county building. 
(Res. of 4-5-2005(1)) 
Secs. 36-56—36-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOCKS, PIERS AND WATERWAYS 

Sec. 36-84. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate any boat, ship, craft or other marine vessel upon the waters of Julienton River in the county from the mouth of Bruro or Shellman Bluff River to a point 4,000 feet northerly therefrom at a rate of speed so great as to create a wake discernable at either bank of said river or stream. It shall further be unlawful for any person to engage in water skiing upon said waters. 
(b)  Punishment for violation of this provision shall be according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. 
(Res. of 12-29-1981) 
Sec. 36-85. - Docking limit. 
Boaters shall have a three-hour limit on the docking of privately owned watercraft at either county-owned or department of leisure services-owned dock facilities through the county. A violation of the terms of this section shall be punishable according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. 
(Ord. of 10-21-1999) 
Chapter 38 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Sales tax. 
A one percent local sales and use tax is hereby levied in and for the county by the county board of commissioners in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-8-82. 
(Res. of 11-20-1979) 
Secs. 38-2—38-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 38-22. - Tax commissioner. 
The tax commissioner shall perform his duties in compliance with the state code, especially the following: 
(1)  O.C.G.A. § 48-5-161, which sets out the timetable for the issuance of executions; 
(2)  O.C.G.A. § 48-5-153, which requires reporting of unpaid taxes by the tax commissioner on a prescribed timetable; and 
(3)  O.C.G.A. § 48-5-142, which requires bi-weekly reports to the county board of commissioners of the aggregate amount of taxes collected during the two-week period. 
(Res. of 9-12-1995, § 1) 
Sec. 38-23. - Failure to comply with state code. 
Should the tax commissioner fail to comply with the requirements of the state code, by a determination of the county auditor, the clerk is instructed to notify the county board of commissioners for further action as required by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-145, 48-5-152, and 48-5-112, respectively. 
(Res. of 9-12-1995, § 2) 
Sec. 38-24. - Tax assessor's compensation. 
The tax assessor's salary shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners from time to time. 
(Res. of 2-18-2003(2)) 
Sec. 38-25. - Boards of equalization. 
(a)  The county board of commissioners does elect to have two county boards of equalization, each of which will consist of five members and 12 alternate members. Both boards of equalization will have a chairperson and two vice-chairpersons, who will be appointed to their positions by the grand jury. 
(b)  The compensation for members and alternate members of the boards of equalization shall be made in accordance with the minimum provisions of applicable state statutes. 
(Res. of 9-9-2003; Res. of 10-25-2005) 
Secs. 38-26—38-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 38-54. - Business license tax—Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for each year an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county and not exempted by state law, at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. Gross receipts means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The term "depository financial institutions" means state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Res. of 10-11-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 38-55. - Same—Minimum. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00. 
(Res. of 10-11-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 38-56. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the county board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Said return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The county board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in said return. 
(Res. of 10-11-1983, § 3) 
Sec. 38-57. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by this article unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 10-11-1983, § 4) 
Sec. 38-58. - Administrative provisions. 
The clerk of commissioners, the county is hereby directed to forward a copy of this article to each depository financial institution in the county and to the home office of each such depository financial institution if located outside the county. 
(Res. of 10-11-1983, § 5) 
Secs. 38-59—38-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Counties authorized to impose, levy, and collect a hotel and lodging tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 38-90. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Dealer means every person engaged in the business of operating an innkeeper's facility in the county, who furnishes for value any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations to the public. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Person means any individual, firm partnership, cooperative, corporation (profit and nonprofit), joint venture, association, trust, business trust, or other legal entity, public or private, or quasi-public, and the plural as well as the singular number. 
Units of accommodation means individual tourist cabins, trailers, trailer sites, camp sites, apartments, suites, and other multi-room accommodations and accommodations consisting of other than a "room," as that term is normally understood in the sale and purchase of accommodations which accommodations are furnished as units and for which charges are assessed on per unit bases. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1978, § 2) 
Sec. 38-91. - Levied. 
There is levied and imposed on the furnishings for value to the public of any room, lodging or accommodations by every dealer a tax in the amount of five percent of the charge to the public as of the time such charge is made, for each room or other unit of lodging or accommodation furnished to the public. 
(Res. of 11-14-1978; Ord. of 11-14-1978, § 1; Ord. of 9-14-1982(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-11-1987, § 1) 
Sec. 38-92. - Exemptions. 
The only exemptions acknowledged by McIntosh County are provided by state statute. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1978, § 3) 
Sec. 38-93. - Applicability. 
Every dealer furnishing any room or other unit of accommodation to the public shall be liable for the tax thereon and for the collection, reporting and remittance of said tax. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1978, § 4) 
Sec. 38-94. - Tax due date. 
It shall be the duty of each dealer liable for the tax imposed by this article to report, on or before the 20th day of each calendar month, to the board of county commissioners on forms furnished by the county, or on forms prepared by the reporting taxpayer and disclosing the same information: 
(1)  The number of rooms, or other units of accommodation furnished during the preceding calendar month and the total charges therefor (excluding charges for telephone, food and beverage services, if any); 
(2)  The number of rooms or other units of accommodation furnished to the same occupant for a period exceeding ten consecutive days; and the total charges therefor (excluding charges for telephone, food and beverage services, if any); 
(3)  The tax base; 
(4)  The total tax due for the month preceding the month of filing; and 
(5)  Any such other information as may be required by the board of commissioners. 
All such reports shall be made under oath and shall be signed by the reporting dealer. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1978, § 5) 
Sec. 38-95. - Monthly report. 
It shall further be the duty of each dealer liable for the tax imposed this article to remit monthly to the board of county commissioners with the report prepared and submitted pursuant to this article the tax due in the amount shown on said report. Failure to so remit such tax shall cause said tax to become delinquent. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1978, § 6) 
Sec. 38-96. - Dealer collection. 
For the purpose of compensating the dealers for collecting, reporting and remitting the tax levied by this article, each such dealer shall be allowed three percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for and remitted to the county in the form of a deduction in submitting his report and paying the amount due by him; provided the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1978, § 7) 
Sec. 38-97. - Failure to report. 
(a)  When any dealer shall fail to make any report or pay the full amount of the tax required by this article, there shall be imposed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the remittance and/or report is not delinquent for more than 30 days, with an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional 30 days, or fraction thereof, during which the failure continues, not to exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater; provided, however, if such failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the board of county commissioners in affidavit form attached to the report and remittance within ten days of due date, such reports may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. In the case of a false or fraudulent report or the failure to file a report, where willful intent exists to defraud the county of any tax due under this article, a specific penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
(b)  When any person or other legal entity fails to remit the tax, or any portion thereof on or before the day when required by law to be paid, there shall be added to the amount due interest at the rate of eight percent per annum from the date until paid. 
(c)  All penalties and interest imposed by this article shall by payable and collectable by the county in the manner as if they were a part of the tax imposed. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1978, § 8) 
Sec. 38-98. - Extension. 
The county board of commissioners for good cause may extend, for not to exceed 30 days, the time for making any reports required under the provisions of this article. In the event that any person or other legal entity fails to make a report and pay the tax as provided by this article, or in case any person or other legal entity makes a grossly incorrect report, or a report that is false or fraudulent it shall be the duty of the board of commissioners through its designated agents to make an estimate for the taxable period of the proceeds from the furnishing of rooms or other units of accommodation, to calculate the tax base taking into consideration the exception for rooms or other units furnished for a period exceeding ten consecutive days, as provided by section 38-92, and to assess and collect the tax and interest, plus penalty, if such have accrued, on the basis of such assessments which shall be considered prima facie correct, and the burden to show the contrary shall rest upon the dealer. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1978, § 9) 
Sec. 38-99. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of every dealer required to make a report and pay any tax under this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of the furnishing of rooms or other units of accommodation, such other books of account as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due hereunder, and other information as may be reasonably required by the county. It shall further be the duty of every such dealer to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all such records of charges made for the furnishing of rooms or other units of lodging or accommodation, all such records, including but not limited to books, of account, shall be open to examination at all reasonable hours to the county or its authorized agents. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1978, § 10) 
Sec. 38-100. - Dealer authorized to appoint agent. 
For purposes of collection, reporting and remittance of the tax imposed hereby, each dealer may appoint an authorized agent and may delegate the collection, reporting and remittance to such agent; provided, however, dealers appointing such agents shall notify the county in writing of the name and address of such agent; provided further, that any dealer appointing such agent shall remain fully liable for the tax and for the collection, reporting and remittance of such tax. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1978, § 11) 
Sec. 38-101. - Municipal boundary limitation. 
No tax as called for by this article shall be imposed, levied and collected on any person as defined in this article, who operates his business within the limits of any municipality. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1978, § 12) 
Sec. 38-102. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of the clerk of the board of commissioners. The clerk or his assistant shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every dealer renting guestrooms in the county to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the clerk may require. 
(c)  Examination of authorized records; audits. The clerk or any person authorized in writing by the clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this section, the clerk may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the clerk when required by the clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the clerk may require. 
Secs. 38-103—38-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 38-133. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Location or office means any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession; but shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person means and includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who, by state law, requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioner of profession or occupation" shall not include an practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-02) 
Sec. 38-134. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the county magistrate court judge, be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-16) 
Sec. 38-135. - Imposed. 
For each year any person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the county, whether with a location in the county or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such business tax registration shall be shown to the sheriff or the sheriff's deputies or to any police officer of the county upon request. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-01) 
Sec. 38-136. - Levied. 
An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon a uniform fee of $100.00 for the first employee, plus $10.00 per employee for every employee other than the first employee. This fee may be changed from time to time by resolution and such amended fee schedule shall be available at the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-03) 
Sec. 38-137. - Registration and assessment. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in county and the business of practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of county. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-04) 
Sec. 38-138. - Lines of business. 
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the county and that line of business being noted by the county upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-05) 
Sec. 38-139. - Different locations. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-06) 
Sec. 38-140. - Tax for practitioners of professions. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on uniform fee of $100.00. 
(2)  A fee of $100.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 10 of each year. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-07) 
Sec. 38-141. - Practitioners employed by United States. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-08) 
Sec. 38-142. - Tax for revenue purposes. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-09) 
Sec. 38-143. - Term. 
Each such occupation tax shall be for each calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by January 30 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling that commences in the county after January 31 the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained within 30 days following the beginning business and a penalty shall be imposed, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the county after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. The amount of the penalty shall be set by resolution of the board of commissioners from time to time, and available for public examination in the rate and fee schedule in the office of the county clerk. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the county on or after July 1 in any year, the business or occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-10) 
Sec. 38-144. - Registration issued by county clerk. 
The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the clerk of county commission, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-15) 
Sec. 38-145. - Exemptions. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service business organized under chapter 3 of the title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those business governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed mean and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-17) 
Sec. 38-146. - Gross receipts. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-18) 
Sec. 38-147. - Discount. 
The taxpayer may have the following options as to payment of said tax: If the entire amount of the occupation tax is paid on or before the due date, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a ten percent discount of the amount of tax so paid allowable at the time of such payment. No discount shall be allowed for any payment made after the due date. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-19) 
Sec. 38-148. - Registration. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-20) 
Sec. 38-149. - Failure to pay. 
Except to the extent otherwise provided for in this article, upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books, as provided in this article, any business tax registration granted by the county under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the county for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-21) 
Sec. 38-150. - Effect of failure to comply with article; continuing in business after tax registration revoked. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in the county after the registration for said business has been revoked are hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the county request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-22) 
Sec. 38-151. - Public hearing. 
The commission shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1996, § 1-26) 
Chapter 40 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local powers of county regarding uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-370 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished according to the provisions of the general penalties described in section 1-9, but in no event shall such penalties exceed those provided by state law. 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Secs. 40-2—40-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); stopping, standing and parking generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

Sec. 40-21. - Parking at Blue-N-Hall County Park. 
(a)  A one-hour maximum limit on the parking of boats with vehicles, and a 24-hour maximum limit on the parking of vehicles with empty trailers, as well as a one hour maximum limit on the parking of vehicles without trailers or boats is hereby established for the parking areas in and adjacent to Blue-N-Hall County Park. 
(b)  Violations of the parking limitation set forth in subsection (a) of this section are to be considered misdemeanor infractions, punishable according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. A new violation shall be cited for every 24 hours that the vehicle and/or trailer/boat remains in violation. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1999) 
Secs. 40-22—40-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOW-SPEED VEHICLES 

Sec. 40-46. - Authority; name. 
This article shall be referred to as the "Motorized Cart Control Ordinance of McIntosh County." 
(Ord. of 7-11-2006, § 2-5-1) 
Sec. 40-47. - Findings; definitions. 
(a)  The county commission finds that all streets and paved recreational paths located within the territorial boundaries of the county and under its jurisdiction are designed and constructed so as to safely permit their use by operators of motorized carts, electric bicycles, and low speed motor vehicle ("LSMV"), except as stated elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  Words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three or more low-pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars for steering control. 
Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having only two wheels which are in tandem and either of which is more than 13 inches in diameter. 
Dealer means a person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or exchanging vehicles who has an established place of business in this state. 
Electric bicycle means a device with two or three wheels which has a saddle and fully operative pedals for human propulsion and also has an electric motor. For such a device to be considered an electric-assisted bicycle, it shall meet the requirements of the federal motor vehicle safety standards, as set forth in 49 CFR 571 et seq., and shall operate in such a manner that the electric motor disengages or ceases to function when the brakes are applied. The electric motor in an electric assisted bicycle shall: 
(1)  Have a power output of not more than 1,000 watts; 
(2)  Be incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than 20 miles per hour on level ground; and 
(3)  Be incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human power alone is used to propel the device at or more than 20 miles per hour. 
Electric personal assistive mobility device or EPAMD means a self-balancing, two non-tandem-wheeled device designed to transport only one person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (one horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such propulsion system and ridden by an operator who weighs not more than 170 pounds. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Low-speed motor vehicle or LSMV means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 CFR 571.500 and in effect on January 1, 2001. 
Moped means a motor-driven cycle equipped with two or three wheels, with or without foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion, and an independent power source providing a maximum of two brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum piston or rotor displacement shall be 3.05 cubic inches (50 centimeters) regardless of the number of chambers in such power source. The power source shall be capable of propelling the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour (48.28 kilometers per hour) on level road surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor, all-terrain vehicle, dirt bike, and moped. 
Motor-driven cycle means every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, every bicycle with a motor attached, and every moped. 
Motorized cart means every motor vehicle having no less than three wheels and an unladen weight of 1,300 pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than 20 miles per hour. 
Motorized play vehicle means a coaster, scooter, pocket bike, any other alternatively fueled device, or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled by a motor engine, gas or electric, and is not otherwise defined in this Code as a "motorized cart," "low speed motor vehicle (LSMV)," "motor vehicle," "motorcycle," "electric bicycle," motorized skateboard," "electric personal assistive mobility device," or "motorized wheelchair." 
Motorized skateboard means a self-propelled device, including Segways, that has a motor, gas or electric, a deck upon which a person may ride, not equipped with a seat, and at least two tandem wheels in contact with the ground and which is not otherwise defined in this Code as a motor vehicle," "motorcycle," "motorized play vehicle," "motor scooter," "electric personal assistive mobility device" or "motorized wheelchair." 
Motorized wheelchair means a self-propelled wheelchair that is used by a physically disabled person for mobility. 
Pocket motorcycle or pocket bike means a two-wheeled vehicle other than a motor vehicle, bicycle with helper motor or a motorized scooter, and which is propelled by an internal combustion engine, electric motor or other mechanical means, is capable of carrying a rider and/or passenger at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour, and is designed to replicate the general appearance of a motorcycle, regardless of the scale of the replication. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2006, § 2-5-2) 
Sec. 40-48. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the terms of this article, except section 40-50(b), (c) or (d), shall be punished as provided in section 40-56; except that any fine for a littering offense shall be doubled. 
(b)  Any violation of section 40-50(b), (c) or (d) shall be charged against the registered owner of the motorized cart, and all fines and penalties shall be levied against the registered owner of he motorized cart as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of not less than $250.00. 
(2)  For the second offense, a fine of not less than $500.00. 
(3)  For a third offense committed within one year of conviction for a second offense for a motorized cart, a fine of $1,000.00, and the registered owner's motorized cart registration shall be revoked. The registered owner or family member cannot thereafter register a motorized cart for use in the county for a period of two years following the third conviction. 
(c)  Any violation by an operator of a LSMV shall be charged against the operator according to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq. and this Code. Any violation by an owner of a LSMV shall be charged against the owner according to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq. and this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2006, § 2-5-9.1) 
Sec. 40-49. - Registration/transfer requirements. 
(a)  Motorized carts. It shall be the duty of every owner of an electric- or gasoline-powered motorized cart that is operated over the recreation paths and streets and those areas accessible by the public to register the cart with the county within ten business days of the date of purchase. Two numerical decals shall be issued upon registration; and a record of each motorized cart number, along with the name and address of the owner, shall be maintained by the county clerk's office. The decals must be affixed to the sides of the cart in such a manner as to be fully visible at all times. The failure to have a current registration decal on a motorized cart shall be a violation of this section and subject the owner of such cart to the penalties set forth in sections 40-53 and 40-54. 
(1)  Annual registration fee. The annual registration fee for motorized carts shall be $12.00. Such registration shall be made annually by the owner of such carts on or before September 1 of each year. Such registration shall be for the period of September 1 to the following August 30. 
(2)  Registration deadline. If the cart is not registered within ten business days of purchase, a penalty will be applied in addition to the registration fee; and the cart shall be considered an unregistered cart after the ten business-day period. 
(3)  Transfers. Upon occurrence of a sale of the cart to another person who shall operate the cart over the recreation paths and streets of the county, the registration must be transferred to the new owner within ten business days of the change in ownership and if the new owner is not a county resident, the nonresident registration/user fee for the balance of the year shall be due from the new owner. If the registration is not transferred within ten business days, a penalty will be applied in addition to the transfer charge; and the cart shall be considered an unregistered cart after the ten business-day period. Dealers acquiring a registered cart exclusively for resale (non-rental) shall not be required to pay the transfer charge, but shall notify the county of the transfer within ten business days of receiving the cart, and of the ultimate disposition of the cart within ten business days of sale. 
(4)  Special tourism events. The county board of commissioners may, at its discretion, waive registration requirements for special events of a limited duration to which out-of-county residents may bring carts as participants. 
(5)  Fees. The fees mentioned in the this section shall be established by resolution of the board of commissioners and available for public examination in the office of the county clerk. 
(b)  Gasoline carts. 
(1)  Every gasoline-powered motorized cart shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
a.  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer. 
b.  The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened, including the consideration of missing or broken brackets or hangers. 
c.  The engine and powered mechanism of every cart shall be so equipped, adjusted and tuned as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any gasoline-powered motorized cart to operate or permit the operation of such cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions, which is placed on a cart by the manufacturer, to render the device unserviceable by removal, alteration or which interferes with its operation. 
(c)  Rental carts. Cart dealers and distributors, as well as other commercial establishments, may rent carts to the public for use on the recreation paths and streets and those areas accessible by the public of the county. Each such establishment renting carts shall be required to register each such rental cart in accordance with subsections (a) and (b) of this section and shall maintain a written record of each person who rents each cart. Renters shall be required to furnish positive identification, shall be provided a copy of this article to read, and must be at least 16 years of age. The registration fee and transfer fees and regulations shall be the same as those in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  Age, number of registrants limited. Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a motorized cart. Cart registration may be in one person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person. 
(e)  LSMV. No LSMV shall be operated on the paved recreational paths or streets located within the territorial boundaries of the county unless it is legally registered and insured according to laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2006, § 2-5-3; Ord. of 9-14-2010, § 4(a)) 
Sec. 40-50. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  Those persons who are 16 years of age and older who hold a valid vehicle driver's license may drive a motorized cart on the recreation paths and/or streets and those areas accessible by the public of the county unless such person has had his license to operate a motor vehicle suspended or revoked by the state which issued said license in which case such person shall not be permitted to operate a motorized cart on the recreation paths and/or streets and those areas accessible by the public of the county during the time of suspension or revocation. 
(b)  Those persons who are 15 years of age but not yet 16 years of age may drive a motorized cart on the recreation paths and/or streets and those areas accessible by the public of the county: 
(1)  If he has in his possession a valid instructional permit issued by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-5-24, as may be amended, and he is accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license or he shall be accompanied in the front seat by a parent, grandparent or legal guardian who is capable of exercising control over the vehicle; or 
(2)  If he has in his possession a valid instructional permit issued by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-5-24, as may be amended, and is accompanied by a licensed driver as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section, then he may be accompanied in the vehicle by up to one other person who must be at least 15 years of age, or he may be accompanied by up to three immediate family members providing the motorized cart has seats to accommodate such persons. 
(c)  Those persons who are 12 years of age but not yet 15 years of age may drive a motorized cart on the recreation paths and/or streets and those areas accessible by the public of the county if they are accompanied in the front seat by a parent, grandparent or legal guardian. 
(d)  No person under the age of 12 shall be permitted to drive a motorized cart on the recreation paths and/or streets and those areas accessible by the public of the county under any circumstances. 
(e)  All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the recreation paths, streets and those areas accessible by the public in the county. Where paths exist, they must be used in preference to parallel county streets with the exclusion of those cart paths privately owned and maintained by golf courses and not used by the general public. 
(f)  Motorized cart shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(g)  Motorized carts may be operated over those authorized streets, recreational paths and those areas accessible by the public only during daylight hours unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights and taillights. 
(h)  No motorized cart shall be permitted to operate over, along, or across any federal or state highway within the boundaries of the county except where authorized crossings are provided. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart or LSMV or any other person operating, employing, permitting the use of or otherwise directing the use of such motorized cart or LSMV to operate or permit the operator of any motorized cart or LSMV to drive over the recreational paths, streets or those areas accessible by the public in the county in violation of this article. 
(j)  Only persons possessing a valid license issued by this state, another state of the United States of America, or international agency which permits such person to operate a motor vehicle on the highways of the state may operate a LSMV on the paved recreational paths or streets located within the territorial boundaries of the county. 
(k)  No LSMV shall be permitted to operate on, over, along, or across any federal or state highway within the boundaries of the county except where authorized crossings are provided. No LSMV shall be permitted to operate on any street on which the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour. Except as prohibited in this section, LSMVs shall be permitted to cross over streets of which the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2006, § 2-5-4) 
Sec. 40-51. - Recreation path users—Authorized. 
Authorized users of paved recreation paths and sidewalks are as follows: 
(1)  Pedestrians; 
(2)  Non-motorized vehicles; 
(3)  Roller skates, roller blades and skateboarders (daylight only); 
(4)  Registered electric-powered golf carts; 
(5)  Registered gasoline-powered golf carts; 
(6)  Emergency and authorized maintenance vehicles; 
(7)  Bicycles, traditional and electric (as defined in section 40-47); 
(8)  Electric and conventional wheelchairs; 
(9)  Electric vehicles designed to carry one person at a speed not to exceed 20 miles per hour except as prohibited in section 40-52; and 
(10)  LSMV, provided that the vehicle is operated only in a mode or other restriction which does not allow the vehicle to exceed 20 miles per hour. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2006, § 2-5-5) 
Sec. 40-52. - Same—Prohibited uses. 
Prohibited uses of recreation paths are as follows: 
(1)  Automobiles and trucks (except authorized maintenance vehicles); 
(2)  Motorcycles; 
(3)  Street and trail motorized bikes or vehicles (not to include electric bicycles); 
(4)  Minibikes and mopeds; 
(5)  Horses; 
(6)  Go-carts; 
(7)  Unregistered electric-powered golf carts or motorized carts; 
(8)  Unregistered gasoline-powered golf carts or motorized carts; 
(9)  Electric or gasoline powered scooters; 
(10)  Motorized play vehicles; 
(11)  Unregistered LSMVs; and 
(12)  Except as permitted in section 40-51, any vehicle designed by the manufacturer to be able to travel at speeds in excess of 20 miles per hour under its own power on a flat surface. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2006, § 2-5-6) 
Sec. 40-53. - Hazardous activities and special rules. 
(a)  Paths are for transportation and public recreation by the various groups of permitted users. No individual or group shall engage in hazardous activities on the paths and streets and those areas accessible by the public. Such hazardous activities, and the special rules pertaining to them, include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Racing of any form, except for special events approved by the county; and 
(2)  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the county. 
(b)  None of the prohibited users in section 40-52 shall use the path system or the bridges and/or their underpasses for any purpose whatsoever. 
(c)  Pedestrians, skaters and permitted vehicles shall not loiter or park on recreation path bridges or in underpasses. 
(d)  Normal rules of the road shall apply to the recreation paths. For instance, when approaching oncoming path users, each user shall move to his right side of the path. Passing shall be on the left side of the path. 
(e)  Pedestrians should be given due consideration and reasonable right-of-way by other users of the recreation paths to ensure them safe passage. 
(f)  A warning or announcement shall be given by operators of golf carts and other users of the recreation paths, such as bicyclists and skaters, when approaching pedestrians from the rear. This warning or announcement may be verbal, but it is recommended that bicyclists and golf carts operators equip their vehicles with a warning device such as a horn or bell. Each user of the recreation paths shall be considerate of the safety and welfare of other users, and dangerous conduct will not be tolerated. 
(g)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the county also apply to the recreation paths. 
(h)  All litter shall be deposited in the receptacles provided along the recreation paths or retained by the path user for proper disposal later. Littering on the recreation paths shall be subject to twice the fines and penalties as littering on the streets. 
(i)  All users of electric bicycles shall wear a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation's Standards for Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling or a motorcycle helmet while operating an electric bicycle on the recreational paths. 
(j)  No one under the age of 15 shall operate an electric bicycle on the recreational paths. 
(k)  Seat belts on LSMVs shall be worn by all occupants at all times the vehicle is moving. 
(l)  All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during the operation of the golf cart. No person may sit on the operator's lap during the operation of the golf cart. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2006, § 2-5-7) 
Sec. 40-54. - Motorized play vehicle; authorizations; prohibitions; disclosure requirements. 
(a)  No motorized play vehicle may be operated on any public street, public roadway, public sidewalk, public park, public or private parking lot, public trail, public shared multi-use path, public bicycle path, and all other public property. 
(b)  Motorized play vehicles are permitted on private residential or rural property with the permission of the property owner. In the case of residential property commonly owned by a homeowners' association, the homeowners' association may regulate such usage. 
(c)  No motorized play vehicle may be operated on any private commercial/industrial property unless the location where the vehicles are to be operated is inaccessible to normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic (such as an enclosed warehouse or fenced parking lot with a locked gate). Motorized play vehicles may be operated on private commercial/industrial property meeting these restrictions with the written permission of the owner, the person entitled to immediate possession of the property, or the authorized agent of either. 
(d)  No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle on any private property in a manner causing excessive, unnecessary, or offensive noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
(e)  The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of any minor shall not authorize or knowingly permit such minor to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any vendor or merchant to sell motorized play vehicles without making disclosures required by this section. Any merchant or vendor who sells motorized play vehicles within the county shall: 
(1)  Post in a prominent place at each location where motorized play vehicles are on display, a notice, on a sign not less than 96 square inches and visible to the public, stating that operation of motorized play vehicles: 
a.  Are prohibited on any public street, public roadway, public sidewalk, public park, public parking lot, public trail, public shared multi-use path, public highway or any part of a highway, public bicycle path and all other public property in the county. 
b.  Are allowed to be used on private residential or rural property with owner's written permission. 
c.  Are allowed to be used on private commercial/industrial property only in areas inaccessible to normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic and only with the written permission of the owner/agent. 
(2)  Provide a copy of such notice to each purchaser of a motorized play vehicle, either before or in connection with the purchase of a motorized play vehicle. If the purchaser is a minor, the minor's parent or legal guardian must sign a receipt of said notice. 
(3)  Any motorized play vehicle owned by a governmental entity and which is operated in the performance of authorized duties or activities, is exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(g)  Temporary suspension of all or part of this section may be granted by the county commission for special events. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2006, § 2-5-7.1) 
Sec. 40-55. - Liability. 
Each person using the recreation paths is liable for his own actions. Liability insurance coverage varies, and each person operating a golf cart or other motorized or non-motorized vehicle on the recreation paths and public streets and those areas accessible by the public should verify his coverage. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2006, § 2-5-8) 
Sec. 40-56. - Enforcement jurisdiction; general penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Jurisdiction for the enforcement of this article shall be in the magistrate court of the county. Whenever in this article any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this article the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this article shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The judge of the magistrate court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the magistrate court the fines provided for in this article or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(c)  The judge of the magistrate court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the magistrate court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(d)  In the event the penalty for violation of any provision of this article shall be beyond the legal authority of the magistrate judge as provided by state law, jurisdiction for the enforcement of such violation shall be in the state court of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2006, § 2-5-9) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-2; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Secs. 40-57—40-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLE STORAGE 

Sec. 40-86. - Guidelines. 
In no way should a vehicle storage facility be construed as being an automotive salvage facility or junkyard. The following are minimum guidelines which must be adhered to in the operation of a vehicle storage facility: 
(1)  Such facility shall only be located in an area zoned C-G. 
(2)  Dismantling of vehicles, in whole or in part, shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Buying and/or selling of parts of vehicles in any manner shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Repairs to vehicles on the site, other than emergency repairs which may be required to get a vehicle cranked and removed, are prohibited. 
(5)  Wrecked vehicles or vehicles which are otherwise inoperable must be removed from the site within 120 days from the initial date of storage, unless requested by a law enforcement officer to keep a vehicle the site for a longer period. 
(6)  Reasonable surveillance for security purposes shall be provided by the operator of the vehicle storage facility. 
(7)  The facility shall be fenced by an opaque screen fence not less than six feet in height with three strands of barbed wire around the top of said fence, said barbed wire to be angled forward of said fence. 
(8)  Fire lanes of not less then 25 feet shall be maintained. 
(9)  Vehicles shall not be stored in a double-decked fashion. 
(Ord. of 1994, § 1) 
Chapter 42 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for the development, storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 42-19. - Applicability. 
These policies apply exclusively to water and sewer systems operated and owned by McIntosh County. 
(Ord. of 5-22-1993, § I; Ord. of 4-9-2013) 
Sec. 42-20. - Authority and responsibilities. 
(a)  All authority and responsibility for enforcing these policies and procedures, of setting water fees, safe and efficient operation, maintenance, and reporting belongs to the county. 
(b)  The water and sewer department, hereinafter referred to as "county," shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. 
(c)  The department may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render the service. 
(d)  The county may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the department's option, on the customer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(e)  The county reserves the right to refuse service unless the customer's lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or backflow. 
(f)  Under normal conditions the customer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service. Failure to notify the customer of service interruptions will not create a liability for the department. 
(g)  Duly authorized agents of the county shall have access at all hours to the premises of the customer for the purpose of installing or removing department property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(h)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the customer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the county a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water or sewer lines. 
(Ord. of 5-22-1993, § II; Ord. of 4-9-2013) 
Sec. 42-21. - Standard operating procedures and duties assigned. 
The county may: 
(1)  Use public funds to extend water lines along public rights-of-way, or it may require potential water customers to share the cost, or bear the total cost. Cost for connecting to a water line and installing water service on private property is the responsibility of the property owner. 
(2)  Apply for and utilize funds which may be available for assisting eligible low-income families to install water service. 
(3)  Pay for repairs and be reimbursed over a period of time agreed to by the county and the association concerned if an emergency occurs and the association concerned does not have sufficient funds on hand to correct the situation. 
(4)  Assign public works department personnel to provide technical/engineering assistance. 
(Ord. of 5-22-1993, § III; Ord. of 4-9-2013) 
Sec. 42-22. - Water use fees. 
(a)  Operating, maintenance, and replacement costs will be paid for by the water users through monthly water fees. 
(b)  The monthly water fee for all customers on the county system shall be set by the county. 
(c)  Fees may be adjusted by the county by ordinance or resolution of the county commission. 
(d)  Customers who are more than 30 days overdue with their payment will pay an additional late charge. Service will be cut off for customers more than 60 days overdue with their payments. Water service will not be reestablished until all back fees and late charges are paid. 
(e)  There is a reconnection fee to charge all customers whose water access has been turned off. 
(f)  The late charge and reconnect fee will be established by resolution or ordinance of the board of commissioners from time to time, and available for public examination in the office of the county clerk. 
(g)  A customer who has a high monthly water bill as a result from a plumbing problem may petition the county manager for an adjustment. No customer shall be allowed more than one adjustment per 12-month period and the amount adjusted to shall be equal to a six-month average water usage by the customer. In addition, to be eligible for the adjustment, the customer must provide documentation of where said plumbing issue was resolved. For example, a bill from a plumber for services rendered would be satisfactory or receipts for supplies associated with leak. 
(Ord. of 5-22-1993, § IV; Ord. of 4-9-2013; Ord. of 6-11-2013(2)) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 11, 2013, amended § 42-22 with the addition of subsection (h); however, at the editor's discretion, said subsection has been redesignated (g) in order to preserve the sequential lettering of the subsections. 
Sec. 42-23. - Well drilling and permitting by governments located outside of McIntosh County. 
The McIntosh County Board of Commissioners reserves the right to approve or disapprove of any county, city or other government seeking to install wells or other water facilities within McIntosh County without the approval of the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners. Any approval granted shall include a fee to be determined by McIntosh County to serve as a permit fee. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2015(1)) 
Secs. 42-24—42-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER USAGE RATE 

Sec. 42-40. - Findings. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of the county has found that its citizens are desirous of the board furnishing clean drinking water, and that its citizens desire a ready supply of water in greater geographic areas than is presently available. Because the board was without sufficient funds to pay for the cost of the improvement of its water system, the board applied for and has been granted a low-interest loan and grant by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). 
(b)  The USDA has set the minimum rate which the board must establish to fund the repayment of the low-interest loan, to wit: $29.00 for the first 1,000 gallons of water usage and $3.50 for each additional 1,000 gallons of water usage. 
(c)  The environmental protection division requires a graduated rate to foster conservation of the supply of water as a condition of new or modified withdrawal permits. 
(d)  The board finds that the water usage rate set in this article is the minimum rate necessary to fund the cost of the supply of water. 
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § 2; Ord. of 4-9-2013) 
Sec. 42-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Base charge means a fee used to recover non-volume-related costs, associated with billing, meter reading, and a portion of administrative costs. The amount is the same each billing period regardless of water used by the end user and may increase based on meter size. 
Base rate means the monetary fee for the first volume block of water used by a customer in the multitiered rate structure stated in this article. 
County water system includes all wells, tanks, mains, and water lines connected to the McIntosh County water network. 
Water customer means the person and entity which applies for the provision of water from the county and those who are connected to the county water system. 
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § 4; Ord. of 4-9-2013) 
Sec. 42-42. - Rate schedule. 
The board establishes the following rate schedule for each water customer connected to the county water system: 
(1)  Base rate/base charge. The base rate includes the base charge, which amount shall be a minimum charge of $29.00 per billing cycle (approximately monthly) per connection (i.e., per water customer). This rate shall include the first 1,000 gallons of water supplied. 
(2)  Tiered rate. 
a.  Additionally, the rate shall be $3.50 for each 1,000 gallons supplied above the base rate, for water usage up to 5,000 gallons (i.e., $3.50 for each 1,000 gallons supplied above the first 1,000 gallons up to 5,000 gallons per billing cycle). 
b.  Additionally, the rate shall be $3.75 for each 1,000 above the provision of 5,000 gallons (i.e., $3.75 for each 1,000 gallons supplied above the aforestated 5,000 gallons per billing cycle). 
(3)  These fees may be changed from time to time by resolution and such amended fee schedule shall be available at the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. The amendment shall not be effective for a period of 30 days after the schedule is adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  These fees shall pertain to the wastewater treatment facility located in Eulonia off of Highway 57. There shall be a fee of $4.00 per 1,000 gallons of treated wastewater. Wastewater shall be measured by utilizing current water meter levels. In addition, there shall be a monthly base charge of $250.00 per connection. 
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § 5; Ord. of 4-9-2013) 
Sec. 42-43. - Tap-in fees, deposits, and fees. 
The Board herby establishes the following fees: 
(1)  Effective April 15, 2013, there shall be a mandatory deposit on new accounts of $100.00 per account. Deposit is refundable upon termination of service and can be applied toward any outstanding balances. 
(2)  There shall be a one-time administrative fee of $15.00 for all new accounts. This fee shall cover all administrative costs for the new service. 
(3)  New meter installation shall be $250.00. This fee is one time only and covers labor and materials associated with installation. 
(4)  A fee of $500.00 shall be assessed as a connection fee for new customers tying into the system. This fee shall go towards capital cost associated with the water system. 
(5)  County shall assess a fee of $50.00 to either reconnect or disconnect an account. 
(6)  All accounts delinquent shall be charged $5.00 per month late fee. Said amount is not prorated. 
(Ord. of 7-8-2010, § 6; Ord. of 4-9-2013) 
Sec. 42-44. - Mandatory tie-ins. 
(a)  A development or subdivision within 1,000 linear feet of the county public water system, its lines and easements, must tie onto the county public water system in accordance with county specifications. All costs shall be borne by the developer of the development or subdivision. 
(b)  A county resident or business within 200 linear feet of the county public water system, its lines and easements, must tie onto the county public water system in accordance with county specifications. All costs shall be borne by the customer, but nothing contained herein shall prevent the board of commissioners from waiving the costs of the hookup during the initial construction phase of the installation project. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2013) 
Sec. 42-45 - Suspension of service. 
(a)  The county reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for any of the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Customer's willful disregard of departmental rules; 
(3)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the department's control; 
(4)  Emergency repairs; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood or unavoidable accident. 
(b)  The following is the general process by which an account shall be disconnected: 
(1)  Customer is notified that their account is past due. 
(2)  Customer does not pay balance in a timely manner as prescribed by this chapter. Customers shall be notified when their account is delinquent. When the account is more than 60 days delinquent, it is subject to disconnection by the county. 
(3)  Customer's service shall be disconnected until the balance is paid and all additional fees for disconnection and reconnection are paid. 
(4)  If customer restores service to property without paying balance and trespassing upon county-owned meter, a lock will be installed on the meter to further prevent theft and charges may be brought by the county. 
(5)  If customer removes lock, then the county will remove the meter and issue a citation to the owner or account holder for theft and damage of public property and any additional charges. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2013) 
Secs. 42-46—42-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE 

Sec. 42-60. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area of the county may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7(a)(1), (2), such watering time limitation shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(2), § 1; Ord. of 4-9-2013) 
Sec. 42-61. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)  The county building inspector and his assistants, any code enforcement officer, and the county sheriff and his deputies shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or to any other court of competent jurisdiction and is punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2010(2), § 2; Ord. of 4-9-2013) 
Chapter 44 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 44-1—44-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WRECKER SERVICE 

Sec. 44-18. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified: 
Motor vehicle has the meaning as that term is defined in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Wrecker service operation means any company, firm, business or individual or group of individuals for hire by the general public which provides by any means the hauling, moving or transferring from one place to another any damaged, disabled, inoperable, operable or impounded motor vehicle. 
(Res. of 8-11-1987, § 2(b), (c); Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 2; Ord. of 07-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 44-19. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-9. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 10; Ord. of 07-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 44-20. - License required. 
Any wrecker service which hauls, moves or transfers motor vehicles, operable or inoperable within the unincorporated area of the county at the request or direction of the county, its employees or any law enforcement officer, shall first obtain a license to do so from the county, before engaging in such business. The fee therefore shall be set by resolution by the board of county commissioners. 
(Res. of 8-11-1987, § 1; Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 1; Ord. of 07-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 44-21. - Application. 
Application for a license to conduct a wrecker service operation as required under this article shall be made as provided in section 44-20, except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  Trade names used during the previous five years by the applicant and each person signing the application along with the locations of prior establishments. 
(2)  The names and addresses of the owners of such business. If such business is a corporation, the names and owners of all persons owning stock in said corporation. 
(3)  Such other information as may be prescribed from time to time by the county commissioners which in the judgment of the commissioners is needed to determine whether such person, firm, organization or individual sufficiently complies with all the requirements of this section. 
(Res. of 8-11-1987, § 3; Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 3; Ord. of 07-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 44-22. - Requirements. 
The following operating requirements shall apply to all wrecker service operations and every item hereunder is a condition precedent to obtaining such a license and maintaining such license and the failure to abide by the requirements at all times shall be cause for revocation and/or denial of such license. 
(1)  All such wrecker service operations shall make available to the county on a 24-hour basis, every day of the year said services when and as called for non-consensual tow services at a price not more than the established maximum service fee provided in section 44-23. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of the license required by this article and prior to the conduct of any such operations by said wrecker service, such wrecker service shall obtain and cause to be kept in force at all times during the term of any such license granted under this section, liability insurance issued by a company or companies of sound and adequate financial responsibility of the following types and minimum amounts: public liability insurance; as required by statute (federal and state) but no less than bodily injury and property damage, $500,000.00 per occurrence, single limit coverage; garage keepers legal liability insurance with limits of $100,000.00 and on the hook cargo insurance (light-duty wrecker $50,000.00; heavy-duty wrecker $100,000.00). 
(3)  Said insurance policy or policies shall name the county, as a certificate holder and such policies of liability insurance shall not thereby cause the county to be deemed a partner or joint venture with the wrecker service operator in its business. 
(4)  Such wrecker service operator shall also carry workers compensation insurance in the amounts and form required by the Workers Compensation Act and insurance laws of the state and shall furnish proof of same to the county board of commissioners, designated agent of the county for this purpose, prior to the granting of any license hereunder and from time to time upon request by said the county board of commissioners. 
(5)  Copies of the certificates of all insurance coverage required of the wrecker service shall be filed with the county, and shall provide therein that the policies of insurance referred to in such certificates shall not be subject to cancellation by the insurer except after delivery of written notice by certified mail to the county board of commissioners at least 30 days prior to the effective date of any such cancellation. 
(6)  Should the wrecker service operator fail or refuse to obtain and keep in full force and effect the insurance required by this article, the county may revoke the license provided for hereunder. 
(7)  Within the area of the county (including municipalities) the wrecker service operator shall provide an area for the storage of vehicles which have been moved, hauled or transferred by the wrecker service operator at the request of the county, its employees or any law enforcement officer. All impounded motor vehicles hauled or towed by such wrecker service shall be stored in said storage facility and an office shall be maintained at the storage area for the convenience of the public in retrieving their vehicles. This office shall be available to the public on an on-call basis 24 hours every day of the year. Such facility must be maintained properly, clean and presentable at all times and shall be subject to inspection by the county sheriff's office. Failure to properly maintain facilities shall be cause for revocation of the license granted hereunder. Further, no impounded automobile hauled, moved, retrieved or transferred from one place to another by the wrecker service operator shall be stored at any place whatsoever other than a storage area which meets the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Such storage area shall meet all county zoning requirements and ordinances pertaining to vehicle storage. 
b.  The storage area and premises shall be kept in a clean and orderly fashion. 
c.  There shall be ample space to store a minimum of 25 automobiles at the same time. The standard size automobile to be used for determining whether such storage facility meets the approval of this requirement is seven feet by 16 feet. 
(8)  Services are to be rendered immediately upon request from the county 911 central dispatcher or sheriff's office employee. The wrecker service operator shall not respond to the scene of an accident unless called to the scene by the county 911 central dispatcher or sheriff's office employee. This resolution recognizes the right of an individual who is the owner of any wrecked or impounded vehicle to select his own wrecker service company provided his state of sobriety or capacity is assured and provided that said vehicle is not blocking the roadway or otherwise dangerous to the traveling public. 
(9)  The wrecker service operator shall comply with and conform to all federal, state and local laws and/or rules and regulations, regarding safety now in effect or as new ones become applicable. The wrecker service owner must submit to a background police and general records check for prior offenses or irregularities to determine suitability, reliability and financial stability in order to properly protect the public against abuse, neglect or malfeasance. No person who has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude shall be granted a license pursuant to the terms of this section. 
(10)  Prior to the issuance of any license hereunder the wrecker service operator must have and demonstrate his ownership [of] one of the following types of equipment: 
a.  One each heavy-duty wrecker. A heavy-duty wrecker shall be defined as wrecker with at least 32,000 pounds minimum gross vehicle weight rating equipped with a 16 to 25 ton power take-off mechanically driven power winch crane and having independent dual booms or independent dual winches and with dual rear wheels. 
b.  One each light-duty wrecker. A light-duty wrecker shall be defined as a wrecker with at least 10,000 pounds minimum gross vehicle weight rating equipped with eight 8,000 pound power take-off, power winch, per independent boom with dual rear wheels. 
c.  One each roll back or car carrier may be substituted for one light-duty wrecker; a light-duty car carrier shall be defined as a wrecker with at least 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight with dual rear wheels, power driven winch with complete hydraulic wrecker system. 
(11)  Each wrecker provided hereunder shall be required to carry a full complement of service items such as fire extinguishers, chains, ropes, blocks, dollies, sports car bar, motorcycle bar, stoplights, flashers, floodlights, hand tools, lock-out tools, wrecking bars, brooms, and any other tools needed for lifting, extracting, righting and removal of a [wrecked] or disabled vehicle or other equipment from public thoroughfares by towing or carting. If at any time after the granting of the license required by this article, the wrecker service operator fails to maintain the equipment required by this section such failure shall be cause for revocation of said license. All wreckers and other equipment must be inspected annually by the county sheriff's department, and any new wrecker must be inspected prior to being put in service. 
(12)  All licenses issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business of the wreck service and in each and every heavy duty wrecker and light duty wrecker used by said operator in its wrecker services. 
(Res. of 8-11-1987, §§ 2(b), 2(c), 3(c), 4; Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 4; Ord. of 07-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 44-23. - Fees. 
(a)  The wrecker service operator will charge the public for all services rendered at rates not greater than those set forth herein as follows: 
(1)  Light duty wrecker: $125.00 maximum per hour and $31.25 every one-fourth hour thereafter. 
(2)  Heavy duty wrecker: $250.00 maximum per hour and $62.50 every one-fourth hour thereafter. 
(3)  Storage fees: Maximum storage fees shall be set at $25.00 per day. 
(b)  Such rates shall be conspicuously posted in the wrecker service operator's place of business for the attention and information of the general public and for claimants of vehicles under wrecker service operator's care. All billings or statements of charges are to be itemized and will have clearly printed on the reverse side, the rates applicable pursuant to this article so that they may be verified by the claimant. 
(Res. of 8-11-1987; Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 5; Ord. of 07-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 44-24. - Telephone and radio communication. 
The wrecker service operator will provide, at no cost to the county, a designated telephone number and line to be used exclusively by the county 911 central dispatcher or sheriff's office employee for the purpose of notifying a wrecker service operator whenever such wrecker service operator's services are needed. 
(Res. of 8-11-1987; Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 6; Ord. of 07-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 44-25. - Minimum drivers. 
The wrecker service operator must submit and have available at all times at least one qualified wrecker operator with a valid driver's license issued by the State of Georgia, or, if the wrecker service maintains a wrecker having a GVW of 26,001 pounds or more, at least one qualified wrecker operator with a valid commercial driver's license (CDL). The wrecker service operator must submit a list of drivers' names, social security numbers, dates of birth, and drivers' license numbers to the county. 
(Res. of 8-11-1987; Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 7; Ord. of 07-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 44-26. - Wrecker services used by sheriff's department. 
(a)  The county board of commissioners shall compile a list of all wrecker service operators licensed under this article which are qualified to accept calls from the county 911 central dispatcher or sheriff's office employee for the purposes of hauling or storing vehicles as those terms are defined in this article, and the county sheriff's office radio dispatcher shall contact and call and request the services only of those wrecker service operators which have been licensed pursuant to the terms of this article which is for the protection of the general public and in furtherance of its police powers. Any wreckers called by the county 911 central dispatcher or sheriff's office employee shall be required to reach the vehicle to be hauled within 30-minute periods or said dispatcher shall be authorized to call the next wrecker service operator on the list. A wrecker service will not be allowed to drive to the scene in that 30-minute period in a wrecker or other vehicle insufficient to tow the vehicle it was called to, for the purpose of giving their sufficient wrecker time to get there. 
(b)  Only one wrecker service will be dispatched by the county sheriff's department to the scene of an accident. It will be at the discretion of the investigating officer to call for additional help if warranted by the circumstances of the accident; however, the wrecker service initially called from the rotational list shall be entitled to first choice of the wreckage to remove. 
(Res. of 8-11-1987; Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 8; Ord. of 07-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 44-27. - Solicitation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of the county to solicit towing business of wrecked vehicles for or in behalf of any wrecker operator. 
(b)  The operator of a wrecker shall at all times obey the orders and directions of members of the county sheriff's department. No operator of a wrecker shall drive his vehicle within 50 yards of any vehicle involved in an accident for the purpose of soliciting the tow of any wrecked vehicle unless: 
(1)  Such action is necessary to render first aid or assistance to a motorist or to a passenger of the vehicle involved in a wreck when the wrecker arrives at the scene of an accident first; or 
(2)  The wrecker operator is requested to remove the vehicle or render assistance by a county police officer. 
(Res. of 8-11-1987; Ord. of 11-14-1995, § 9; Ord. of 07-11-2017(1)) 
Sec. 44-28. - Denial, suspension or withdrawal of license. 
(a)  A license or an application for a license under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked only for due cause as defined in subsection (c) of this section. A license may be denied or suspended by the licensing officer as set forth in this article; provided, however, that a license may be revoked only after a hearing before the governing authority of the county upon a prior written notice to the applicant or licensee of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the reason why the license is to be revoked. Three days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the board of commissioners may deem the circumstances justify. Unless the circumstances otherwise justify, the hearing shall be generally held no later than 45 days after the fully completed application is filed with the licensing officer, or after the licensing officer has suspended a license. If a license is denied by the county manager under this article, the reasons for such denial shall be set forth in writing to the applicant. The applicant shall have 30 days following receipt of notice of denial to appeal the decision of the county manager to the governing authority, which shall review such application de novo at the next regular meeting of the governing authority following receipt of any such appeal, or, at the election of said governing authority, at a special meeting within 45 days following said appeal; provided, however, that any appeal received within ten business days prior to the next regular meeting of the governing authority shall be heard at the second regularly scheduled meeting of said governing authority following receipt of said appeal. If the governing authority affirms the decision of the county manager, then the license shall be denied. If the decision of the county manager is reversed, then the license shall be issued to the applicant. Alternatively, the governing authority may elect to issue the license subject to such reasonable conditions as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(b)  The county manager may suspend a license where there is evidence of due cause under subsection (c) of this section for revoking the license. Such action by the county manager shall be reported, in writing, to the governing authority. This action shall be reviewed at the next regular meeting of the governing authority, or, at the election of said governing authority, at a special meeting within 30 days following said suspension. If the governing authority affirms the decision of the county manager, then the license shall be permanently revoked. If the decision of the county manager is reversed, then the license shall be returned to the licensee immediately. Alternatively, the governing authority may elect to return the license to the licensee subject to such reasonable conditions as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(c)  A license or application therefor under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked if one or more of the following exists: 
(1)  The applicant or licensee has failed to obtain any paper, permit, approval, or document required under this article. 
(2)  The applicant or licensee has supplied false information to the county manager or the governing authority. 
(3)  The applicant or licensee has violated any federal, state, or local statute, ordinance, regulation, rule, or law applicable to the towing and recovery services, to include, without limitation, any provision contained in this article. 
(4)  Allowing any condition relating to the towing and recovery services that endangers public health or safety. 
(d)  Unless otherwise determined by the board of commissioners following a hearing as provided herein, any licensee may petition for reinstatement of any license revoked hereunder no sooner than six months from the date of revocation. Such petition shall be submitted on forms provided by the county, and shall first be reviewed by the county manager, who, following a hearing in the matter, shall make a recommendation regarding reinstatement to the board of commissioners. Said recommendation shall be nonbinding, and shall be decided by the board of commissioners following a subsequent hearing in matter. 
(Ord. of 07-11-2017(1)) 
Appendix A - FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the fees for McIntosh County, Georgia. For stylistic purposes, headings, catchlines, and section numbers appearing in this appendix have been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code of Ordinances. 

ARTICLE I. - COUNTY FEES 

Sec. 1. - Fees related to alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  The following license fees related to alcoholic beverages are established: 
Sec. 6-5(e) 
(1) Beer and wine off premises\$ 500.00 
(2) Liquor off premises\1,000 
(3) Liquor/beer and wine off premises\1,250.00 
(4) Beer and wine on premises\750.00 
(5) Liquor on premises\1,250.00 
(6) Liquor/beer and wine on premises\1,750.00 
Sec. 6-14 
Notice of pending application\35.00 
Sec. 6-25 
Temporary event alcohol permit, per event\25.00 
(b)  These various fees may be amended by resolution by the board of commissioners without the necessity of drafting a new ordinance applicable to the various statutes. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2013(1); Ord. of 1-14-2014) 
ARTICLE II. - CITY FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— This article is a reprint of appendix B, Municipal Fees, from the Code of the City of Darien, Georgia. Section numbers appearing in this article are as they appeared in the City of Darien's appendix B. 

Sec. 27-100. - General provisions. 
For the purpose of municipal fees this section shall be referred to as chapter 27 [appendix B] "Municipal Fees". The fees in this chapter are referenced throughout the Code of the City of Darien. The fees are established under the provisions of the Charter of the City of Darien. Any fees not listed in this chapter but that are listed in other chapters of the Code of the City of Darien remain in effect. Any fees that are listed in other chapters of the code of the City of Darien which are inconsistent with fees set forth herein are hereby repealed and the new fee as set forth herein shall be binding. All fees may be changed from time to time by a vote of the city council. 
Sec. 27-101. - Annexation (nondeveloped land). 
1.  $100.00/acre, up to $10,000.00 
2.  All property less than an acre shall be treated as an acre. 
Sec. 27-102. - Rezoning. 
1.  $200.00/acre, up to $10,000.00 
2.  All property less than an acre shall be treated as an acre. 
Sec. 27-103. - Variances. 
1.  $250.00 each variance request 
Sec. 27-104. - Subdivision plat/plan reviews. 

 
Sec. 27-105. - Subdivision inspections. 

 
Sec. 27-106. - Site plan reviews. 

 
Sec. 27-107. - Site development inspections. 
Clearing, grading, & improvements: $450.00 plus $10.00/acre 
Sec. 27-108. - Water taps. 

 
Sec. 27-109. - Sewer taps. 

 
Sec. 27-110. - All building permit and inspection fees. 
1.  The following fees are hereby established. 

 
2.  Any construction not covered by the schedule listed above and over $2,000 in cost shall be assessed at the rate of $3.00 per $1000.00 for the purpose of permitting. 
3.  For multifamily building permits the schedule is graduated; therefore the fee must be paid at each level as the number of units increase. 
Sec. 27-111. - Certificate of occupancy. 
$50 per unit 
Sec. 27-112. - Business license. 

 
2.  The following list of occupations are required by Georgia law to either pay a flat rate occupational tax not to exceed $400.00 per state certificate holder to the City of Darien or a local occupational tax assessment based on the local government's rate schedule: 
Physician licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 
Osteopath licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 
Chiropractors 
Podiatrists 
Dentists 
Optometrists 
Psychologists 
Veterinarians 
Landscape architects 
Land surveyors 
Practitioners of physiotherapy 
Certified Public Accountants 
Embalmers 
Funeral directors (this does not mean funeral homes) 
Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers 
Architects 
Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors 
Dealers of motor vehicles as defined in paragraph (1) of section 10-1-622 O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622] and any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by State Law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
Sec. 27-113. - Water, sewer rate schedules. 
Monthly Billing Rates and Charges for Water 
Base Charge of $8.00 per REU* Inside the City 
Base Charge of $12.00 per REU* Outside the City 

 
*kgal = 1000 gallons; REU = Residential Equivalent Unit 
Monthly Billing Rates and Charges  for Wastewater 
Base Charge of $10.00 REU* Inside the City 
Base Charge of $13.00 per REU* Outside the City 

 
*kgal = 1000 gallons; REU = Residential Equivalent Unit 
(Ord. of 5-20-2008, § 27-113) 
Sec. 27-114. - Meters. 
1.  Meters shall be installed by the city at a cost of $250.00 per meter. This price shall cover installation, labor, and capital equipment. 
2.  The city shall lease meters to residents at a fee of $3.00 per meter per month. The fee shall be added on as a surcharge to monthly city utility bills. 
Sec. 27-115. - Garbage collection. 
1.  Fee Schedule 

 
2.  All garbage fees shall be billed in with city utility bills. 
3.  Any commercial business that requires more than one garbage can shall be accessed at the rate equivalent to five pulls per week or $20.00. 
4.  Every business in the city shall be required at minimum to pay for one pull per week or $12.00. 
Sec. 27-116. - Definitions. 
1.  (REU)—Residential equivalency unit. A calculation used to determine the impact of a development onto a water or sewer system. REUs for Darien are based on 300 gallons per day. 
2.  All subdivision fees are also applicable to PUD as they both are a subdivision of land. 
[Sec. 27-117. - Schedule of costs for planting trees.] 
Cost Schedule 

 
(Ord. of 6-18-2002, § IV(G); Ord. of 7-19-2007(1), § IV(G)) 
[Sec. 27-118. - Land disturbing activity permits.] 
Editor's note— The following provision was adopted on August 21, 2007, by the City Council of the City of Darien, Georgia, as part of the "Water Resources Protection Ordinance." It has been reprinted here at the request of the city for referential purposes. 
The following permit fees are established per acre or fraction thereof in the project area: 

 
Appendix B - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the subdivision regulations for McIntosh County, Georgia, as adopted by the board of county commissioners on April 10, 2012. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY AND TITLE 
In accordance with applicable laws, statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State of Georgia, and as established through the local governing body, McIntosh County does hereby exercise the power and authority to review, approve, and disapprove plans for the subdivision of land within its unincorporated limits that show lots, blocks, or sites with or without new streets or highways. 
ARTICLE II. - AUTHORITY 
This Ordinance is adopted under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and laws enacted pursuant thereto. Specifically, the General Planning Enabling Act of 1957 as amended by the regular 1973 session of the General Assembly of Georgia, Section 14, grants authority to the governing body of each county and municipality to regulate subdivisions and land development. 

Section 1. - Short Title. 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "Subdivision Regulations of McIntosh County, Georgia." 
Section 2. - Purpose. 
The regulations set forth in this Ordinance are intended to serve the following purposes. 
A.  To protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  To provide a system for the subdividing of lands and the accurate recording of land titles. 
C.  To encourage economically sound, orderly, and compatible land development practices in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and other local policies and objectives. 
D.  To assure the provision of needed open spaces and public facility sites in new land subdivisions through the dedication or reservation of land for public purposes. 
E.  To assure equitable review and approval of all subdivisions by providing uniform procedures and standards for the subdivider. 
Section 3. - Intent and Application. 
It is the intent of this Ordinance that it will apply to and provide guidance for the subdivision of lands within the unincorporated limits of McIntosh County, Georgia. Any land development activity must first comply with this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 1. - Use of Words and Interpretation. 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following shall apply to the use of all words: 
A.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; 
B.  Words used in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular; 
C.  Words in masculine gender shall include the feminine and words in feminine gender shall include the masculine; 
D.  The term "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; 
E.  The word "may" is permissive; 
F.  Use of the word "and" is inclusive and requires that all of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency; and 
G.  Use of the word "or" is not exclusive and requires that at least one of the component phrases so connected must be present or fulfilled for sufficiency. The word "or" may allow more than one component phrase to be present or fulfilled, as in "and/or". 
H.  The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
I.  When the title of building and zoning inspector is used, it shall be construed to mean the planning and building department director or designee. 
J.  Words not defined herein shall be construed to have their common meaning. 
Section 2. - Definitions of Words and Phrases. 
Active Recreation. Recreational activities that require either (1) the use of a playing field or playground; (2) the installation of buildings or other structures; or (3) the substantial modification or grading of a tract of land. 
Best Management Practices (BMPs). Structural devices to store or treat storm water runoff or non-structural programs or practices both of which are designed to prevent or reduce the pollution of the waters of the State Of Georgia and provide other amenities. 
Buildable Area. Land area of a parcel, excluding Unbuildable Area. 
Buildable Lot. The smallest lot area established by the zoning ordinance on which a use or structure may be located in a particular district. 
Building Envelope. Area of a building lot identified on a subdivision plan indicating the allowed limits of clearing and grading, and within which all structures, and, when applicable, the well and septic systems, with the tank and leach field, shall be located. 
Concept Plat. A drawing which shows the overall concept of a proposed development, as further defined in these regulations. 
Conservation Easement. An easement which perpetually prohibits further development or use inconsistent with, or harmful to, the enhancement, preservation, and protection of a defined area for the benefit of fish, wildlife, plants, or other similar ecosystems, or preserves such areas predominantly in their natural scenic or open condition; but which may, in the sole discretion of the McIntosh County, permit recreational and/or agricultural uses which do not involve significant alteration or development of the restricted area in a manner which is inconsistent with, or harmful to, the preservation and protection of the restricted area. 
Conservation Subdivision. A subdivision approved in accordance with the applicable provisions and regulations, including those in Article XII, stated in this Ordinance. 
Conventional Subdivision. A subdivision design that is consistent with the provisions of the underlying Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations that would be applicable in the absence of the provisions and regulations stated in this Article XII. 
Easement. Legal authorization for a specified purpose by a property owner for the use of any designated part of the real property by another entity. 
Final Plat. A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and boundary information and certifications required by these Regulations and conforming to the Georgia Plat Act. 
Golf Course. A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing the game of golf and includes tees, greens, fairways, hazards, and structures such as a clubhouse and shelter. 
Golf driving range. A tract of land dedicated to driving of golf balls off tees into a designated landing area. 
Health Department. The Health Department of McIntosh County, Georgia. 
Land Trust. A private non-stock, non-profit corporation that has as its purpose the preservation of open space land. 
Lot. A portion of a subdivision, or any other tract or parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both. 
McIntosh County. The county, municipality, or other political subdivision adopting this Ordinance. 
Open Space. A portion of a subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection, or restricted or limited development. Activities within the open space may be restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument, as described in Article XII, Section 5. 
Owner. A person having a majority fee simple interest in real property, or a majority interest through any other form of ownership. 
Passive Recreation. Recreational activities that do not require either (1) the use of a playing field or playground; (2) the installation of buildings or other structures; or (3) the substantial modification or grading of a tract of land. The installation of a building or structure may be permitted in connection with a particular passive recreational activity, if the building or structure facilitates an underlying passive recreational activity that requires the building or structure, and the addition of the building or structure does not qualitatively change the impact of the passive recreational activity on the natural features of the land on which the activity occurs. For example, the installation of posts, signs, or water fountains along a hiking trail may not cause hiking to be deemed an active recreational use. 
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or other entity, group or combination thereof, other than a State, County, municipality, or any agency, board, authority, or subdivision of the foregoing, acting singly or collectively for a common purpose, and the duly authorized agents thereof. 
Plat. A map or drawing showing the subdivision, resubdivision, or recombination of land and any other features specified for a Plat in this Ordinance. 
Preliminary Plat. A drawing which shows the perimeter boundary, topography, lot layout arrangement, street layout, and other features of a proposed subdivision, as specified for a Preliminary Plat in the Ordinance. 
Qualified Wetland Scientist. A wetland scientist with current certification by the Society of Wetland Scientists Professional Certification Program as either a Professional Wetland Scientist of a Wetland Professional in Training 
Road. Used interchangeably with the word street. 
Sketch Plat. Refer to "Concept Plat". 
State Waters. Any and all rivers, perennial and intermittent streams, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, wetlands, wet weather systems, and all bodies of surface or subsurface water, including any waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the ocean tides, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single Person. 
Street, Private. An access way, other than a driveway, similar to and having substantially the same or similar function as a public street, providing access to more than one property, but held in private ownership. 
Street, Public. A right-of-way dedicated to and accepted by the local government for vehicular traffic including a prescriptive easement for public access and designated and numbered U.S. and State Highways. For purposes of these Regulations, the term "public street" shall be limited to those, which afford a direct means of vehicular access to abutting property, and exclude limited access highways which abut a property but from which direct access may not be allowed under any circumstances. 
Subdivider. Any person dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined. 
Subdivision. Any division or re-division of a lot, tract, or parcel, regardless of its existing or future use, into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels. Where appropriate to the context, the term "subdivision" also may be used in reference to the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership at the time of division. 
Unbuildable Area. The area in square feet, within a proposed subdivision which is comprised of watercourses, State Waters, any of the items 1 through 3 of Section 3.1.A of this Article XII, or any portion of any required buffers for any of the foregoing natural feature, existing and proposed streets and highways, easements and rights-of-way for vehicular access, drainage, and utilities. Easements and rights-of-way shall maintain a defined width. 
Wetlands. All wetlands, swamps, bogs, and waters that are subject to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' jurisdiction, and including without limitation, all areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, and further including, without limitation, all hydric soils, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
ARTICLE IV. - APPLICATION OF THE REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - Subdividing Land. 
After the adoption of this Ordinance, no tract of land within McIntosh County shall be subdivided without prior approval of McIntosh County in accordance with this Ordinance, provided however the division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved is exempt from this requirement. 
Section 2. - Recording a Plat. 
No plat of a Subdivision shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of McIntosh County unless it has first been approved in compliance with the regulations of this Ordinance. 
Section 3. - Use of a Plat. 
The transfer of title or sale of land by reference to a plat of a subdivision that has not been approved by the County and properly recorded in compliance with the regulations set forth in this Ordinance is prohibited and shall not be recognized or qualified as a Subdivision under this Ordinance. 
Section 4. - Erection of Buildings. 
No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any subdivided lot within McIntosh County unless that lot legally existed prior to the enactment of these Regulations, or unless that lot shall first have been created in accordance with the regulations set forth in this Ordinance. 
Section 5. - Dedication of Land, Facilities, and Streets. 
Land and Facilities. No land or facilities shall be dedicated to McIntosh County for public ownership or use unless that dedication is made in accordance with the regulations set forth in this Ordinance and all other County ordinances. 
Streets. The County Commission shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street or authorize the laying of water lines, sewers, drainage structures, or other facilities or utilities in any street within the unincorporated area of McIntosh County unless: 
1.  Such facility has been officially reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the County's construction standards and has received the legal status of a public street or is located in the ROW of said public street; or 
2.  Such facility has been officially reviewed and disapproved by the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and such disapproval by the Planning Commission is overridden by vote of eighty percent (80%) of the entire membership of the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners. Upon such approval by the County Board of Commissioners the street shall have the legal status of a public street. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Section 1. - Suitability of the Land. 
Land subject to flooding, improper or inadequate drainage or erosion, if developed as proposed, and any land deemed unsuitable for development due to steep slopes, unsuitable soils, subsurface conditions or other undesirable properties, shall not be subjected to development as a lot within a Subdivision for any uses that shall or may create or continue such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life, or property. In particular, no land within any delineated floodways or within any required undisturbed buffer shall be included within the Buildable Area of any Subdivision or included within any Lot of a Subdivision. In addition, no undisturbed buffer that is required by any of the local development codes and ordinances in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community shall be included or within any Lot proposed for a Subdivision for any development. 
Section 2. - Appropriateness of Location. 
The Building and Zoning Administrator and the Planning Commission must consider the following when making a recommendation for approval of a subdivision: 
A.  Whether the subdivision is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
B.  Whether the subdivision will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
C.  Whether the land to be subdivided has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned and in its existing use; 
D.  Whether the subdivision will cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
E.  Whether the subdivision is in conformity with the policy and intent of the County's Comprehensive Land Use Plan; 
F.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the subdivision; 
G.  Whether the subdivision can be considered environmentally adverse to the natural resources, environment and citizens of McIntosh County. 
Section 3. - Differences in Ordinances. 
Whenever there is a difference between minimum standards or requirements under the regulations set forth in this Ordinance and those contained in any applicable zoning regulations, development regulations, building codes or other ordinances or regulations, the most restrictive shall apply. 
Section 4. - Conformance. 
All proposed subdivisions must conform to the adopted Comprehensive Plan of McIntosh County. 
Section 5. - Access. 
When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such lots shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
No subdivision should be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. Every development should be designed to facilitate access to adjoining properties, which are developed or anticipated to be developed in a manner compatible with or substantially similar to the subject property. Locations of inter-parcel access shall be as required by and subject to the approval of McIntosh County. Private streets, as may be approved under the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be constructed to the roadway standards of McIntosh County. 
Section 6. - Public and/or Community Utility Requirements. 
By permitting varying numbers of lots and varying levels of improvement, regulations enable the small developer to provide for growth in the rural, more slowly developing areas of the county characterized by a lower lot absorption rate. Less restrictive development standards are imposed according to quantity of lots to allow for flexibility in subdivision sizes. All subdivisions are required to abide by the requirements of the McIntosh County Subdivision Ordinance, Water Resources Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, and Flood Damage Protection Ordinance, and applicable provisions of the Development Standards. 

 
Section 7. - Permanent Reference Points. 
Prior to the approval of the Final Plat, all of the subdivisions permanent reference points shall have been placed in accordance with the following requirements: 
7.1. Benchmarks. 
At least two public benchmarks (one of which shall be on a public right-of-way) shall be established within a subdivision. Such benchmarks shall be at opposite corners of the property being subdivided where feasible in the opinion of the Planning Commission. Additional benchmarks may be required by the Planning Commission on a case by case basis. All benchmarks shall refer to mean sea-level datum provided from the nearest applicable U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey benchmark and should be so noted on all plats. 
7.2. Subdivision Corner Tie. 
At least one (1) corner of the Subdivision shall be designated by course and distance (tie) from a readily discernible reference marker. If a corner is within two thousand (2,000) feet of a U.S. Coast and Geodetic Station, U.S. Geological Survey, or Georgia Grid System coordinated monument, then this corner shall be marked with a monument so designated by computed X and Y coordinates which shall appear on the map with a statement identifying this Station or Monument to an accuracy of 1:10,000. When such a Monument or Station is not available, the tie shall be made to some permanent and readily recognizable land mark or identifiable point, physical object or structure. 
7.3. Monument Standards. 
A.  Monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the boundaries of the subdivision; at the intersection lines of streets and at the intersection of the lines of streets with boundaries of the plat and at the intersection of alleys with the boundaries of the subdivision; at all points of curvature, points of tangency, points of reverse curvature and angle points in the side lines of streets and alleys; and at all angles of an intermediate traverse line. 
B.  It is not intended or required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a street to mark angles in the boundary of the subdivision if the angle points can be readily re-established by reference to monuments along the sidelines of the streets. 
C.  All required monuments shall be placed flush with the ground where practicable. 
D.  If the required location of monument is in an inaccessible place, or where the location of a monument would be clearly impracticable, it is sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location thereof be clearly indicated on the plat and referenced to the true point. 
E.  Unless otherwise stated within this ordinance, all monuments used shall be made of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half (½) inch in diameter and thirty-six (36) inches long and completely encased in concrete at least four (4) inches in diameter. 
7.4. Control Corners. 
Within each block of a subdivision at least two (2) Monuments designed and designated as Control Corners shall be installed. All Control Corners shall be constructed of concrete and shall be at least four (4) inches in diameter or square and not less than three (3) feet in length. Each monument shall have imbedded in its top or attached by a suitable means, a metal plate of noncorrosive materials and marked plainly with the point, the Surveyor's registration number, the month and year it was installed and the words "Control Center." 
7.5. Property Markers. 
A steel or wrought iron pipe or the equivalent not less than three-fourths (¾) inches in diameter and at least thirty (30) inches in length shall be set at all corners, except those located by Monuments. 
ARTICLE VI. - THE CONCEPT PLAT 

Section 1. - Purpose of Concept Plat. 
The purpose of a Concept Plat review is to provide a developer with an economical way to work with the planning staff and elected officials in reaching a general agreement as to the nature of a proposed land subdivision project, its impact on the community, and its conformance with the codes, ordinances, plans and policies. For the Concept Plat review, the developer will not need detailed architectural and engineering drawings. 
Section 2. - Concept Plat Specifications. 
As a minimum, the following information and materials should be provided as a part of the Concept Plat application package: 
A.  One (1) copy of an accurate and up-to-date survey of the property proposed for subdivision; 
B.  One (1) copy of a vicinity map at a scale of 1:600 showing the property in relation to the general area of the jurisdictional limits in which it is located; 
C.  One (1) copy of a completed Project Data Sheet; 
D.  Ten (10) copies of a schematic plat drawn clearly and accurately by a design professional at a scale appropriate for the nature of the project, to include: 
1.  Scale, North Arrow, and Date of Preparation; 
2.  Approximate Topography; 
3.  All primary and secondary conservation areas; 
4.  Significant Existing Man-Made Features on the Property; 
5.  Proposed streets, lots, public areas, open spaces, greenbelts, buffers, amenity areas, and other significant proposed improvements; 
6.  Zoning setbacks, and the approximate area of each lot; 
7.  Any other features that will be important in the design and development of the project; and 
8.  Any off-site improvements that may be needed to properly develop the property. 
E.  One (1) copy of a reduced 11″ × 17″ copy of the Concept Plat suitable for distribution to the Planning Commission and the general public; 
F.  One (1) copy of the Stormwater Management Concept Plan; 
G.  Soil Survey (Level 1 Soil Report, McIntosh County Health Department); 
H.  Proposed method of water supply and sewage disposal; 
I.  Typical floor plans and elevations of the houses that are planned for the proposed subdivision; 
J.  Proposed name of the subdivision; 
K.  Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the property owner of record and the developer or subdivider; 
L.  Name, address, and telephone number of each professional firm associated with the preparation of the Preliminary Plat; 
M.  A Concept Plat review fee. 
Section 3. - Concept Plat Review Process. 
Step 1: The developer of a proposed subdivision shall meet with the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator or designated development coordinator to discuss what is required for Concept Plat approval in terms of documents, fees, and schedules. 
Step 2: The developer shall submit to the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator a complete Concept Plat application package including all items specified under Section 2 of this Article, and any other matter appropriately required by McIntosh County. 
Step 3: The Concept Plat Application Package is carefully checked by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator or designated administration assistant to determine whether or not it is complete. If it is incomplete it will be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it is incomplete and what must be done to make it complete. The developer will then begin the process again with Step 2 and an additional fee will be required. 
Step 4: If the Concept Plat Application Package is complete, it will be accepted by McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator or designated development coordinator; the date of acceptance will be noted. For every submittal, the Building and Zoning Administrator or designated review authority shall have at least 15 working days for review and comments. 
Step 5: If the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator concludes the Concept Plat is not acceptable, the Concept Plat shall be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it was found to not be acceptable, and with instructions as to what needs to be done to make it acceptable. The developer will then begin the process again at Step 2, and a new plat review fee will be required. 
Step 6: If the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator approves the Concept Plat, it shall be forwarded to the developer will be authorized to proceed with the preparation of a Preliminary Plat that will be based on the approved Concept and be in accordance with all conditions and agreements included in the action to approve the Concept. 
Section 4. - Concept Plat Certifications. 
4.1. Concept Plat, Owner's Certification. 
The following certification statement shall appear in the Concept Plat Application package: 
I hereby submit this Concept Plat as the owner, or his authorized agent, of all property shown thereon. 
____________ 
[Signature of Owner or Authorized Agent] 
____________ 
Date 
____________ 
[Name of Owner or Authorized Agent] 
____________ 
Title 
4.2. Concept Plat. 
The following certification statement shall appear in the approved Concept Plat Application package: 
This Concept Plat has been reviewed and approved by McIntosh County in accordance with these Regulations and other applicable development codes and ordinances. This approval expires in one (1) year from this date if the owner/developer fails to secure Preliminary Plat approval by that time. 
____________ 
County Administrator 
____________ 
Date 
ARTICLE VII. - THE PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Section 1. - Purpose of Preliminary Plat. 
The purpose of a Preliminary Plat is to provide a review of a proposed subdivision at an intermediate point between the Concept Plat and a full set of Construction Plans. It is intended that this review will help assure that the plans which are being prepared are in accordance with all applicable development codes and ordinances and with the conditions set forth in the approval of the Concept Plat. 
Section 2. - Preliminary Plat Specifications. 
The Preliminary Plat for a subdivision shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. The sheet size shall not exceed 36 inches by 48 inches, provided, however, a scale of 200 feet to one inch may be used to avoid sheets in excess of 36 inches by 48 inches. The minimum sheet size shall be 17 inches by 22 inches. The Preliminary Plat application package shall, at a minimum, contain the following: 
A.  Proposed name of the subdivision. 
B.  Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the property owner of record and the developer or subdivider. 
C.  Name, address, and telephone number of each professional firm associated with the preparation of the Preliminary Plat. 
D.  Date of survey, north point, and graphic scale. 
E.  Subdivision location including land lot(s) and land district(s), area in acres, internal and abutting zoning, proposed number of lots with minimum lot size, and proposed phasing, if any. 
F.  A location sketch or vicinity map positioning the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area with regard to recognized permanent landmarks. The location sketch scale shall be at a scale of 600 feet to the inch. 
G.  Boundary lines of the overall property perimeter showing bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds and distances in feet and hundredths of a foot along all lines and the bearing and distances to an existing street intersection or other recognized permanent landmark. The source of boundary information shall be shown. 
H.  Current field-run topography with mean sea level contours at intervals no greater than five feet. The source of topographic information shall be shown. 
I.  Accurate locations of all natural features such as lakes, ponds, streams, creeks, State Waters, Wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other significant features, and notations designating any federal, state, or local regulatory agency permits or approvals that are or may be required relative to development of or around such features. The source of floodplain information shall be shown. In applicable, the petitioner must provide a copy of the Wetland Delineation that has been approved by the US Army Corps of Engineers, or at a minimum, a delineation prepared by a qualified wetland scientist. 
J.  Approved Stormwater Management Plan. 
K.  Erosion and Sedimentation Plan, approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District. 
L.  Soil Survey (Level 3 Soil Report, McIntosh County Health Department). 
M.  Accurate locations of all cultural features such as all existing historic resources, public recreational facilities, cemeteries, rights-of-way, easements, pavements (including widths), bridges, culverts and storm drains, utility lines, appurtenances and structures, municipal, County, or other political subdivision jurisdictional limits, land lot and district lines, zoning districts and limits and other significant features. 
N.  Proposed layout including lot lines with preliminary dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, street rights-of-way with names and widths, easements, public use facilities, facilities exclusively for subdivision use and all relevant conditions of zoning. 
O.  Location of all known existing or previous landfills. 
P.  Proposed method of water supply and sewage disposal. 
Q.  Tree Preservation Plan which shall identify all native trees greater than [6 inches] in diameter at [4 feet] above the ground, indicate which trees will be retained. 
R.  Preliminary Plat Certifications as specified in Section 5 of this Article. 
S.  Schedule. This should include the date beginning as well as completion dates for the various elements of the plat. 
T.  Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all surrounding and adjacent property owners. 
Section 3. - Preliminary Plat, Supplemental Information. 
The following supplemental information shall be required for each submittal of a Preliminary Plat: 
A.  A written summary of the proposed Subdivision giving information as to the overall development plan including, as appropriate, the type and square footage of structures, number of housing units, types of land uses, anticipated traffic generation, and other pertinent information so that the effects and conformance of the Subdivision as to the purposes and requirements specified in Article V, Section 1 can be considered by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator or designated development coordinator. 
B.  Description of the anticipated utility systems required to serve the proposed subdivision including projected average and peak demands or flows for potable water (Water Availability Report), fire protection, sewerage, and electrical power. 
C.  Description of proposed stormwater management practices for the subdivision including the ownership and proper maintenance provisions of all stormwater detention facilities within the subdivision. 
D.  Such additional information as may be reasonably required to obtain an adequate understanding of the subdivision. 
Section 4. - Preliminary Plat Review Process. 
Step 1: The developer of a proposed Subdivision shall meet with the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator to discuss what is required for Preliminary Plat Approval in terms of documents, fees, and schedules. 
Step 2: The developer shall submit to the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator four complete sets of the Preliminary Plat Application Package. 
Step 3: The Preliminary Plat Application Package shall be carefully checked by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator or designated development coordinator to determine whether or not it is complete. If it is incomplete, it will be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it is incomplete and what must be done to make it complete. The developer will then begin the process again with Step 2, and an additional fee will be required. 
Step 4: If the Preliminary Plat Application Package is complete, it will be accepted by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator or designated development coordinator; the date of acceptance will be noted. The Application Package will be forwarded to the Health Department and Historic Preservation Committee for review. The Health Department will provide written approval or comments to the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator or designated development coordinator. The Historic Preservation Commission will provide comments, if any, to the Planning Commission. 
Step 5: If the Preliminary Plat Application Package is acceptable to the Health Department, the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator and the County Engineer shall have at least 15 working days for review of the Preliminary Plat, and preparation of review comments, from the date of acceptance of the McIntosh County Health Department. 
Step 6: If it is concluded that the Preliminary Plat is not acceptable, the Preliminary Plat shall be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it was found to not be acceptable, and with instructions as to what needs to be done to make it acceptable. The developer will then begin the process again at Step 2 and a new plat review fee will be required. 
Step 7: After the Preliminary Plat Application has been approved by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator and staff, the Preliminary Plat submittal shall then be placed on the Agenda for the next regularly occurring meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval, so long as that meeting is at least five working days following County staff approval of the Preliminary Plat Application. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to impose conditions and agreements on any plat approval as will ameliorate the negative effects of the proposed development on internal or surrounding properties. 
Step 8: If the Preliminary Plat is approved by the Planning Commission, it shall be forwarded to the developer and he will be authorized to proceed with the preparation of construction plans. The construction plans will be based on the approved Preliminary Plat and be in accordance with all conditions and agreements included in the action to approve the Preliminary Plat. 
Step 9: The McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator will sign the Preliminary Plat Certification after receiving approval from the Planning Commission. If the Preliminary Plat was approved with conditions, said conditions shall be noted on the preliminary plat certification. 
Section 5. - Preliminary Plat Certifications. 
5.1. Preliminary Plat, Owner's Certification. 
The following certification statement from the owner shall appear in the Concept Plat Application package: 
I hereby submit this Preliminary Plat as the owner, or his authorized agent, of all property shown thereon. 
____________ 
Signature of Owner or Authorized Agent 
____________ 
Date 
____________ 
Name of Owner or Authorized Agent 
____________ 
Title 
5.2. Preliminary Plat, Designer's Certification. 
The following certification statement from the design professional of record shall appear in the approved Concept Plat Application package: 
I hereby certify that the plans for the proposed subdivision shown on this Preliminary Plat were prepared by me or under my direct supervision: 
____________ 
Signature 
____________ 
Date 
Registered Landscape Architect No. ____________ 
Or Registered Land Surveyor No. ____________ 
Or Registered Civil Engineer No. ____________ (Seal) 
5.3. Preliminary Plat, Conformance with Concept Plat. 
The following certification statement shall appear in the approved Concept Plat Application package: 
I hereby certify that this proposed Preliminary Plat conforms to the approved Concept Plat and the requirements of the other applicable development codes and ordinances: 
____________ 
McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator 
____________ 
Date 
____________ 
County Engineer 
____________ 
Date 
5.4. Preliminary Plat Approval. 
All requirements of McIntosh County relative to the preparation and submission of this Preliminary Plat have been fulfilled and approval of this Plat is hereby granted. This approval expires in 365 days from this date if the owner/developer fails to secure Final Plat approval by that time. 
____________ 
McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator 
____________ 
Date 
Acknowledged by: 
____________ 
Owner/Developer 
____________ 
Date 
ARTICLE VIII. - CONSTRUCTION PLANS 

Section 1. - Purpose of Construction Plans. 
The purpose of the Construction Plans is to provide all the detailed engineering information necessary to actually build the proposed subdivision in accordance with the approved Preliminary Plat and all the other development codes and ordinances of the County. It shall be the responsibility of the County Building and Zoning Administrator and County Engineer to approve the format and content of the plans and specifications and to determine what supplemental information shall be required to assure proper construction of the project. 
Section 2. - Construction Plans and Specifications. 
The Construction Plans for a subdivision shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. The sheet size shall not exceed 36 inches by 48 inches, and the minimum sheet size shall be 17 inches by 22 inches. The Construction Plans shall include the following information: 
A.  Name of Subdivision; 
B.  Name, Address and Telephone Numbers of the Owner/Developer of the Property; 
C.  Name, Address and Telephone Number of the Professional Engineer who prepared the plans; 
D.  Name, Address and Telephone Number of the designated 24-hour contact person for the project; 
E.  Date plans were prepared, North Arrow and Graphic Scale on all appropriate sheets. 
F.  Location Map at a scale of 600 feet to the inch; 
G.  An accurate list of all conditions relative to the zoning or development of the property as a Subdivision and the approval of the Concept Plat and Preliminary Plat; 
H.  Pertinent Site Development Data; 
I.  A copy of each permit or approval that shall be required from any federal, state or local regulatory agency for or in connection with the proposed subdivision, or any portion thereof. 
J.  Detailed Limits of Clearing and Tree-Save Plans; 
K.  Detailed Limits all undisturbed buffers and open space; 
L.  Erosion and Sediment Control Plans; 
M.  Detailed Stormwater Management Plans; 
N.  Detailed Electric and Natural Gas Utility Plans; 
O.  Detailed Roadway Plans; 
P.  Detailed Grading Plans; 
Q.  Detailed Water Supply/Utility Plans; 
R.  Landscaping and Tree Preservation Plans that identify all native trees greater than [6 inches] in diameter at [4 feet] above the ground, indicate which trees will be retained, and detail a plan to protect those trees, including the root zone, during construction. The plan shall identify the areas of existing natural cover to be retained as well as new landscaping to be provided on the site, including specific types and sizing of plantings with a preference for native species. 
S.  Detailed Sanitary Sewer Plans; and 
T.  Such other Information as may be required by McIntosh County to fully evaluate and review the Project. 
Section 3. - Construction Plan Review Process. 
Step 1: The developer of a proposed subdivision shall meet with the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator to discuss what is required for Construction Plan Approval in terms of documents, fees, and schedules. 
Step 2: The developer shall submit to McIntosh County two complete sets of the Construction Plan Application Package. 
Step 3: The Construction Plan Application Package shall be carefully checked by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator or designated development coordinator to determine whether or not it is complete. If it is incomplete it will be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it is incomplete and what must be done to make it complete. The developer will then begin the process again with Step 2, and no additional fee will be required. 
Step 4: If the Construction Plan Application Package is complete, it will be accepted by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator or designated development coordinator; the date of acceptance will be noted. For every submittal, the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator and County Engineer shall have at least 30 working days for review of the Construction Plans, and preparing comments. 
Step 5: The McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator and County Engineer shall approve two identical sets of plans, one for the developer and one for the County. The developer shall then make five copies of the approved set for the County, along with one 11″×17″ set. The developer shall keep one copy of the approved set on the construction site at all times. 
Step 6: Upon request, after approval on the Construction Plans and receipt of all permits and approvals under Section 2, Item I of this Article, which shall become a part of the developer's Construction Plans, the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator shall issue a Development Permit to install the erosion control facilities and the tree-save fence in accordance with the approved plans. A fee is required for this permit in accordance with the fee schedule set by McIntosh County. 
Step 7: The County staff or appointees may periodically inspect the property to determine whether or not the site is developed in accordance with the approved plans. Also, the developer shall submit for review and approval all test results, documentation, and certifications that are required to demonstrate satisfactory construction and adherence to all federal, state, or local regulatory agency permits and approvals, all codes, ordinances and development standards. 
Step 13[8]: Upon receipt of written notification from the development, the County staff shall make a final inspection of the construction. On the basis of the site inspection and the review of the supporting documentation, the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator and County Engineer shall determine whether or not the construction work is acceptable. This determination shall be made within ten working days of the request. If it is determined that the construction is satisfactory, the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator will authorize the preparation of a Final Plat. 
Step 14[9]: If the construction is not approved, the developer shall be informed in writing of what needs to be done to secure approval, and then begin the process again with Step 13. A re-inspection fee shall be required. 
Note: If the developer wishes to make any change to the Construction Plans at any time during the process, that change must first be approved by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator and County Engineer in accordance with the Construction Plan Review Process. 
Note: Staff inspections will be performed on a regular basis during the construction process to assure conformance with the approved plans and specifications. 
Section 4. - Construction Plans Certification. 
4.1. Construction Plans, Engineer's Certification of Design. 
The following certification statement from the design professional of record shall appear in the approved Construction Plans package: 
I hereby certify that the design of stormwater and drainage facilities including culverts, drainage structures and detention or retention ponds and appurtenances; the design of roadways and streets; and the design of water system facilities including pipelines, fire hydrants, valves and appurtenances, sanitary sewerage facilities including gravity sewer pipelines, force mains, manholes and appurtenances was prepared under my direct supervision and is in strict accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulatory permits and approvals, and all applicable local codes, ordinances and regulations. 
____________ 
Signature of Engineer of Record 
____________ 
Date 
____________ 
Name (Printed) 
(Seal) 
4.2. Construction Plans Approval, McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator. 
The following certification statement from McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator shall appear in the approved Construction Plans: 
All requirements of the County relative to the preparation and submission of these plans and specifications have been fulfilled and approval is hereby granted subject to the conditions stipulated below: 
____________ 
County Engineer 
____________ 
Date 
4.3. Construction Plans Approval, McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator. 
The following certification statement from the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator shall appear in the approved Construction Plans: 
These Construction Plans have been reviewed and found to be in accordance with the approved Concept Plat and the approved Preliminary Plat, and any zoning conditions that may have been previously imposed on the property. 
____________ 
McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator 
____________ 
Date 
ARTICLE IX. - THE FINAL PLAT 

Section 1. - Purpose of the Final Plat. 
The purpose of the Final Plat of a subdivision is to present an accurate depiction of the layout of the Subdivision that has been constructed so that it can be properly recorded and then used as a permanent reference for the sale of the property included within the Subdivision. 
Section 2. - Final Plat Specifications. 
The Final Plat shall be clearly, legibly, and professionally drawn in black ink on suitable permanent reproducible material. The scale of the Final Plat shall be 100 feet to one inch or larger. Sheet size shall be 18 inches by 24 inches. 
The Final Plat shall be based on a certified boundary survey delimiting the entirety of the property contained within the Final Plat, and tied to an established monument with the same degree of accuracy as the boundary itself. The survey shall have an accuracy of no less than 1 in 10,000, and shall meet all requirements of Georgia Law regarding the recording of maps and plats. The Final Plat shall be submitted as hard copy and electronically in a format acceptable to McIntosh County. 
The Final Plat shall conform to the approved Concept Plat and Preliminary Plat and it may constitute only a portion of the approved Concept Plat, which the subdivider proposes to record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of these regulations, and said portion is not inconsistent with the public health, safety, or welfare. Any substantial deviation from the approved Concept Plat or Preliminary Plat shall require revision and re-approval of both the Concept Plat and Preliminary Plat. The Final Plat shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name of the subdivision and unit or phase number, if any. 
B.  Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the property owner of record and the developer or subdivider. 
C.  Name, address, and telephone number each professional firm associated with the portion of the subdivision depicted on the Final Plat. 
D.  Date of plat and survey, north point and graphic scale. 
E.  Subdivision location including land lot(s), land district(s), Georgia Militia Districts, area in acres, internal and abutting zoning, proposed number of lots and area represented in tabular format showing associated square footage. 
F.  A location sketch or vicinity map positioning the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area with regard to recognized permanent landmarks. The location sketch scale shall be drawn at a scale of 600 feet to the inch. 
G.  Field-run boundary survey of the subdivision property perimeter showing actual bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds and distances in feet and hundredths of a foot along all lines and the bearing and distances to an existing street intersection or other recognized permanent landmark. The boundary information shall be tied and related to the State Plane Coordinates System, 1983 North American Datum, Georgia, East zone. 
H.  County and any municipal jurisdictional lines tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or adjoin the subdivision; land lot or land district lines traversing or adjoining the subdivision shall also be indicated. 
I.  Locations, widths, and names of all streets within and immediately adjoining the plat and all other public or utilities easements or rights-of-way. 
J.  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data including radii, chord lengths, and bearings, lengths of arcs and tangents, and points of curvature and tangency. 
K.  Lot lines with complete dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and bearings to the nearest second, and radii, arc and chord lengths, and chord bearings of rounded corners. 
L.  Building setback lines with dimensions. When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than ninety degrees, the lot width at the building line shall be shown. 
M.  Lots numbered in numerical order, blocks lettered alphabetically, and addresses as established by the County. 
N.  Location, material and size of all drainage pipes, location and type of all drainage system appurtenances such as catch basins, headwalls and inlets, location and extent of detention ponds with 100 year event level noted, the location, material and size of all County water and sewer mains and appurtenances, the location of all fire hydrants, and the location, width and purpose of any easements, including slope easements. 
O.  Location of any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use with notes stating their purpose and limitations. Location of any areas to be reserved by private deed covenant for common use of all property owners, or dedicated to a homeowners' association. 
P.  A statement of restrictive covenants or conservation easements, if any, and if they are brief enough to be put directly on the Final Plat; otherwise, if covenants are separately recorded, a statement as follows: "This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto dated [insert date], which hereby become a part of this plat, and which were recorded on [insert date]." 
Q.  Accurate location, material, and description of property corner or line monuments or markers. All monuments and markers shall be in place prior to approval of the Final Plat. 
R.  Extent and elevation of the regulated floodplain within the subdivision. When floodplain is present, a chart giving the areas within and outside of the floodplain for each lot containing any portion of the floodplain shall be on the Final Plat. The origin of the floodplain data shall be indicated. The minimum finished floor elevation for sites adjacent to the floodplain shall be indicated on the plat for each lot. 
S.  Individual lots, which are deemed by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator as requiring site plans, shall be designated in a readily identifiable manner. No part of any Lot shall contain State Waters, conservation easements or other permanently protected areas, or the required undisturbed buffers for those areas. 
T.  Any delineated wetlands, wetland setbacks, septic system setbacks, and riparian buffers. 
U.  Certificates and statements specified in these Regulations. 
Section 3. - Final Plat, Supplemental Information. 
The following supplemental information shall be required for each Final Plat: 
A.  A maintenance bond warranting workmanship and covering damages for a period not less than two (2) years from the date the Final Plat is recorded. 
B.  As-built construction plans in both a paper and electronic format, acceptable to the County, showing all infrastructure installation details, and certified by the engineer of record. 
Section 4. - Final Plat Review Process. 
Step 1: The developer of a proposed subdivision shall meet with the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator to discuss what is required for Final Plat Approval in terms of documents, fees, and schedules. 
Step 2: The developer shall submit to the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator two complete Final Plat Application Packages. 
Step 3: The Final Plat Application Package shall be carefully checked by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator or designated development coordinator to determine whether or not it is complete. If it is incomplete it will be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it is incomplete and what must be done to make it complete. The developer will then begin the process again with Step 2 and an additional fee will be required. 
Step 4: If the Final Plat Application Package is complete, it will be accepted by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator or designated development coordinator; the date of acceptance will be noted. If the Final Plat Application Package is complete, it will be forwarded to the McIntosh County Health Department. 
Step 5: Once the McIntosh County Health Department accepts the final plat, the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator shall have at least 15 working days for review of and comments on the Final Plat. 
Step 6: If the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator concludes the Final Plat is not acceptable, the Final Plat shall be returned to the developer with an explanation of why it was found to not be acceptable, and with instructions as to what needs to be done to make it acceptable. The developer will then begin the process again at Step 2 and a new plat review fee will be required. 
Step 7: If the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator approves the Final Plat, it shall be placed on the Agenda for the next regularly occurring meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval, so long as that meeting is at least five working days following County staff approval of the Final Plat. 
Step 8: Once the Planning and Zoning Commission has approved the Final Plat, the same shall be forwarded to the developer who will then be authorized to submit the Final Plat to the County Clerk and Tax Assessors Office, who will take action to record the Final Plat, upon submittal of records indicating that Steps 9 through 11 below have been completed. 
Step 9: Prior to recording the Final Plat, the developer shall provide to the County Building and Zoning Administrator a complete and accurate set of as-built drawings in both paper and electronic format acceptable to the County. These as-built drawings must be approved by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator. 
Step 10: Prior to recording the Final Plat, the developer shall complete all required improvements and those improvements must all be inspected and approved by the County staff. If for any reason, it is not possible or practical for the developer to be able to complete this work within a reasonable period of time, the developer may post a cash bond, the amount of which shall be determined by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator, the satisfactory completion of the work. 
Step 11: Prior to recording the Final Plat, the developer must post with the County an acceptable Maintenance bond to guarantee the quality and workmanship of the required improvements for a period of not less than two (2) years following the date the Final Plat is actually recorded. 
Section 5. - Final Plat Certifications. 
5.1. Final Plat Surveyor's Certification. 
The following certification statement from the Surveyor of Record shall appear in the approved Final Plat Package: 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown here on actually exist or are marked as "future" and their location, size, type, and material are correctly shown: This plat conforms to all requirements of the Georgia Plat Act. By: 
____________ 
Signature of Registered Georgia Land Surveyor 
____________ 
Date 
____________ 
Name (Printed)  (Seal) 
____________ 
No. 
5.2. Engineer's Certification. 
The following certification statement from the Engineer of Record shall appear in the approved Final Plat Package: 
I hereby certify that this subdivision was constructed in accordance with the construction plans and specifications which were approved by the [Local Jurisdiction] [insert administrator's or engineer's title], as well as any approved revisions thereto, and that all applicable engineering requirements of the applicable development and zoning ordinances have been fulfilled, except as noted below: 
____________ 
Signature of Engineer of Record 
____________ 
Date 
____________ 
Name (Printed)  (Seal) 
____________ 
No. 
Noted Exceptions: 
5.3. Final Plat Approval Certification. 
The following certification statement from the County Administrator shall appear in the approved Final Plat Package: 
This Final Plat has been prepared in accordance with the approved Concept Plat, the approved Preliminary Plat, the approved Construction Plans, and the other applicable development codes and ordinances, and has been approved by the County for recording in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of McIntosh County. 
____________ 
County Engineer 
____________ 
Date 
____________ 
County Clerk 
____________ 
Date 
____________ 
Building and Zoning Administrator 
____________ 
Date 
5.4. Maintenance Guarantee. 
The undersigned, and all of its successors assigns to its interest in the subject property and, hereby warrant and guarantee to McIntosh County the full and complete maintenance of a certain improvement known as ____________ and more particularly shown in plat book ____________ , page(s) ____________ , of the ____________ County Records (the "Property" or the "improvements"). 
This warranty and guarantee is made in accordance with the applicable subdivision and development regulations of the County. This guarantee includes not only paving but also all other appurtenant structures and amenities lying within the right-of-way of any said road and in the buffer areas, including but not limited to all curbing, drainage pipes, culverts, catch basins, drainage ditches, and pedestrian walks. Utilities owned and operated by a governmental body or public utility company shall be the responsibility of said governmental body or public utility company and not the developer. 
The developer shall correct and repair or cause to be corrected and repaired all damages to said improvements resulting from any cause whatsoever. In the event the developer fails to correct any damages within 30 calendar days after written notice thereof, then said damages may be corrected by the County and all costs and charges billed to and paid by the developer; but this remedy shall not limit the County, and it shall also have any remedies available to it as approved by law. 
The terms of this agreement shall be for a period of five years beginning on the date of written acceptance of said improvements by the County as evidenced by the final plat approval of said completed improvements. 
After the termination of said two (2) year period the County shall be responsible to the citizens of the County for the maintenance of said improvements as provided by law. Provided, however, any damages which occurred prior to the end of said five year period and which still are unrepaired at the termination of said period shall remain the responsibility of the developer (written notice of said damages must be given prior to the time the five year period ends). 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the developer has caused this Agreement to be executed by its duly authorized officers this ____________ day of ____________ , ____________ . 
____________ 
Owner/Developer 
____________ 
Date 
____________ 
Title 
(Seal) 
____________ 
Notary Public State of Georgia 
(Seal) 
5.5. Certificate of Dedication. 
State of Georgia  County of McIntosh 
The owner of the land shown on the attached final plat (the "Plat") acknowledges that the Plat was made from an actual survey, and for value received, the sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, does hereby convey in fee simple to McIntosh County, Georgia, and further dedicates to the use of the public forever all streets and rights-of-way, pedestrian walks, watercourses, drains, easements, greenbelts and public places shown on the Plat, except those easements designated on this plat as other utility company easements, and except those streets specifically designated on the Plat as private streets. 
In consideration of the approval of this Plat and other valuable considerations, the owners do hereby agree to hold McIntosh County, Georgia, harmless for a two (2) year period from any and all liabilities arising from any and all claims, damages, or demands arising on account of the design and construction of the improvements shown on the Plat, to include but not limited to, the roads, streets, fills, embankments, ditches, cross drains, culverts and bridges within the proposed right-of-way shown, resulting from any and all causes other than by an act of McIntosh County, Georgia. 
And further, the owner warrants that he owns fee simple title to the property shown on the Plat and agrees that McIntosh County shall not be liable to the undersigned or subsequent owners in title for a period of two (2) years for any claim of damages resulting from negligence in exercising engineering techniques and due caution in the construction of cross drains extension, drives, structures or buildings, the changing of courses of streams and rivers, flooding from natural creeks and rivers and any other matter whatsoever on private property. Any and all monetary liability arising from the property shown on the Plat during the term of the two (2) year hold harmless period specified herein shall be the liability of the owner, or its successors and assigns in interest. I further warrant that I have the right to convey said land according to this plat and do hereby bind myself and the owners subsequent in title to defend the covenants and agreements set out. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set by hand and affixed my seal this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ 
Owner/Developer 
____________ 
Date 
____________ 
Title 
(Seal) 
____________ 
Notary Public State of Georgia 
(Seal) 
5.6. Final Plat Revisions. 
If it should become necessary to revise a Final Plat due to a dimensional error, a revised plat shall be submitted to the McIntosh County Clerk of Court for final recording after the Planning and Zoning Commission has approved and signed the revised plat. 
5.7. Performance Bonds. 
In lieu of the completion of required improvements and the installations previous to the approval of the Final Plat, the County Commission may accept a bond, in an amount and with surety and conditions; satisfactory to it, providing for and securing to the County a period specified by the Planning and Zoning Commission and expressed in the bond. The County is hereby granted the power to enforce such bonds by all appropriate and legal and equitable remedies. 
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 

Section 1. - Responsibility. 
It shall be the responsibility of the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator, or other person designated by the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners, to administer, interpret and enforce these Regulations. 
Section 2. - Fees. 
The fees for reviewing plats and plans in accordance with these Regulations are established and periodically updated by the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners. A copy of the current Fee Schedule is available upon request from the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator. 
Section 3. - Forms and Instructions. 
Application forms and instructions for preparing and processing plats and plans in accordance with these Regulations are periodically updated. Current copies of these forms and instructions are available upon request from the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator. Applicants will be required to submit such other information as may be required by the Administrator. 
Section 4. - Variances. 
The Planning and Zoning Board shall have the power to hear, grant or deny variances from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest when, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of its provisions in a particular case will result in unnecessary hardship, provided that the spirit of the part shall be observed, public welfare and safety be secured, and substantial justice done. 
4.1. Procedures for Variances. 
A.  Requests for variances shall be filed with the McIntosh County Planning and Zoning Board, and with supporting material as required by the Building and Zoning Administrator and this Section 5 of Article X. Upon submittal of a complete application, as determined by Building and Zoning Administrator, the Building and Zoning Administrator shall place the variance request on the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Board. No appeal for variance shall be accepted except from the owner or operator of the subdivision involved. 
B.  Action by the Planning and Zoning Board: The Building and Zoning Administrator shall review the facts of each application and shall submit findings of fact and recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Board at the time each application is heard. The Planning and Zoning Board shall approve or reject the variance request. 
C.  Notice of Hearings: Notice of public hearings shall conform to the requirements as established by the County. 
4.2. Conditions of Granting a Variance. 
A.  Findings Required: Except as permitted by the provisions of subsection (2) below, variances may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Board only upon making all of the following findings: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The strict application of this Ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this Ordinance. 
B.  Exceptions for Preservation of Primary Conservation Areas: Variances to reduce required setbacks may be granted for the sole purpose of preserving primary conservation areas, as defined in Article XII, Section 5.2 (B) upon making the following findings: 
a.  That the variance is necessary in order to preserve a primary conservation area. 
b.  Any variance granted under the provisions of this section shall include a condition that should the primary conservation area be impacted as a consequence, direct or indirect, of construction despite the granting of the variance, it shall be restored, at the property owner's or applicant's expense, in accordance with a plan approved by the County Building and Zoning Administrator within 30 days. 
c.  Variances granted under the provisions of this section may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Board only upon its finding that relief, if granted, would not cause detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this ordinance. 
d.  Any proposed variance shall be granted only upon a finding by the Planning and Zoning Board that the development plans are in accordance with the plans and requirements of the County. 
e.  Variances granted under these provisions are specifically exempt from the provisions of Section 5.1 (A), a.-c. of this Article X. 
4.3. Variances Conditions and Safeguards. 
The Planning and Zoning Board may impose such conditions relating to the variance application as it may deem necessary in the particular case to protect the public interest. 
4.4. Variances Apply to Property. 
When granted, a variance, together with any conditions or safeguards attached, shall apply to the land or use or which it was issued, and not to a particular person. 
Section 5. - Enforcement. 
In any instance where activities are undertaken in violation of these Regulations, the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to stop all unauthorized work, direct correction of deficiencies, and take any other legal or administrative action necessary to achieve compliance. 
Section 6. - Filing or Recording. 
The filing or recording of a Final Plat of a subdivision without the approval of the Planning Commission as required by these regulations, or the filing and recording of any Sketch Plan or Preliminary Plat as a "record" plat is hereby declared a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable as provided by law. 
Section 7. - Recording Official. 
The County Clerk of Court shall not accept, file or record any Sketch Plan or any preliminary plat as a "record" plat, nor any Final Record Plat involving any area subject to these regulations which have not been approved by the Planning Commission. Should any public official violate the provisions of this section, he shall in each instance be subject to the penalty provided in this article and the governing authority shall have such rights and remedies as to or collection as are provided and may enjoin any violations thereof. 
Section 8. - Transfer of Lots in Unapproved Subdivisions. 
The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within McIntosh County who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat or subdivision of such land before such Final Plat has been approved by the Planning Commission and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Court in and for the County, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in the discretion of the court; and the description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from these penalties. The County may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
Section 9. - Erection of Buildings. 
Any building erected in violation of these regulations shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the building official or county attorney or other official designated by the county may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
Section 10. - Street Names. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in laying out any new street or road to name such street or road on any plat, by any marking or in any deed or instrument without first getting the approval of the Planning Commission. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in the discretion of the court. 
Section 11. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of these Regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined up to $1,000 or sentenced to up to 60 days in jail, or both, pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 15-10-60, for each offense, and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the County from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
Section 12. - Appeals. 
A decision of the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator or the Planning and Zoning Board concerning the administration, interpretation, or enforcement of the regulations may be appealed to the McIntosh County Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 calendar days of that decision being final and in written form. Appeals may be made by an affected owner/developer or by any legal resident of the County who feels he has been adversely affected by that decision. All appeals shall be submitted in a form prescribed by the County and shall include a fee established by the County. The McIntosh County Zoning Board of Appeals shall render a decision on an appeal within sixty (60) calendar days after the appeal application is accepted. 
Section 13. - Appeal from Decisions. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision on an appeal by the McIntosh County Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the Right of Appeal by Writ of Certiorari to the Superior Court of McIntosh County within 30 calendar days after that decision is rendered by the McIntosh County Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Section 14. - Amendments. 
These Regulations may be amended from time to time by the County when such action is justified by the public necessity, convenience or general welfare, or when dictated by the principles of good land development practice. These Amendments shall not apply to applications made previous to the date of adoption of these Amendments, and accepted by the County as being complete and in compliance with this ordinance. 
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any amendment to these regulations prior to its adoption, notice of which shall be given not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date. The notice of hearing shall be made in a newspaper having general distribution in the area of jurisdiction. 
ARTICLE XI. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Section 1. - Conflicts. 
Whenever the regulations of this Ordinance require or impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statutes, the requirements of this Ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this Ordinance, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
Section 2. - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or provision of this Ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Section 3. - Effective Date. 
These regulations shall be in full force and effective on ____________ , 20 ____________ following its adoption and shall apply to any tract of land which is proposed to be subdivided as of and after the effective date of these Regulations and for any tract for which a Preliminary Plat has not already been approved, for so long as the Ordinance remains in effect. 
ENACTED AND ADOPTED this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
By: ____________ 
[Enter Name, Title of Elected Official] 
Attested to: ____________ 
[Enter Name, Title of Clerk] 
(Seal) 
ARTICLE XII. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS 
The value of conserving natural resources is recognized herein as an important consideration in subdivision design. Accordingly, the regulations set forth in this Article XII of this Ordinance may or shall, as this Ordinance provides, be followed for a development to be considered a conservation subdivision. This ARTICLE XII is intended to supplement and, where provided herein, amend the specific requirements of ARTICLE I through ARTICLE XI of this Ordinance; therefore, application by the developer for a conservation subdivision shall follow the following guidelines while fulfilling, to the extent consistent with the following guidelines, the submittal, review, and approval processes outlined in the preceding ARTICLES. 

Section 1. - Purpose. 
A.  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land, consistent with the Green Growth Guidelines (Coastal Resource Division, Department of Natural Resources, April 2006). 
B.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams and stream banks, riparian buffers, woodlands, wildlife habitat, and coastal features including tidal marshlands and dunes. 
C.  To preserve important historic, cultural, and archaeological sites. 
D.  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils to reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
E.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
F.  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
G.  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent recreational facilities and jurisdictions. 
H.  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
I.  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries in the neighborhood while increasing safety and access for pedestrians and bicyclists. 
J.  To promote construction of convenient and environmentally acceptable landscaped walking trails and bike paths—both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities—that reduce reliance on automobiles and provide recreational opportunities. 
K.  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
L.  To protect prime agricultural land and preserve farming as an economic activity, where applicable. 
Section 2. - Applicability of Regulations. 
The Conservation Subdivision option is available, as a use by right, for all Subdivision applications in all residential and mixed use zoning districts provided in the zoning ordinance. Applicants for a Conservation Subdivision shall comply with all other provisions of the County Zoning Ordinance, Development Standards, and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
Section 3. - Housing Density Determination. 
3.1. Maximum Lot Determination. 
The maximum number of lots in the Conservation Subdivision shall be determined by the following methods, and approved by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator: 
A.  Calculation: The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  The 100-foot vegetative riparian buffers as included in the River Corridor Protection Act [O.C.G.A. § 12-2-1] for protected rivers, or areas defined by the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act [O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280],or as required and delineated by the code of McIntosh County; 
b.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; and 
c.  Coastal Marshlands that meet the definition of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Coastal Zone Management Act, or 
B.  Density Bonus Provisions: The following density bonuses may be approved by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator for proposed development of a Conservation Subdivision, based on the maximum number of lots as determined Section 3.1(A) of this Article XII. Subject to the maximum of ten (10) percent under subpart c. of this subsection, any combination of bonuses may be applied simultaneously to the same Conservation Subdivision under one application, if the site qualifies based upon the prerequisite conditions as outlined below. When computing bonuses the number of dwelling units shall be rounded down to the next whole unit, provided, however, that in no case shall a bonus equal less than one dwelling unit. The number of bonus units allowed under this density bonus is based on the maximum number of lots determined for the conservation Subdivision under Section 3.1, subsection A of this Article XII, prior to the application of any density bonus. 
a.  Historic preservation density bonus of up to [five] 5 percent may be approved for the preservation and rehabilitation of any historic resource as identified by the McIntosh County Comprehensive Plan, listed on any local, State, or Federal Register of Historic Places, or otherwise determined worthy of preservation by the McIntosh County Historic Preservation Board or Committee. 
i.  Applicant must guarantees in a form acceptable to the Local Historic Preservation Board or Committee that applicant shall rehabilitate, preserve, reconstruct, and maintain historic resources in a manner satisfactory to the County Historic Preservation Board or Committee. A maintenance plan submitted to the provisions of the Ownership and Management Plan provided for under Section 5.5 Subsection C of this Article XII, shall be required in order for any density bonus to be considered. 
ii.  The number of bonus lots approved up to the maximum permitted five (5) shall be based on the applicant's demonstration of cost to implement subsection (i) above versus the value of additional lots to offset such cost. 
iii.  Approval of the extent of the historic preservation density bonus allowed for a given Conservation Subdivision shall be made by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator, based on the extent to which the bonus is consistent with the purposes and requirements of this Article XII. 
b.  Environmental protection density bonus of up to [five] percent may be approved the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator for the protection or rehabilitation of any environmental feature listed as an Primary Conservation Area, or otherwise determined worthy of preservation by the County. 
i.  Applicant must guarantee in a form acceptable to the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator that applicant shall preserve all identified natural resources in a manner satisfactory to the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator. A maintenance plan submitted to the provisions of the Ownership and Management Plan provided for under Section 5.5 Subsection C of this Article XII, shall be required in order for any density bonus to be considered. The McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator may request the review of a density request under this subsection by a registered landscape architect and/or professional engineer. 
ii.  The number of lots approved up to the maximum permitted five (5) percent shall be based on the applicant's demonstration of cost to implement subsection (i) above versus the value of additional lots to offset such cost. 
iii.  Approval of the extent of the environmental protection density bonus allowed for a given conservation Subdivision shall be made by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator, based on the extent to which the bonus is consistent with the purposes and requirements of this Article XII. 
c.  Combining Density Bonus Provisions. If both bonus provisions can be met, and are approved by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator, a total density bonus of up to and including, but not more than, ten (10) may be added to the yield plan. Said bonus shall be a minimum of one dwelling unit. 
3.2. Maximum Lot Guarantee. 
The maximum number of lots calculation does in no way guarantee that the conservation subdivision will be approved with the maximum number of lots. If all other requirements are met, the conservation subdivision may have up to (and not exceeding) the maximum number of lots plus and density bonus approved by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator. 
3.3. Minimum Lot Area. 
Subdivision without EPD or McIntosh County Health Department approved public/community sewage disposal systems must comply with the minimum lot standards established by the State of Georgia, locally regulated by the local McIntosh County Health Department, and any other applicable ordinances. 
Section 4. - Application Requirements. 
4.1. Site Analysis Map. 
Concurrent with the submission of a site Concept Plan, as required under Articles VI and XII, Applicants shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The approach to preparing the site analysis map should be consistent with site fingerprinting, as described in Chapter 1 - Green Growth Guidelines, and include the following steps: 
A.  Identify general site features; 
B.  Determine and locate primary and secondary conservation areas; 
C.  Consider the impact of other important factors such as adjacent land uses, accessibility, transportation, and infrastructure availability; 
D.  Use collected information to derive the actual buildable area; and 
E.  Synthesize this information to create various development scenarios which incorporate the natural features of the site. 
The site Concept Plan shall include the following features: 
A.  Property boundaries; 
B.  All hydrologic features including: streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands, riparian buffers, estuaries, marsh hammocks, marshlands, 100-year floodplains, FEMA flood zones, beaches, groundwater recharge areas, areas with elevated or perched groundwater tables; 
C.  Topographic contours of no less than 3-foot intervals; 
D.  Existing drainage pathways; 
E.  General vegetation characteristics; 
F.  Soil Survey (Level 3, McIntosh County Health Department); 
G.  Coastal Habitat Assessment of the 11 counties being conducted by DNR, Wildlife Resources Division, Coastal Nongame Conservation Program; 
H.  Historic, cultural, and archeological resources; 
I.  Agricultural land; 
J.  Recreational land; 
K.  Wellhead protection areas; 
L.  Future land use or Character Area designations (if current); 
M.  Viewsheds identified in the McIntosh County Comprehensive Plan; 
N.  Existing water access; 
O.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in Section 5.2 of this ordinance; 
P.  The planned location of protected open space; 
Q.  Existing roads and structures; and 
R.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
4.2. Open Space Management Plan. 
An open space management plan, as described in Section 5.5 shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
4.3. Instrument of Permanent Protection. 
An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in Section 5.4.5.7, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
4.4. Other Requirements. 
The Applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning ordinance and/or the subdivision regulations of McIntosh County. 
Section 5. - Open Space. 
5.1. Definition. 
Open Space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection for the common use of the residents of the development, or for the use of the community as a whole if so designated. The land designated as open space shall be in single ownership, and shall not be divided among any of the constituent lots of the subdivision. The open space may be left in their existing condition, or restored with native vegetative cover. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument and are subject to the terms described in this Section of the ordinance. 
5.2. Standards to Determine Open Space. 
A.  The minimum restricted open space should comprise at least 30 percent of the gross tract area. 
B.  The following areas are considered Primary Conservation Areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the Applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
a.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
b.  Riparian buffer zones in accordance with the Riparian Buffer Ordinance of McIntosh County. 
c.  Slopes that are atypical of the surrounding terrain of the coastal plain that are at least 5000 square feet in contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Coastal Marshlands that meet the definition of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Coastal Zone Management Act 9. 
f.  Populations of rare, endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species, as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources as priority 1 or 2 in the Coastal Habitat Assessment of the 11 counties being conducted by DNR, Wildlife Resources Division, Coastal Nongame Conservation Program. 
g.  Important, known archaeological sites and all cemeteries and burial grounds. 
h.  Any undisturbed buffers required by law or regulations for items 1-7, listed in Section B. 
C.  The following are considered Secondary Conservation Areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.  Important historic sites and structures; 
b.  Populations of rare, endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species, as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources as priority 3, 4, or 5 in Coastal Habitat Assessment of the 11 counties being conducted by DNR, Wildlife Resources Division, Coastal Nongame Conservation Program. 
c.  Existing healthy, native forests, woodlands, or fields in early stages of succession, with a contiguous area of at least one (1) acre; 
d.  Individual existing healthy trees (heritage trees) not included as the part of a larger stand of trees; 
e.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as coastal sand dunes or bluffs, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
f.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five (5) acres contiguous area; 
g.  Lands identified in a greenway network plan, where applicable; 
h.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas; and 
i.  On-site septic disposal system drainfields provided that systems are properly maintained and inspected. 
D.  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
E.  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract and shall adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, or non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
F.  The open space shall be configured so as to maximize direct accessibility to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
5.3. Permitted Uses of Open Space. 
Uses of open space may include the following: 
A.  Conservation of natural, archaeological, or historical resources; 
B.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, marshlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
C.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of pervious materials; 
D.  Passive recreation areas, such as open fields; 
E.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than 10 percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. These areas must be clearly indicated on all submitted plans. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space. Active recreation areas located in the protected open space may not include the installation of buildings or other than incidental structures and impervious surfaces, except by variance; 
F.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
G.  Landscaped stormwater management facilities and impoundments. Such facilities shall be located outside of primary conservation areas; 
H.  Community wastewater disposal systems and individual wastewater disposal systems located on soils particularly suited to such uses. Such facilities shall be located outside of primary conservation areas. 
I.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
J.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
5.4. Prohibited uses of Open Space. 
The following uses are not permitted within the designated open space: 
A.  Golf courses; 
B.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
C.  Planting of invasive exotic plant species; 
D.  Active recreation areas, except as allowed in Section 5.3, including but not limited to tennis courts, basketball courts, or swimming pools; or other impervious areas; 
E.  Other activities as determined by the Applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
5.5. Ownership and Management of Open Space and Common Facilities. 
The following methods may be used to own open space land and all common facilities: 
A.  Homeowners' Association. A Homeowners' Association representing residents of the conservation subdivision shall own the open space, and meet the following requirements: Membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors; The Homeowners' Association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members; and, responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be legally borne by the Homeowners' Association. 
B.  Private conservation organization. With approval by the Local Authority, fee simple title of the open space or easements on the open space may be transferred to a private nonprofit conservation organization provided that the conservation organization meets the criteria set forth herein. The organization shall have a letter from the Internal Revenue Service stating that it is exempt under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code as an organization described in section 501(c)(3a), and is a qualified conservation organization as defined by the U.S. Treasury Regulations (1.170A-14(c) intended to exist indefinitely. 
5.6. Management Plan. 
Applicant shall submit a Plan for Management of Open Space and Common Facilities ("Plan") that: 
A.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the Open Space and any facilities located thereon, as well as including additional provisions for ongoing maintenance and long-term capital improvements related to open space, stormwater drainage systems and components, common property and facilities, and any community water supply or sanitary sewer system; estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
B.  Provides that any changes to the Plan be approved by the County; and 
C.  Provides for enforcement of the Plan. 
In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the County may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the Homeowners' Association, or in the event that the costs cannot be recovered from such Homeowners' Association for any reason, then the costs shall be charged to the individual property owners that make up the subdivision, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all the open space property and on all subdivision or other properties of which the open space property is a part. This language shall be recorded in the final plat, any deed restrictions, or by-laws for Homeowners' Associations. 
5.7. Legal Instrument for Permanent Protection. 
The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the Applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. In addition, the legal instrument shall also include the Management Plan described in Section 5.8 above. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
A.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
a.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements, or a private conservation organization that owns the open space under Section B, above. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
b.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
c.  If the entity accepting the easement is not the County, then a supplemental right of enforcement favoring the County shall be included in the easement. 
B.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity. 
C.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the County. 
Section 6. - Conservation Subdivision Development Standards. 
6.1. Applicability. 
Where these Conservation Subdivision Development Standards conflict with the McIntosh County Development Standards or any other County Ordinance, these Conservation Subdivision Standards shall apply, unless otherwise approved by the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator and McIntosh County Engineer. 
6.2. Standards for Conservation Development. 
The following design standards are intended to improve the character and aesthetic qualities of development and to minimize impacts on natural and cultural features on the site. The planning board may require development plans to be certified by an individual with professional training in neighborhood design. 
A.  Lot Standards and Building Envelopes—Individual lot lines and building envelopes shall, to the extent possible, conform to the natural contours of the site and be delineated to minimize negative impacts on the natural and cultural resources of the site, particularly those specified in Sections 5.2 B& C of this Article XII and as identified by the planning board and/or site inventory. 
a.  The location and orientation of individual building envelopes and building sites shall be designed to maintain the natural topography and drainage patterns, to preserve important natural features in their natural condition, to maximize the potential for use of passive solar energy for light and heat, to minimize disturbance of natural vegetated cover, and to minimize grading, cut-and-fill, and soil removal. 
b.  Topography and natural drainage ways shall be treated as fixed determinants of road and lot configuration rather than malleable elements that can be changed to allow a preferred development scheme; unless variances are granted to ignore this topographical and natural drainage determinant. Land disturbance and cut-and-fill shall be minimized 
c.  Native trees and vegetation, wetlands and streams, and other important natural features not included within the designated open space should be incorporated along the edges of individual lots or along a path or roadway, rather than transected by lot lines or a roadway. 
d.  Stream and wetland crossings shall be eliminated whenever practical. When necessary, stream and wetland crossings may be allowed that minimize disruptions or impacts to water flow and animal passage. 
e.  A building envelope shall be identified for each lot. Future construction on the lot is encouraged, but not required to be located within the identified building envelop for each lot; however, construction outside of the designated building envelop shall comply with the setback requirements for a conventional development. 
f.  Building envelopes, and/or areas of contiguous clearing, shall generally be limited to a maximum area of [½ acre] for an individual building or up to [2 acres] when multiple buildings are located on a common lot. 
g.  The removal or disruption of significant historic sites or architectural elements shall be minimized. 
B.  Minimum Street and Street Right-of-Way Widths. Minimum street and street right-of-way widths shall conform with the requirements set forth in the McIntosh County Development Standards, Article V. 
C.  Impervious Coverage Maximum. Conservation Subdivisions within this district shall have a maximum equivalent impervious area (EIA) coverage of 15% as determined by the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Supplement EIA tool. 
D.  Riparian Buffer Requirement. All Conservation Subdivisions within this District shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained along both banks of streams and along all impoundments, as measured from the top of the bank of the stream or impoundment. The buffer shall be a variable width buffer with an average width of at least 75 feet, and a minimum width of 50 feet. All land disturbing activity is prohibited within the buffer unless a variance is granted in accordance with provisions of this ordinance. 
b.  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained along all coastal marshlands, measured horizontally from the landward edge of the coastal marshlands, as established by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and along all wetlands, as measured from the inland edge of the wetland, as established by the Army Corp of Engineers. The buffer shall be a variable width buffer with an average width of at least 75 feet, and a minimum width of 50 feet. All land disturbing activity is prohibited within the 75 foot buffer unless a variance is granted in accordance with this ordinance. 
6.3. Utility Standards. 
A.  Tree Preservation Plan: Installation of utility lines must be in accordance with the Tree Preservation Plan. 
B.  Critical Root Radius: Trenching machinery is prohibited in the critical root radius (see Appendix A) of trees that are designated for preservation according to the tree preservation plan. Note: Technical advice on tree protection plans during construction is available at: http://www.marex.uga.edu/advisory/CSCP.html 
C.  Construction Guidelines for Above Ground Utilities: 
a.  Utility lines must be constructed in accordance with the recommended guidelines set forth on page 14 of the document Coastal Riparian Buffer Guidance Manual: A Companion to the Model Coastal Buffer Ordinance. [Note: Available at: http://www.rivercenter.uga.edu/education/upper_altamaha/fall2006/coastal.htm] 
b.  The above ground utility lines must occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing and so as to minimize the angle, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream 
c.  Create a width of disturbance of no more than 50 feet within the buffer 
d.  Incorporate and implement adequate erosion control measures and specifications be into the project plans. 
e.  Construction is capable of surviving 100-year flood. 
f.  Maintenance of utility lines should not involve chemical application. 
g.  The disturbed area must be restored to its natural state (section 6.14). 
D.  Construction Guidelines for Below Ground Utilities 
a.  No more than 500 linear feet of trench may be opened at one time. Excavated material shall be placed on the uphill side of trenches. 
b.  Material used for backfilling trenches shall be properly compacted in order to minimize erosion and promote stabilization. 
c.  Effluent from dewatering operations will be filtered or passed through approved sediment trapping device, or both, and discharged in a manner that does not adversely affect flowing streams or off-site property. 
d.  The disturbed area must be restored to its natural state. 
6.4. Locally and Regionally Designated Open Space. 
A.  To the maximum extent possible, the area of designated open space shall include any area identified as a priority for conservation in a local, town, regional or state conservation plan. These areas shall be adequately buffered from development by including an additional (minimum) [100]-foot distance within the designated open space to the maximum extent feasible. A larger setback from the edge of the designated open space to specific areas may be required depending on the type of habitat and/or sensitivity of a species of concern to human influence. 
B.  To the extent practical, the designated open space shall be contiguous within the parcel and adjacent to existing undeveloped land on adjoining parcels to form a continuous, integrated open space system. Particular attention shall be paid to maintaining and expanding existing trail networks. 
C.  The design of the designated open space and any permitted uses, such as trails, shall be sensitive to minimizing potential impacts to high-quality and/or rare plant communities and habitat areas, particularly those areas potentially supporting rare or endangered species as determined by state and federal listings. 
D.  No topsoil or vegetation shall be removed from the designated open space, except in conformance with an approved management plan for the area. 
6.5. Docks. 
A.  Prohibited Activities and Uses: The following uses and activities are prohibited in conservation subdivisions. 
a.  Private residential single-family docks are prohibited. 
b.  Community docks that serve four or more households are allowed. 
B.  Clean Marina Program: The community dock must function as a part of the University of Georgia's Clean Marina Program. Note: The prohibited activities of Clean Marine Program will apply to any community dock. 
C.  EPA Consistent: The community dock must be consistent with the United States Environmental Protection Agency's National Management Measures Guidance to Control Nonpoint Source Pollution from Marinas and Recreational Boating. [Note: Available at: http://www.epa.gov/owow/nps/mmsp/index.html] 
D.  Location: The community dock must be located such that: 
a.  The length of the marsh crossing must be limited to the maximum extent possible. 
b.  Sensitive habitat must be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Note: Technical advice on dock siting is available in the Recreational chapter of the Green Growth Guidelines when available. 
E.  Dimension: Total area of the community dock structure must be less than 1/10 of an acre as measured from the marshland jurisdiction line. This includes: floating dock, hoist, walkway and fixed deck). Other dimension restrictions are: 
a.  Dock length cannot exceed 750 feet. 
b.  Docks must be at least 3 feet above marshgrass, unless the structure creates an obstruction of view when located over big cordgrass ( Spartina cynosuroides ). In this case, the dock must be immediately above the big cordgrass. 
F.  Piling Spacing: Piling spacing should be as far apart as practical. A spacing allowance of no less than 10 feet between pilings is required for those portions of the dock constructed over marshgrass. 
G.  West Indian Manatee Protection. 
a.  Permitting Process: During the standard permitting process the developer must consult the local Ecological Services Division of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service regarding manatee protection during and post construction of the community dock. 
b.  Conditions for Boating Facilities: If required by the local Ecological Services Division of the Unite States Fish and Wildlife Service and Corp of Engineer Savannah District, the 2007 Standard Manatee Conditions for Boating Facilities must be followed. 
c.  Manatee Conditions: The 2007 Standard Manatee Conditions for Boating Facilities Savannah District-Corps of Engineers must be followed and incorporated into the construction and post-construction process, including signage, dissemination of the Manatee Awareness Brochure, and no wake zones. 
A.[H.]  Building Materials and Construction. 
a.  Pile Driving: Driving the piles must be conducted using shallow-draft, barge-mounted equipment in at least two feet of water. 
b.  Plank Spacing: Planks must be one half inch to one inch (½ to 1) apart. 
c.  Prohibited Wood Treatments: The use of chromated copper arsenate (CCA) treated wood and creosote treated timber is prohibited. 
d.  Wood Preservative Preparations: Wood preservatives must be dry before the treated wood is used in construction. 
6.6. Bank Stabilization. 
All bank stabilization projects must be completed in compliance with the recommendations included in the Hydromodification Best Practices Manual, published by the University of Georgia. 
6.7. Golf Courses. 
Golf courses may be included in a Conservation Subdivision subject to the following standards, but may not be included in the 30% open space calculation. 
A.  Site Plan: As part of an overall concept site plan including a golf course, the Applicant shall prepare a golf course concept plan. The golf course concept plan shall be prepared for submission to [insert local government] that shows the proposed layout of the golf course. This plan should include the following: 
a.  Tees, greens, fairways, and practice range; 
b.  Buildings (e.g., clubhouse, maintenance facilities, etc.); 
c.  Roads and parking lots; 
d.  Conceptual design for the management of stormwater runoff and water quality including locations and methods and documentation that these locations and methods are practical; and 
e.  Location of irrigation wells and/or ponds. 
f.  The golf course should be designed to avoid, to the extent practical, encroachments on the protected areas restricted from development and to minimize the impact of the overall site development on natural resources. 
A.  Variances to Buffer Standards: If any of the above facilities would require encroachment on vegetative buffers, streams, wetlands or floodplains, a variance of the standards must be granted by the EPD and McIntosh County Planning and Zoning Board as applicable. Any variance must meet the following conditions: 
a.  Fairways should be sited to reduce the number of stream crossings. Crossings should be limited to a maximum of two (2) for each 1,000 feet of stream length. 
b.  Fairways should be sited to eliminate or minimize the need to clear forest on steep or erodible slopes. 
c.  Clearing of forest canopy and conversion of forested wetlands to shrub-scrub or emergent wetlands should be minimized where practical. 
d.  Fairways will not require filling or grading in buffers, wetlands, or floodplains. 
e.  Where lack of topographic relief requires clear cutting of trees, this may be permitted; however, that portion of the fairway in the buffer, wetlands, or floodplains must be maintained as an unplayable rough. The vegetation will be maintained as shrub-scrub or herbaceous with a concentration of shrubs and small trees along the stream banks to provide shading and stream bank stability. 
f.  Cart paths will be timber, and timber pilings, (no wider than 6 to 8 feet in width) where they cross wetlands. Cart paths will not be located along steep or erodible slopes. Minimal clearing will be allowed. 
g.  Buildings and parking lots will not be located in stream buffers, wetlands, or floodplains. 
h.  Stormwater and water quality management facilities will not be located in stream buffers, wetlands, or floodplains. 
B.  Ponds: Ponds constructed for irrigation water supply or as hazards shall address applicable impacts including changes in organic material transport; invertebrate drift; fish passage; and loss of wetland functions. If site characteristics are such that one or more of these conditions is not applicable, a statement to that effect shall be provided with reference to the source of that determination. 
C.  Forest Cover; The Applicant should determine the percentage of the total site acreage that is forest cover. The design of the golf course should limit clearing of forest to 25% of the total on-site forest acreage. If the design requires that more than 25% of the existing forest be cleared, an afforestation (i.e., artificial planting) program must be implemented to replace any acreage over the clearing limit. A reforestation in other parts of the watershed may be accepted to meet the percent forest cover requirements. 
D.  Where state or federal plant and/or animal habitat are determined to exist on site, the applicant will design the golf course to preserve these areas. 
E.  Surface Water Monitoring: The applicant will be required to conduct surface water monitoring for one (1) year prior to release of grading permits and for three (3) years after the start-up of golf course operations. This monitoring program will be developed in coordination with EPD. The monitoring plan and the data collected for the three years post-construction shall be submitted the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator. 
F.  Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPM): The Applicant will develop in coordination with EPD an IPM Plan. Emphasis will be given to: 1) selection of drought and disease resistant grass species for fairways, tees and greens; 2) the use of biological controls instead of chemicals; 3) where pesticides are used, selection of those chemicals that are less toxic, less mobile and have a shorter half-life; 4) strict control over those pesticides in terms of location of application; and 5) identification of areas on a site that are particularly susceptible to ground water or surface water contamination. The IPM plan must include the contact information for the person(s) responsible for it implementation. 
G.  Ground Water Protection: Greens and tees should be located in areas where the maximum high water is greater than two feet below the surface. Field determination of ground water should be conducted with respect to the final grading of those locations. 
Appendix C - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the zoning ordinance for McIntosh County, Georgia, as adopted by the board of county commissioners on September 13, 2011. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of McIntosh County, Georgia." 
ARTICLE II. - ENACTMENT, JURISDICTION, PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

Section 1. - Enactment. 
1.1.  In accordance with the Authority granted counties by the 1983 Georgia State Constitution, Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 4 and Chapter 66 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia, this ordinance is adopted. 
Section 2. - Jurisdiction. 
2.1.  These regulations shall govern the use of all land and the development thereof within the unincorporated area of McIntosh County, Georgia. 
Section 3. - Purpose and Objectives. 
3.1.  The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the best and maximum use of property promoting the health, safety, morale, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the people of McIntosh County. These regulations are designed to: 
A.  Lessen congestion in the streets; 
B.  Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; 
C.  Promote health and general welfare; 
D.  Provide adequate light and air; 
E.  Prevent overcrowding of the land; 
F.  Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; 
G.  Sustain the character of the county and its suitability for particular uses; 
H.  Promote desirable living conditions and stability of neighborhoods; 
I.  Protect property from blight and depreciation; 
J.  Secure economy in governmental expenditures; 
K.  Conserve the value of buildings; 
L.  Encourage the most appropriate use of land and buildings throughout the county; 
M.  Conserve natural resources, waterfront areas, public access to water, and water dependent uses; 
N.  Preserve the County's historic and cultural resources for future generations. 
Section 4. - Scope. 
4.1.  The scope of this ordinance of McIntosh County, Georgia includes the following activities or uses: 
A.  The regulation of the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; 
B.  The percentage of a lot which may be occupied; the sizes of yards and other open spaces; 
C.  The density and distribution of populations; and the uses of buildings, structures and lands for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, water supply, sanitation, public safety, public activities, preservation of scenic areas, historic structures, cultural resources, protection against floods, rising waters and erosion, and other purposes; 
D.  Creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof; 
E.  Defining certain terms used herein; 
F.  Providing for the method of administration, appeal and amendment and duties; and 
G.  Providing penalties for violation; and for other purposes. 
H.  To insure compliance with all federal and State laws pertaining to land use and development, health and environmental protection. 
ARTICLE III. - INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

Section 1. - Interpretation of Terms. 
1.1.  For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
A.  Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular; 
B.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; 
C.  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; 
D.  The word "may" is discretionary; 
E.  The phrased "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
F.  The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, or corporation. 
G.  The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
H.  The word "building" includes the word "structures." 
I.  Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use. 
Section 2. - Definitions. 
2.1.  ABANDON. The cessation of a use as indicated by the visible or otherwise apparent intention of an owner to discontinue a use of a structure or lot; or, the removal of the characteristic equipment of furnishing used in the performance of the use, without its replacement by similar equipment or furnishings; or, the replacement of a use or structure by a different use or structure. 
2.2.  ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or use customarily incidental to, and located on the same lot with, the main building or use, such as a garage or workshop. An accessory use may not be unrelated to the principal use of the property. 
2.3.  ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental to, and located on the same lot with, the main building or use, such as a garage or workshop. An accessory use may not be unrelated to the principal use of the property. 
2.4.  ADVERTISING SIGN OR STRUCTURE. Any cloth, card, paper, metal, painted, glass, wooden, plastic, plaster, stone sign or other sign, device or structure of any character whatsoever, including statuary, placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building or structure. The term "placed" shall include erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving or otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. The area of an advertising structure other than a sign shall be determined as the area of the largest cross-section of such structure. Neither directional, warning nor other signs posted by public officials in the course of their public duties nor merchandise or materials being offered for sale shall be construed as advertising signs for the purpose of this definition. 
2.5.  AGRICULTURE. The raising of soil crops and/or poultry and livestock in a customary manner and shall include all associated activities. 
2.6.  ALLEY. A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
2.7.  APARTMENT. A room, or a suite of two or more rooms in a multiple dwelling unit, occupied or suitable for occupancy as a residence for one family. 
2.8.  APARTMENT HOUSE. A dwelling designed for and occupied by more than two families living independently of each other as separate housekeeping units, including apartment houses, apartments and flats, but not including auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels, or resort-type hotels. 
2.9.  APPLICANT. An owner or his/her designated representative who is submitting an application for consideration under any provision of this Ordinance. 
2.10.  AUTOMOBILE SERVICE, MAJOR. Automobile repair services which generally require substantial replacement/repair of major components of an automobile. Examples of major automobile services include, but are not limited to, transmission repairs/replacement, paint and body work, engine overhaul, and radiator repair. 
2.11.  AUTOMOBILE SERVICE, MINOR. Automobile maintenance services which generally only require very brief adjustments and replacement of minor components. Examples of minor automobile services include, but are not limited to, tune-up, oil change, lubrication, brake repair, air conditioning system servicing, muffler replacement, and alignment. 
2.12.  AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A building or premise where products necessary for automobile service or maintenance are sold, provided there is no storage of automobiles, and only minor services are rendered and all repairs are performed indoors. An automobile service station is not a repair garage nor a body shop. 
2.13.  BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling other than a hotel, motel, or B&B where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more persons. 
2.14.  BODY SHOP. A building or premise where motor vehicle repair and/or replacement is performed, including but not limited to painting and metal fabrication of motor vehicle bodies or structures. 
2.15.  BUFFER. That portion of a lot or parcel of land established for permanent vegetation and open space and intended to separate properties with a different and a possible incompatible types of use/or zoning classifications. This area is a distance as specified pursuant to this Ordinance and typically as measured from the common property line of the different uses and/or zoning classifications. 
2.16.  BUFFER, NATURAL. A buffer which is left to remain in its natural state except for minor maintenance activity as may be authorized under this Ordinance. 
2.17.  BUFFER, OPAQUE. A buffer which is of sufficiently dense vegetation and/or other features (such as a fence or earthen berm) as to preclude uninterrupted vision from one side to another. 
2.18.  BUFFER, PLANTED. A buffer which consists of planted vegetation as provided for in this Ordinance. 
2.19.  BUFFER, UNDISTURBED. A buffer, which once installed, is not to be reduced or altered except for minor maintenance as may be authorized under this ordinance. This term "installed" as used herein refers to the time at which either: a) the natural buffer is staked out, or b) the planned buffer is planted and approved. 
2.20.  BUILDING. Any combination of materials, whether portable or affixed to the ground, used for sheltering, housing or the enclosure of persons, animals, property, or materials of any kind. Such "building" shall include open porches, open breezeways and any other roofed areas. 
2.21.  BUILDING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The individual selected by the County Manager whose duty it shall be to administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. 
2.22.  BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance of a building measured from the first finished floor level or street level, whichever is lower, to the highest point of the roof. The measurement shall not include roof appurtenances such as chimneys, antennas, or church steeples. 
2.23.  BUILDING INSPECTOR. The official appointed by the County and charged with the responsibility of building permit and certificate of occupancy compliance certification. 
2.24.  BUILDING LINE. That line which represents distance a building or structure must be set back from a lot boundary line or a street right-of-way line or street center-line according to the terms of this ordinance. 
2.25.  BUILDING, PRINCIPAL or BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which there is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. Where a permissible use involves more than one structure designed or used for the primary purpose, as in the case of group houses, each such permissible building on one lot as defined by this ordinance shall be construed as comprising a main building. 
2.26.  BUILDING SITE. Means (a) the ground area of one lot or (b) the ground area of two or more lots when used in combination for a building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces required by this ordinance. 
2.27.  BUSINESS OR COMMERCE. The purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, service, substance or commodity for livelihood or profit; or the management of office buildings, offices, recreational or amusement enterprises, or the maintenance and use of offices, structures and premises by professions and trades rendering services. 
2.28.  BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A business identification sign is a sign that contains the name of the business enterprise located on the same premises as the sign and the nature of the business conducted there. Not more than one-third of the area of a business identification sign may be devoted to commodity or service advertising. 
2.29.  BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION PYLON SIGN. A sign erected on a single pole or multiple poles which contains only the name or the nature of the business conducted on the premises on which it is located. 
2.30.  CAMPER. A motor home, tent, trailer, or other self-contained vehicle designed for recreational purposes. 
2.31.  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (CO). A statement signed by the Building Inspector permitting occupancy and use of a building. 
2.32.  CERTIFIED SURVEY. A survey, sketch, plat, map, or other exhibit is said to be certified when a written statement regarding its accuracy or conformity to specified standards is signed by the specified professional engineer, registered surveyor, architect, or other legally recognized person. 
2.33.  CHURCH. A legally approved structure and its accessory buildings used and approved on a permanent basis, primarily for the public worship of religion. 
2.34.  CLUB, PRIVATE. An organization or association of persons for some common purpose, such as—but not necessarily limited to a fraternal, social, educational or recreational purpose; but not including clubs organized primarily for profit or to render a service, which is customarily carried on as a business. Such club's major purpose shall not be the serving of alcoholic beverages to its members or others. This may not be located on, or operated by, or in connection with any commercial use. 
2.35.  COMMERCIAL FISHING ACTIVITIES. Commercial fishing, including aquaculture and shrimp fisheries, and those commercial activities commonly associated with or supportive of commercial fishing, such as the manufacture or sale of ice, bait and nets, and the sale, manufacture, installation, or repair of boats, engines, or other equipment commonly used on boats. 
2.36.  COMMON OPEN SPACE. That land designated in a development which is undeveloped and of sufficient size and good quality, open, natural unpaved, except for recreational structures, and easily accessible which is specifically set aside for common use and enjoyment, and restricted only for such recreational and conservation uses as parks, playgrounds, swimming, golf courses and conservation areas. While the term "common land" may be either singular or plural, the intention and emphasis is on quality and suitability rather than number of parcels. 
2.37.  CONDOMINIUM. A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis, as more specifically provided in the Code of Georgia. It is a legal form of ownership of real estate and not a specific building style. 
2.38.  COURT. Any portion of the interior of a lot or building-site which is wholly or partially surrounded by buildings, and which is not a required front, side or rear yard. 
2.39.  CURB CUT. A sloping grade transition from the street or road to a site drive or parking area to permit vehicular access. 
2.40.  DAY CARE CENTER. A private establishment enrolling four or more children under five (5) years of age and where tuition, fees, or other forms of compensation for the care of the children is charged. 
2.41.  DEVELOPMENT SETBACK LINE. A setback line determined by authorities of this county, seaward of which no development can take place, is to be drawn 40 feet behind the first (most seaward) stable dune row. The purpose of the setback line is to delimit those areas in which development can be allowed without interfering with natural processes. Ideally, successive rows of stable dunes should be retained, for maximum protection of inland properties. The setback line represents the closest conceivable point to which development can proceed without permanent interference with the natural functioning of the dune system. 
2.42.  DIRECTIONAL SIGN. The term "directional sign" means signs containing directional information about public places owned or operated by State, Federal or local governments or their agencies; publicly or privately owned natural phenomena, historic, cultural, scientific, educational, and religious sites, and areas of natural scenic beauty or naturally suited for outdoor recreation, deemed to be in the interest of the traveling public. 
2.43.  DOMESTICATED PETS. Shall include dogs, cats, song birds, parrots, reptiles (excluding alligators and crocodiles), rabbits and similar animals. 
2.44.  DUNES, Active. Generally, the most seaward dune group (often more than a single row) may also commonly be referred to as primary or foredunes. Dunes remain active, in a state of flux, until finally stabilized by seaward moving inland plant communities. These active dunes may be characterized by sea oats, grasses with spreading, mat-like (though shallow) root systems, and scrub vegetation, low-lying shrubs, vines and scattered herbs. On calm days, and during summer months, active dunes accumulate sand, and grow. In times of storm, and high-water, these active dunes lose sand to erosion processes and wave action. 
2.45.  DUNES, Stable. Generally, the most landward dune ridges may also commonly be referred to as backdunes. These backdunes are characterized by plant life such as live oak, wax myrtle, and holly (all woody plants). Unlike foredunes, these backdunes are stable, not subject to constant shifting and change. An active-stable dune sequence should be characterized by foredunes and backdunes. 
2.46.  DWELLING. Any buildings, or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one or more families containing permanent provisions for living, cooking, sleeping and sanitation. 
A.  DWELLING, GROUP. A building or portion of a building occupied or intended for occupancy by several unrelated persons or families, but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons or families. The term "group dwelling" includes—but is not limited to—the terms rooming house, apartment hotel, fraternity house or sorority house, YMCA or YWCA. Rooms in facilities such as hotels, motels, boarding houses, or other facilities intended for transient use shall not be considered dwellings. 
B.  DWELLING, ONE FAMILY. A private residential building used or intended to be used as a home or residence in which all living rooms are accessible to each other from within the building, and in which the use and management of all sleeping quarters, all appliances for sanitation, cooking, ventilating, heating, cooling, or lighting are designed for the use of one family only on a minimum of a single lot. One family dwelling includes modular homes as defined herein. 
C.  DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY OR DUPLEX. A dwelling designed to be occupied by two families living independently of each other with each dwelling unit containing an independent entrance, and permanent provisions for living, cooking, sleeping and sanitation facilities. There shall be a maximum of 4 bedrooms per unit. 
D.  DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A dwelling designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other, exclusive of auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels or resort type hotels. 
E.  DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms within a dwelling constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment, with provision for cooking, eating and sleeping, and physically set apart from any other room or dwelling units in the same structure. If a dwelling unit, as defined herein, is served by an individual septic system, it shall have no more than four bedrooms, unless otherwise approved by the McIntosh County Health Department. 
2.47.  EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. Elementary, junior high, high schools, college or universities or other schools giving general academic instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught by the State Board of Education. 
2.48.  FACADE. The exterior surface of a building. 
2.49.  FACTORY BUILT HOME. Any structure or component thereof which is designed primarily for residential occupancy and which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building site. 
2.50.  FAIR MARKET VALUE. The value of property or structures, shall mean, as determined by the tax assessor, either (a) before the improvement was started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
2.51.  FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit living as a single, non-profit housekeeping unit; provided that a group of four or more persons who are not within the second degree of kinship shall not be deemed to constitute a family. Notwithstanding the definition in the preceding sentence, a family shall be deemed to include four or more persons not within the second degree of kinship occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, if said occupants are handicapped persons as defined in Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. Such unrelated individuals shall have the right to occupy a dwelling unit in the same manner and to the same extent as any family unit as defined in the first paragraph of this definition. 
2.52.  FARM. Any plot or tract of land devoted to agricultural purposes or the raising of domestic and/or other animals. 
2.53.  FLASHING SIGN. A sign whose illumination is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits changes in light, color, direction, or animation. Illuminated signs which indicate the date, time, and temperature will not be considered flashing signs. 
2.54.  FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the horizontal area of all livable floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches or attics not used for human occupancy or for commercial and/or industrial use. 
2.55.  FLOOR AREA, NET. The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding stairwells, equipment rooms, storage areas, interior vehicular parking and all floors below the first or ground floor, except when used or intended to be used for human habitation. 
2.56.  FREE-STANDING SIGN. A self-supporting sign not attached to any building, wall, or fence, but in a fixed location. This does not include portable or trailer type signs. 
2.57.  FRONTAGE. That Lot dimension along any road or street. 
2.58.  GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the main building, enclosed on all sides and designed or used only for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned and operated by the occupants of the main building. 
2.59.  GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building other than a private garage used for the care, repair or equipping of automobiles, or where such vehicles are kept for remuneration, hire, or sale. 
2.60.  GENERAL SERVICE OR REPAIR ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial establishment, the primary concern of which is the rendering of service and repair activities on equipment and appliances rather than the sale of goods. Such establishments include but are not limited to: watch, clock, radio, television, home appliances, and bicycle repair, but shall not include automotive, boat, truck, and earthmoving equipment repair. 
2.61.  GRADE. The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the above-ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk. 
2.62.  GROUP HOME. A facility maintained for the purpose of providing accommodations for not more than 10 occupants needing medical or social support and supervision. Group homes may include orphanages. 
2.63.  GUEST HOUSE. A secondary building incidental to the main residence which is used only for the non-commercial boarding of guests or on-site domestic workers. 
2.64.  HEIGHT. As applied to a building means the vertical distance from grade to the highest finished roof structure in the case of flat roofs or to a point midway between the top plate and the ridge of any building having a pitch greater than one foot in four and one-half feet height of a building in stories does not include basements and cellars that are not habitable. 
2.65.  HOME BEAUTY PARLORS AND PROFESSIONAL USE. When located within the principal dwelling and operated by a person resident in the building and employing not more than one person who is not a resident of the premises, provided that not more than twenty-five percent of total floor area in any dwelling unit is devoted to such use and that no additional parking spaces shall be required. 
2.66.  HOME BUSINESS OFFICE. An office within a dwelling which is secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes. The office may be for the purposes of service or trade workers who customarily work at various locations, such as electricians, plumbers, appraisers, or individuals who work at home, such as writers or computer programmers. Home business offices are not offices for on-site customer servicing. 
2.67.  HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants of a residence and no more than one nonresident, within their primary residence which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes. 
2.68.  HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION. A private non-profit corporation, association, or other non-profit legal entity organized under the laws of the State of Georgia established to provide for the ownership, care and maintenance of common open space lands and site improvements. 
2.69.  HOSPITAL. An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients, and medical and surgical care of the sick or injured—including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices. 
2.70.  HOSPITAL, VETERINARIAN. An establishment in which veterinary services, clipping, bathing, boarding, and other services are rendered to dogs, cats, and other small animals and domestic pets. 
2.71.  HOTEL OR MOTEL. A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six or more sleeping rooms occupied, intended or designed to be occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation, but not including an auto or trailer court or camp, sanatorium, hospital, asylum, orphanage, or building where persons are housed under restraint. 
2.72.  ILLUMINATED SIGN. When artificial illumination techniques are used in any fashion to project the message on a sign, that sign shall be an illuminated sign. 
2.73.  INDIVIDUAL LETTER BUSINESS SIGN. An individual letter business sign consists of individual letters that spell the name of the business and are placed on the wall of the business. 
2.74.  INFORMATION SIGN. Signs containing information other than directions, traffic or warning erected by a public agency. 
2.75.  JUNK. Old and dilapidated automobiles, trucks, tractors, and other such vehicles and parts thereof, wagons and other kinds of vehicles and parts thereof, scrap building material, scrap piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery, rags, paper, excelsior, hair, mattresses, beds or bedding, or any other kind of scrap or waste material which is stored, kept, handled, or displayed. 
2.76.  JUNK YARDS. Any land or building used for the purchase, sale, abandonment, storage, keeping, collecting, or bailing of paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap or discarded materials, or for the abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage, or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in running condition, machinery, or parts thereof. A "junk yard" includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any area for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
2.77.  KENNEL. The housing of four (4) or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals for the purpose of providing income or revenue. 
A.  COMMERCIAL KENNEL: Any location where boarding, caring for and keeping of more than a total of four (4) dogs or cats or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six (6) months of age) is carried on, and also raising, breeding, caring for or boarding of dogs, cats or other small animals for commercial purposes. 
B.  NONCOMMERCIAL KENNELS: Any location where the boarding, caring for and keeping of more than four (4) but not more than twelve (12) dogs or cats or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six (6) months of age is carried on, not for commercial purposes, but as a hobby such as the raising of show and hunting dogs. Noncommercial kennels shall not be used for the purpose of producing income or revenue - and will be as a hobby only. 
2.78.  LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any activity which results in changes in the volume or flow rates of rainfall runoff, soil erosion from water or wind; any installation of impervious cover; any construction, rebuilding or significant alteration of a structure that damages or destroys vegetation; any other activity that destroys vegetation in the buffer; or the movement of sediments into state waters or onto land within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices. Land disturbing activity shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single-family dwelling, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
2.79.  LIVESTOCK. Shall include horses, cows, pigs, goats, sheep, and similar animals. 
2.80.  LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. Space logically and conveniently located for pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles. 
2.81.  LODGING HOUSE. The same as boarding house, but not meals shall be provided. 
2.82.  LOT. A parcel of land of varying size which is designated as a single unit of property and which is intended to be occupied by one building, or group of buildings, and its accessory buildings and uses as required by this ordinance. 
A.  LOT, AREA. The total area included within lot lines. 
B.  LOT, CORNER. A lot of which at least two adjacent sides abut for their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. 
C.  LOT COVERAGE. That portion of the lot that is covered by impervious surfaces. 
D.  LOT DEPTH. The average horizontal length between the front and rear lot lines. 
E.  LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE or LOT, THROUGH. A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street other than an alley. 
F.  LOT LINES. The lines forming boundaries for a lot as defined above. 
2.83.  LOT OF RECORD. An area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed as filed in the records of the Clerk of McIntosh County, Georgia Superior Court. 
2.84.  MEAN SEA LEVEL. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. 
2.85.  MANUFACTURED HOME. Any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width and forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, which include plumbing, heating and electrical heating systems contained therein. Homes built since June 15, 1976, are constructed in accordance with the standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and bear that department's insignia. The home shall be incorporated on a permanent enclosed foundation with wheels and tongue removed. Manufactured housing as defined herein shall not include pre-site built housing. 
2.86.  MANUFACTURING. Uses serving the needs of the community for industrial activity which are not offensive to nearby commercial or residential uses, as described below. 
A.  Light Industry includes manufacture or assembly processes carried on completely inside a building. Light Industry shall not produce any of the following adverse impacts, as determined at the boundary of the Light Industry lot: 
1.  Noise at a level greater than typical street or traffic noise; 
2.  Hazardous solids, liquids, or gases for emission to the environment; 
3.  Offensive odors or glare; 
4.  Offensive vibration; or 
5.  Any other adverse impact as may be determined by the County Commission, based on evidence presented. 
B.  All other manufacturing uses shall be considered Heavy Industrial. 
2.87.  MEDICAL CLINIC BUILDING. An establishment where patients are accepted for special study or treatment by a group of physicians practicing together. 
2.88.  MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
2.89.  MOBILE SIGN. A sign designed and constructed in such a manner as to readily allow changes of location. 
2.90.  MOBILE HOME PARK. A lot containing all required utility connections where space is rented for the placement of two (2) or more mobile homes for a period exceeding thirty (30) days. 
2.91.  MODULAR HOME. A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with the regulations of the Southern Building Code Congress International, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act, or the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act as amended. For the purpose of this ordinance, a modular home is a one-family detached dwelling. 
2.92.  MONUMENT SIGN. A monument sign structure is one sign either single-faced or double-faced located near the front property line indicating the name of the center's or site's general activity and may include the names of business occupants therein. 
2.93.  NON-CONFORMING LOT. A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, but which fails, by reason of such adoption, to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
2.94.  NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE or BUILDING. Any building or structure which does not conform to the space and bulk requirements of this ordinance. 
2.95.  NON-CONFORMING USE. A use which was lawfully established and maintained but which, because of the application of this Ordinance, no longer conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
2.96.  OFFICE BUILDING. Rooms and/or buildings used for office purposes of any business or service other than medical or dental clinics. 
2.97.  OUTDOOR STORAGE. Placement on a lot not within a building or structure of supplies, materials, goods, products, or surplus materials for more than seven (7) consecutive days or more than thirty (30) days in any year if not fully screened from public view. 
2.98.  PERENNIAL STREAM. A stream which flows year-round. 
2.99.  PERSONAL SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial establishment, the primary concern of which is the rendering of a service to persons or individuals, rather than the sale of products. Such establishments includes, but are not limited to: barber, hairdresser, beauty parlor, shoe repair, shoe shine, laundry, laundromat, dry cleaner, photographic studio and businesses providing similar services of a personal nature. 
2.100.  PLANNING COMMISSION. An appointed body of people by the local governing authority whose responsibilities include the guidance of growth and development within the county and interpreting of the various county regulatory ordinances. 
2.101.  PRINCIPAL BUILDING. One building, the use of which conforms to the primary use permitted by the zone classification in which it is located. 
2.102.  PRINCIPAL USE. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building therein is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied, or maintained. 
2.103.  PROFESSIONAL SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial establishment, the primary concern of which is the rendering of professional services of the following or similar categories: law; architecture; accounting; engineering; medicine; dentistry; optometries; osteopathy; chiropractic; optician; planning, or consulting of the nature of the aforementioned categories. 
2.104.  PROJECTING SIGN. A sign extending outward not more than eight (8) feet from the wall of a building and located overhead not less than the height of the first story ceiling. 
2.105.  PUBLIC BODY. Any government or governmental agency of McIntosh County, the State of Georgia, or the United States Government. 
2.106.  PUBLIC USE. Use of any land, water, or buildings by a municipality, public body or board, commission or authority, county, state or the federal government, or any agency thereof for a public service or purpose. 
2.107.  PUBLIC OR COMMUNITY SEWERAGE SYSTEM. This means any sewage treatment works, pipe lines or conduits, pumping stations and force mains and all other constructions, devices, and appliances appurtenant thereto, approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and/or the McIntosh County Health Department and designed for treating sewage for ultimate disposal into lakes, streams, estuaries, or other bodies of surface water. The Health Department and EPD does not approve of any disposal of water into Surface Waters. 
2.108.  PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state, or municipal regulations to the public: natural gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, or water. 
2.109.  RECREATION VEHICLE. A vehicle portable structure, either towed or operated under its own power, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation or vacation uses, such vehicles being commonly known as "campers," "recreational vehicles," or "travel trailers." 
2.110.  REST HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME, or GUEST HOME. A home operated as a boarding house, in which nursing, dietary and other personal services are furnished to convalescents, invalids and aged persons - but in which are performed no surgery, maternity or other primary treatments such as are customarily provided in sanitariums or hospitals or in which no persons are kept or served who normally would be admittable to a mental hospital. 
2.111.  RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principal business is serving food and which does not include any of the following operations: 
A.  An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages in previously prepared, prepackaged, ready-to-consume individual servings; or 
B.  An establishment that includes a drive-up or drive-through facility or curb service; or 
C.  An establishment where there are fewer than fifteen (15) customer seats per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area in the establishment; or 
D.  An establishment that does not provide waiter/waitress service to the customer seating area (exclusive of food bars). 
2.112.  RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages in ready-to-consume individual servings, for consumption either within the restaurant building or for carry-out, and where either: 
A.  Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are usually served in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers; or 
B.  Where the majority of customers are not served their food, frozen desserts, or beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter where the items are consumed; or 
C.  The establishment includes a drive-up or drive-through service facility or offers curb service. 
2.113.  RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land that is generally used for the location of a street, walkway, utility line or other access way, that is separate and distinct from the lots and parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions of areas of such other lots or parcels. 
2.114.  ROOF SIGN. A roof sign structure is one business sign either single-faced or double-faced located on the roof of the business advertised by the sign and extending upward not more than 8 feet high. 
2.115.  ROOMING HOUSE. The terms rooming house, boarding house, tourist home, cooperative house and lodging house are used synonymously in this Ordinance. 
2.116.  SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building. When two or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior property line so grouped shall be used in determining offsets. 
2.117.  SHOPPING CENTER. A group of commercial establishments having a building composition that is an architectural unit and is not a miscellaneous assemblage of stores; planned, developed, analyzed as a unit, related in location, size, and type of shops to the trade areas that the unit serves, and providing onsite parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of stores. Shopping Centers are classified by type, each distinctive in its own function. 
A.  Neighborhood Shopping Center. Provides for the sale of convenience goods (foods, drugs, sundries, etc.) and personal services (laundry, barbering, shoe repair, etc.) for the day-to-day living needs of the immediate neighborhood, and is usually built around a supermarket which is the principal tenant. 
B.  Community Shopping Center. In addition to the convenience, goods and personal services of the neighborhood center, provides a wider range for the sale of soft line (apparel, etc) hard line (hardware and appliances) and includes eating facilities, making more depth of merchandise and services available. It is usually built around junior department store or variety store which is the principal tenant. 
C.  Regional Shopping Center. Provides for general merchandise, apparel, furniture and home furnishings in full depth and variety. It is built with one or more full-line department stores as the focal point. 
2.118.  SIGN. Any display of lettering, logos, colors, lights, or illuminated neon tubes visible to the public from outside of a building or from a traveled way, which either conveys a message to the public, or intends to advertise, direct, invite, announce, or draw attention to, directly or indirectly, a use conducted, goods, products, services or facilities available, either on the lot or any other premises, excluding window displays and merchandise. 
2.119.  SIGN AREA. The area of the face of the sign formed by a perimeter consisting of a series of straight lines enclosing all parts of the sign. The area of a free-standing sign structure is the area of the face or faces on each side only. 
2.120.  SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE. A structure which contains one dwelling unit designed for occupation by one family. It may be stick built manufactured or modular housing but not a mobile home. 
2.121.  SPECIAL USE. A use which within certain districts specified by this ordinance is not permitted as a matter of right, may be permitted within these district by the County Board of Commissioners after it has: 
A.  Reviewed, in conjunction with the Standards of Review, the proposed site plans, its location within the County, its arrangements and design, its relationship to neighboring property and other conditions peculiar to the particular proposal which would determine its desirability or undesirability; or 
B.  Has found the proposal not to be contrary to the intent of this ordinance. 
2.122.  STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. 
2.123.  STREET. Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
A.  STREET CENTERLINE. That line surveyed and monumented by the governing authority shall be the centerline of a street, or in the event that no centerline has been determined, it shall be that line running midway between, and parallel to the outside right-of-way lines of such streets. 
B.  STREET, INTERSECTING. Any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
2.124.  STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, including items located in water which are attached to the ground, but not including fences or walls used as fences less than six feet in height. 
2.125.  STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
2.126.  SUBDIVISION. The division of a track or parcel that is less than 5 acres per parcel and does include new public roads. 
A.  The public acquisition of land for use in widening existing streets. 
B.  The transference of part of one lot or trace in an existing subdivision to adjacent lots or tract in the same subdivision providing that the transference does not reduce any lot or tract to an area or width less than the zoning minimum of the area and does not increase the total number of lots. 
2.127.  TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign intended to be used for a period of no more than thirty (30) days. Exceptions for pennants and similar devices intended for civic purposes may be granted by special permit. 
2.128.  TOWNHOUSE. A multi-story dwelling unit located on a row of dwelling units with no other dwelling unit located above or below another, and with each dwelling unit having a fire restrictive party wall from ground floor to the roof decking and a private exterior entrance. 
2.129.  TRAFFIC SIGN. Signs containing information for direction of all moving traffic/vehicles erected by a public agency. 
2.130.  TRAILER. A vehicle designed for towing, not intended for use as a dwelling, either temporary or permanent, and restricted to such uses as a temporary construction office and/or storage facility, temporary operations office pending construction of a permanent facility, and the like. 
2.131.  TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and travel use. 
2.132.  USE. The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
2.133.  VARIANCE. A relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance that will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary or undue hardship; and where such modification will not authorize a principal or accessory use of the property which is not permitted within the Zoning District in which the property is located. 
2.134.  WALL SIGN. Signs attached to the wall of a building and not projecting more than twelve (12) inches from the building. 
2.135.  WAREHOUSE. A building used exclusively, except for appurtenant office space, for the storage of goods or merchandise. 
2.136.  WARNING SIGN. Signs containing information to alert traffic to special conditions on the street/highway erected by a public agency. 
2.137.  WATER DEPENDENT USES. Those uses that require for their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in coastal waters and which therefore cannot be located away from these waters. Those uses include, but are not limited to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, finfish and shellfish processing, aquaculture, storage, and retail and wholesale marketing facilities, marinas, navigation aides, basins and channels, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water that cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland site and uses which primarily provide general public access to marine or tidal waters. 
2.138.  WETLANDS. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. For purposes of this ordinance, wetlands do not include coastal marshlands as defined under the Georgia Coastal Marshlands Protection Act. 
2.139.  YARD. An open space between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward except where an accessory building may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main building or as otherwise specifically provided in these Regulations. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
A.  YARD, FRONT. An open unoccupied space within and extending the full width of the lot, between the R.O.W. property line and the closest part of a structure nearest to such street line. In the case of a corner lot which has frontage on two streets, the yard areas abutting both streets shall be considered front yards for setback purposes. 
B.  YARD, REAR. An open unoccupied space within and extending the full width of the lot, between the rear property line and the closest part of the structure nearest to such property line. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
C.  YARD, SIDE. An open unoccupied space within the lot between the side lot line, not a street line, and the parts of the structure nearest to such lot line. 
(Ord. No. 2013-3, 6-11-2013) 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF LAND USE DISTRICTS AND INTERPRETATION OF LAND USE DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 

Section 1. - Establishment of Land Use Districts. 
1.1.  In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of land and buildings, to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings and to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings, and to regulate the density of population, the following land use classifications or zones are by this Ordinance established to be known as follows: 

 
Section 2. - Establishment of Zones by Map. 
2.1.  The location and boundaries of the various zones are as shown and delineated on the Zoning Map of the McIntosh County, said map is made a part of this Ordinance by reference as though fully set forth herein. 
Section 3. - Interpretation of Land Use District Boundaries. 
3.1.  Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the land use districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following shall apply: 
D.[A.] Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street or highway center lines, or street or highway right-of-way lines, said boundaries shall be construed as following such lines. 
E.[B.] Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, said boundaries shall be construed as following such lines. 
F.[C.] Where district boundaries are indicated as being approximately parallel to the center lines or right-of-way lines of streets, or the center lines or right-of-way lines or highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto at the scaled distance indicated on the Zoning Map. 
G.[D.] Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines or abandoned railroad easements shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks or midway between the easement if tracks no longer exist. 
H.[E.] Boundaries indicated as following salt water shorelines shall be construed to follow the low water mark of said shorelines, and in the event of change, the boundary line shall be construed as moving with the actual low water lines; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of fresh water rivers, creeks, canals, lakes, inlets or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerline. 
I.[F.] Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are incongruous with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, the Planning Commission shall interpret the district boundaries. 
J.[G.] Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this ordinance, the Planning Commission may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 75 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
K.[H.] It is the policy of the Planning Commission that all Freshwater Wetlands and Saltwater Marsh areas fall within the Conservation Preservation Land Use District (CP). Where a boundary is indicated as following such Freshwater Wetlands or Saltwater Marsh area the boundary line shall be construed as following the actual limits of said fresh or salt marsh. 
Section 4. - Changes in Boundaries. 
4.1.  Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance adopting an amended zoning map, or part of said map, or unit of a part of said map, which said amended maps, or parts or units of parts, when so adopted, shall be published in the manner prescribed by law and become a part of this Ordinance. 
Section 5. - Limitation of Land Use. 
5.1.  Except as provided in this Ordinance, no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purposes except as hereinafter specifically provided and allowed in the same zone in which such building and land is located. 
Section 6. - Use and Dimensional Regulations. 
6.1.  Except as herein provided, no building or land shall be used except for the purposes permitted in the district as described in this chapter. A permit for the construction, alteration, enlargement, moving demolition or use of a building or structure shall not be issued by the Building Inspector unless it complies with the provisions of this chapter and/or has been granted a variance or special exception by the Planning Commission. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1. - General Provisions. 
1.1.  All water and sewer systems must comply with the minimum lot and design standards established by the State of Georgia and locally regulated by the McIntosh County Health Department and any other applicable ordinances. 
1.2.  No owner or occupant of land in any district shall permit a structure wholly damaged by a fire (or other ruins) to be left in such partially or wholly damaged state, but shall repair or remove and properly dispose of the same within six months. 
1.3.  Any persistent uses that may be obnoxious or injurious by reason of the production or emission of odor, dust, smoke, refuse matter, fumes, noise, vibration, or similar conditions or that are dangerous to the comfort, peace, enjoyment, health or safety of the community are prohibited. 
1.4.  Unless otherwise specified within this ordinance, no structure shall exceed 35 feet in height. Height shall be measured from grade. If the structure is located in an established flood plain, height shall be measure from the flood plain elevation. 
1.5.  No persons shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises of any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any occupied dwelling except as follows: 
A.  The parking of one (1) trailer in a private garage building or in a rear yard is permitted providing said trailer is not occupied and the trailer belongs to the owner or lessee of the land it occupies. 
B.  The temporary use of a trailer by a person engaged in adjoining construction work, or for whom a residence is being built, provided that such use is shown to be a temporary expedient, may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall grant such permission for a period not to exceed three months excepting that they may renew in their discretion such permission at the expiration of said three-month period. 
C.  Any property owner or lessee may accommodate one trailer of a nonpaying guest in their yard for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days in any one year. 
1.6.  Within any residential district, no wall or fence shall exceed 4 feet in height within or along a boundary of a front yard. No wall or fence shall exceed 6 feet in height within or along a boundary of a rear yard. Any wall or fence within or along side yard boundaries must be set back at least 8 feet from the front setback requirements and may not exceed 6 feet in height. 
1.7.  All non-residential developments shall install and maintain screened areas for the purposes of service, refuse and/or storage. These areas shall be screened from public view from streets and/or adjoining properties. 
ARTICLE VI. - INTENT OF LAND USE DISTRICTS AND SPECIFIC LAND USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
The regulations set by this ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly, and to each class or kind of structure or land, except when modifications are provided. 

Section 1. - A-F, General Agriculture-Forestry District. 
1.1. District Intent. 
To provide land for the production of agricultural products such as field crops, livestock, poultry, and other conventional agricultural and forestry pursuits. This district is also created to assist in the conservation of natural resources by encouraging practices which will conserve soil, water, and marine resources. Utilities other than electricity and telephone should be provided by the land user in order to discourage the costly extension of public water supply and sewage disposal facilities. 
1.2. Uses Permitted. 
Property and buildings in an A-F, General Agriculture-Forestry District shall be used for the following purposes: 
A.  One-Family Dwelling structure for farm owner, family, or employee; 
B.  Commercial and private green houses, fruit trees, nut trees, vines and other horticultural stock; 
C.  Agricultural crops; 
D.  Stands for the display of agricultural products raised on the premises; 
E.  The following animals may be kept under the following conditions: 
1.  Animals raised for fur-bearing, feed, or scientific purposes. 
2.  Horses, and the grazing of bovine animals (excluding dairies) provided that such animals will be permitted but not to exceed a number equal to two horses or two bovine animals per acre devoted to feed for same (excluding feed lots). 
3.  The keeping of all domestic animals provided for in this Ordinance shall conform to all other provisions of law governing same and no fowl or animals, or any pen, coop, stable or barn, shall be kept or maintained within two hundred feet of any portion of a required yard space located on adjoining property, or within one hundred feet of any street or public property; 
F.  Churches; 
G.  Cemeteries; 
H.  Tree farms (silviculture); 
I.  Riding stables; 
J.  Home business offices; 
K.  Home occupancy; 
L.  Active and passive recreation areas; 
M.  Country clubs and golf courses; 
N.  Hunting, fishing clubs or lodges; 
O.  Kennels, commercial and private; 
P.  Aquaculture; 
Q.  Nurseries; 
R.  Accessory buildings and structures must conform to Area Regulations. 
1.3. Special Permit Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
A.  Public buildings and utilities; 
B.  Private airfields; 
C.  Libraries, museums, non-profit institutions. 
1.4. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the A-F, General Agriculture-Forestry Districts shall conform to the following requirements: 
A.  Minimum lot area shall be 5 acres; 
B.  Minimum lot width, at building line shall be 300 feet; 
C.  Minimum front yard, setback from street shall be 50 feet; 
D.  Minimum side yard, setback from property line shall be 40 feet; 
E.  Minimum rear yard, setback from property line shall be 50 feet; 
F.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage including primary and accessory buildings and structures, must not exceed 20% of the total lot area. 
Section 2. - A-R, Residential Agriculture District. 
2.1. District Intent. 
To provide land primarily for small farms with residences and other limited compatible uses. Commercial, industrial and small lot residential uses are discouraged in order to protect the natural amenities of the area, as well as suppress urban sprawl. It is the purpose of this district to promote a compatibility between uses and to encourage and provide an orderly transition from agricultural to urban uses. 
2.2. Uses Permitted. 
Property and buildings in an A-R, Residential Agriculture District shall be used for the following purposes: 
A.  One-Family Dwelling structure for farm owner, family, or employee; 
B.  Private green houses, fruit trees, nut trees, vines and other horticultural stock; 
C.  Agricultural crops; 
D.  Churches; 
E.  Cemeteries; 
F.  Tree farms (silviculture); 
G.  Home business offices; 
H.  Home occupancy; 
I.  Active and passive recreation areas; 
J.  Country clubs and golf courses; 
K.  Hunting, fishing clubs or lodges; 
L.  Kennels, private; 
M.  Aquaculture; 
N.  Nurseries; 
O.  Accessory buildings and structures (must conform to Area Regulations); 
P.  Public and private schools. 
Q.  Day care. 
2.3. Special Permit Use[s]. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
A.  Stands for the display of agricultural products raised on the premises. 
B.  Public buildings and utilities. 
C.  Domestic animals may be kept under the following conditions: 
1.  Horses, and the grazing of bovine animals provided that on sites containing two acres or less such domestic animals shall not be permitted. On sites of over two acres such animals will be permitted but not to exceed a number equal to two horses or two bovine animals per acre devoted to feed for same. 
2.  The keeping of all domestic animals provided for in this Ordinance shall conform to all other provisions of law governing same and no fowl or animals, or any pen, coop, stable or barn, shall be kept or maintained within two hundred feet of any portion of a required yard space located on adjoining property, or within one hundred feet of any street or public property. 
3.  No stall or barn shall be kept or maintained within two hundred (200) feet of any window or door of any building used for human habitation nor within three hundred (300) feet of any portion of a required yard space or adjoining property if such property is devoted to a use other than agriculture. 
D.  Commercial kennels. 
E.  Libraries, museums, non-profit institutions. 
2.4. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the A-R, Residential Agriculture Districts shall conform to the following requirements: 
A.  Minimum lot area shall be 3 acres. 
B.  Minimum lot width, at building line shall be 150 feet. 
C.  Minimum front yard, setback from street shall be 30 feet. 
D.  Minimum side yard, setback from property line shall be 25 feet. 
E.  Minimum rear yard, setback from property line shall be 25 feet. 
F.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage, including accessory buildings and structures shall be 30% of the total area of the lot. 
Section 3. - R-1 Single-Family Residential District. 
3.1. District Intent. 
This is the most restrictive residential district. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities needed to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function appropriate to the single-family residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element. 
3.2. Uses Permitted. 
Property and buildings in an R-1, Single-Family Residential District shall be used for the following purposes: 
A.  Single-family residences (must meet the requirements in 3.5 below). 
B.  Active and passive recreational areas 
C.  Accessory buildings and structures. 
D.  General purpose gardening, but not the keeping of poultry or livestock, except as provided for in Article VII: Additional Regulations, Section 2. 
3.3. Special Permit Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
A.  Public buildings and utilities. 
B.  Home occupations and/or business offices provided that the conditions set forth in Article XI, Section 1. 
C.  Bed and Breakfast, limited to five rental rooms. 
D.  Churches. 
E.  Public and private schools. 
F.  Day care centers or kindergartens. 
G.  Country clubs, golf courses. 
H.  Libraries, museums, non-profit institutions. 
3.4. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the R-1, Single-Family Residential Districts shall conform to the following requirements: 
A.  Minimum lot area shall be 21,780 square feet or the equivalent density cannot exceed 2 dwelling units per acre and should have no more than 4 bedrooms per unit. Five bedrooms would require approval by the McIntosh County Health Department. There shall be no more than 8 bedrooms per 1 acre lot. 
B.  Minimum lot width at building line shall be 60 feet. 
C.  Minimum front yard setback from street shall be 25 feet. 
D.  Minimum side yard setback from property line shall be 10 feet. 
E.  Minimum rear yard setback from property line shall be 15 feet. 
F.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage, including primary and accessory structures shall be 40%. 
G.  Any and all lots in an R-1 district smaller than 43,560 square feet shall be served by a community/public water system or a community sewerage system. 
3.5. Limitations on Permitted Uses in R-1 Zones. 
No person shall store on a permanent basis, commercial vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of Georgia, which has a capacity greater than three-quarters (¾) of a ton, in any R-1 Zone. 
3.6. Residential Building Standards. 
All Single-Family Residences must meet the following standards in the R-1 District: 
A.  All structures including the primary structure and accessory structures shall be constructed with a pitched roof having a pitch of 3 in 12 or greater. 
B.  The roof shall be covered with asphalt composition shingles, metal roofing, tile materials, corrugated metal similar materials. Flat sheet metal roofs are prohibited. 
C.  The exterior wall shall be material similar to traditional site-built housing. These materials may include clapboards, simulated clapboards such as conventional vinyl or metal siding, wood shingles, shakes, stucco, brick, brick veneer, concrete block, or similar materials, but shall not include smooth, ribbed or corrugated metal or plastic panels. 
D.  The minimum horizontal dimension of the unit as installed on the site shall be 24 feet. Horizontal dimension is defined as heated living space measured from outside wall to outside wall as setting on foundation. 
E.  The minimum floor area shall be 1,200 square feet. 
F.  Only 'SITE BUILT' structures may be placed in an R1 district. For purposes of this paragraph, a 'Site Built' structure is one which is built or constructed, from the foundation to the roof, a t the precise location whereat the structure is permanently affixed to its foundation. 
G.  No trailers, mobile homes, manufactured homes, modular homes nor any similar structures may be placed in the R1 District. 
H.  All structures must meet wind loading requirements of Federal Emergency Management Administrator and the SBCCI Codes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-3, 6-11-2013) 
Section 4. - R1-CS, Residential Conservation Subdivision Zoning District. 
4.1. District Intent. 
This is the conservation oriented residential district. The principal use of land is for single-family residential dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities needed to provide the basic elements of a balanced, attractive, and conservation oriented residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function appropriate to the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element. In addition, uses within this district are intended to serve the following functions: 
A.  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater control and watershed protection measure. 
B.  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
C.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as coastal marshlands, fisheries, freshwater wetlands, waterways, groundwater, floodplains, and wildlife habitat. 
D.  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
E.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
F.  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
G.  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
H.  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
I.  To promote design and installation of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. To conserve scenic views and to preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
4.2. Uses Permitted. 
Property and buildings in an R1-CS Residential District shall be used for the following purposes: 
A.  Any use permitted in the R-1, Single-Family Residential District. 
4.3. Special Permit Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1, and if additional conditions, which may be required by the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners are met. 
A.  Any special permit use permitted in the R-1, Single-Family Residential District. 
4.4. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in R1-CS Residential Conservation District shall conform to the following requirements: 
A.  All developments shall be consistent with the requirements of Article XII of the McIntosh County Subdivision Ordinance entitled: Conservation Subdivisions. 
B.  The Housing Density Determination. The maximum number of lots in the Conservation Subdivision shall be determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in R-1. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
1.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
2.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
3.  Coastal Marshlands that meet the definition of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Coastal Zone Management Act; or 
4.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
C.  The maximum number of lots does in no way guarantee that the conservation subdivision will be approved with the maximum number of lots. It means that if all other requirements are met, the conservation subdivision may have up to (and not exceeding) the maximum number of lots. 
D.  Minimum Lot Area. Conservation Subdivisions within this district shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  With both public/community water and public/community sewer: 10,000 square feet. 
2.  Lots with individual sewage disposal systems and/or individual wells must comply with the minimum lot standards established by the State of Georgia and locally regulated by the McIntosh County Health Department and any other applicable ordinances. 
4.5. Residential Building Standards. 
All structures in the R1-CS Zoning District must comply with residential building standards in Section 3 R-1 Single-Family District, Subsection 3.6. 
Section 5. - R-2, One and Two Family Residential District. 
5.1. District Intent. 
It is the intent of this section that the R-2 One and Two Family Residential District be developed and reserved for medium density residential purposes served by adequate water and/or sewer facilities. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, healthy environment for several different types of dwellings, and to discourage unwarranted encroachment of commercial, industrial or other uses capable of adversely affecting the residential character of the district. It is the intent of this District to prohibit any new R-2 rezoning applications for properties within 600 feet of any marshland or river frontage, as this zone is not appropriate for these areas. This District will provide a maximum residential density of approximately 4 dwelling units per acre. 
5.2. Uses Permitted. 
Property and building in R-2, One and Two Family Residential Districts shall be used for the following purposes: 
A.  Any use permitted in the R-1 Single Family Residential District. 
B.  Mobile Homes. 
C.  Accessory structures. 
D.  Manufactured homes. 
5.3. Special Permit Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1 and Article VIII and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
A.  Medical facilities and offices. 
B.  Public buildings and utilities. 
C.  Bed and Breakfast, limited to six rental rooms. 
D.  Churches. 
E.  Public and private schools. 
F.  Day care centers or kindergartens. 
G.  Country clubs, golf courses. 
H.  Libraries, museums, non-profit institutions. 
5.4. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance uses permitted in R-2, One and Two Family Residential Districts shall conform to the following requirements. 
A.  Minimum lot area: 
1.  Lot with public/community water and public/community sewer: 10,890 square feet per dwelling unit. 
2.  Lot with an individual well and public/community sewer: 21,780 square feet per dwelling unit. 
3.  Lot with public/community water and individual sewage disposal systems: 21,780 square feet per dwelling unit. 
4.  Lot with an individual wells and individual sewage disposal systems: 43,560 square feet per dwelling unit. 
5.  All water and sewer systems comply with the minimum lot and design standards established by the State of Georgia and locally regulated by the McIntosh County Health Department and any other applicable ordinances. 
B.  Minimum lot width at building line: 60 feet. 
C.  Minimum front yard setback from street: 20 feet. 
D.  Minimum side yard setback from street: 15 feet; setback from other property line: 10 feet. 
E.  Minimum rear yard setback from street: 15 feet; setback from other property line: 10 feet. 
F.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 40%. 
G.  Maximum building height: 35 feet or 3 stories—whichever is lower. 
H.  Minimum dwelling unit size: Minimum square footage shall be 720 square feet for single family homes, mobile homes, and manufactured homes. 
5.5. On-Street Parking Requirements. 
Streets may contain 8 foot by 22 foot (8' × 22') parking spaces parallel to the travel lane for visitor or neighborhood amenity uses. All lots shall provide for off street parking in accordance with Article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2013-3, 6-11-2013; Ord. of 6-15-2016(1)) 
Section 6. - MHP, Manufactured Housing Park District. 
6.1. District Intent. 
The intent of this district is to provide a sound and healthy residential area sufficient to meet the unique needs of inhabitants living in manufactured homes, to protect manufactured housing parks from encroachment by incompatible uses, to encourage the consolidation of mobile homes in parks, to enhance property values in the community by providing distinctive areas for manufactured housing parks to be desirable living areas providing adequate open space, and essentially the same considerations given to residents of R-1 and R-2 districts. 
6.2. Uses Permitted. 
The following uses shall be permitted in any MHP, Manufactured Housing Park District. 
A.  Manufactured Housing Parks. 
B.  Parks and playgrounds. 
C.  Laundromats. 
D.  Accessory buildings and structures (See Article Six [VI]). 
6.3. Special Permit Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
A.  Uses which are in keeping with the intent of this district, and which will serve exclusively the residents of that particular MH district. 
6.4. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the MH, Manufactured Housing Park District shall conform to the following requirements: 
A.  A development plan for the park will be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for approval prior to submittal of an application for rezoning. Said plan of operation shall include a plan showing all proposed manufactured housing sites, including roads, service areas, recreation facilities, utility easements, covenants, and a plan of operation of the park including the rules intended be enforced by the operator upon the park residents. The development plan must be compliant with the requirements of the McIntosh County Natural Resources Protection Ordinance. 
B.  Information to be provided on Development Plan. The preliminary developmental site plan shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the owner of record and of the developer, including telephone numbers; 
2.  Proposed names of the development and its acreage; 
3.  North arrow, graphic scale and date; 
4.  Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the development and inset showing access to major thoroughfares; 
5.  Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearing and distances; 
6.  Names of owners of record of adjoining land; 
7.  Existing streets, utilities and easements on and adjacent to tract; 
8.  Proposed layout including street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, and land to be reserved; 
9.  Block numbers and unit location numbers; 
10.  Provisions for water supply, sewage and drainage; 
11.  Minimum building setback lines; 
12.  Such street cross sections and centerline profiles as may be required by the director of public works; 
13.  All plans shall comply with all state law requirements for recording of developmental site plans or plats in the office of the clerk of the superior court (these requirements are currently set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 15-6-67); 
14.  The plan shall show ground elevations based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey; 
15.  Certificate of Health Department review. A signed affidavit of preliminary consultation with the county health department must accompany the preliminary plan. Preliminary consultation with the health department does not guarantee or imply final approval from the county health department. A soil report may be required; 
16.  Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved for common use; 
17.  A statement, either directly on the plan or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants; 
18.  The final plan shall clearly show the unit location of each recreational park trailer/ recreational vehicle, and shall clearly indicate required building setback lines; 
19.  The following certification: "A certificate of approval on the final developmental site plan by the planning commission, directly on the plan, as follows: "Pursuant to the Recreational Park Trailer/Recreational Vehicle Regulations of McIntosh County, Georgia, all the requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plan was given final approval by the McIntosh County Planning Commission on ____________ ." 
C.  Minimum lot size for a Manufactured Housing Park is five acres. 
D.  Density is limited to eight manufactured homes per acre. 
1.  The following minimum stand sizes shall apply to mobile home developments in the Manufactured Housing Park District. With both public/community water and public/community sewerage system, minimum stand size for each mobile home shall be 5,000 square feet. 
2.  With either community water or community sewerage system, minimum stand size shall be 21,780 square feet. 
3.  With private well and individual sewerage disposal system minimum stand size shall be 43,560 square feet. 
4.  Developments proposing use of private sewerage disposal systems are also subject to the regulations of the Georgia Environmental Protection Ordinance forced by the McIntosh County Health Department. 
E.  The minimum distance required for the separation of a manufactured home from any other manufactured housing shall be: 20 feet from side to side, 20 feet from side to rear, and 20 feet form rear to rear, setback from driveways shall be at least 20 feet. 
F.  No manufactured housing shall be located closer than 30 feet from street right-of-way lines and not closer than 20 feet from property lines. 
G.  Each manufactured housing park shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet set aside for common open space; in the case of manufactured housing parks larger than the minimum five acres or in the case of expansion of existing parks, 400 square feet of common open space shall be added for each additional manufactured housing space. 
H.  All manufactured housing stands shall abut an all-weather surface driveway of not less than 20 feet in width, which shall have access to a public street; all mobile home stands shall have all weather-walkways of not less than three feet in width. 
I.  All manufactured housing parks shall provide the following infrastructure/facilities: 
1.  One (1) paved parking spaces per lot with a surface driveway of not less than twenty (20) feet in width, preferably composed of pervious material; 
2.  All manufactured houses shall have all weather walkways of not less than three (3) feet width from the driveway to the front door of the house; 
3.  A Laundromat, approved and maintained according to McIntosh County Health department standards; and 
4.  All infrastructure within the park shall be constructed and maintained to City standards. 
J.  Each lot shall have clearly marked street addresses according to the current system of numbering homes in the City. 
K.  Each home shall be placed upon a concrete foundation pad sufficient in size to support the mobile home. 
L.  Within 30 days of the placement of a manufactured home upon a site the following items shall be accomplished: 
1.  The undercarriage shall be concealed from view utilizing nonflammable shrouding materials; 
2.  Hitches shall be detached from the home and removed from premises or concealed under the home; 
3.  Electricity and plumbing shall be hooked up to licensed contract and any window air-conditioning units must be supported properly. 
M.  All manufactured housing parks shall install and maintain a fifty (50) foot wide vegetated buffer for the purposes of visual screening and noise abatement, between their property and all abutting properties. 
N.  All manufactured housing parks road systems shall be inspected by the fire marshal to insure the adequacy of the system for emergency vehicle access. 
O.  All manufactured housing parks shall install and maintain screened areas for the purpose of service, refuse and/or storage. These areas shall be screened from public view from streets and/or adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 2013-3, 6-11-2013) 
Section 7. - RVP, Recreational Vehicle Park District. 
7.1. District Intent. 
The intent of this RVD district is to provide an area, outside the normal use of the commercial district, on which to establish a planned, desirable living area with adequate open space and health considerations for the placement of recreational vehicles on a temporary basis. This ordinance is adopted for the following purposes: 
A.  To provide for the orderly growth and efficient development of the county with respect to the temporary placement of recreational vehicles on property which is not being divided into individual lots for sale or building development. 
B.  To provide for and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of McIntosh County. 
C.  To provide for the coordination of streets in recreational vehicle parks with existing and/or planned streets. 
D.  To insure an adequately planned street system and to avoid sharp curves, steep grades and hazardous intersections. 
E.  To provide for safe and adequate water and sewer systems, parks and playgrounds. 
F.  To insure against flood damage. 
G.  To facilitate an orderly system for the design and use of land for recreational vehicles. 
H.  To set forth the standards and procedures for the use of land for recreational vehicles in McIntosh County. 
7.2. Uses Permitted. 
The following uses shall be permitted in any RVD: Recreational Vehicle Park District: 
A.  Recreational vehicles and travel trailers. 
B.  Playground, parks and swimming pools. 
C.  Community buildings, intended for the use of park patrons, which may include: bathrooms, showers, kitchen, food and notion sales, meeting rooms, recreation rooms, park office, and a single-family residence for the park manager. 
7.3. Special Uses Permitted. 
There will be no special uses permitted within any RVD: Recreational Vehicle Park District. 
7.4. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the RVD, Recreational Vehicle Park district shall conform to the following requirements: 
A.  Lot Area. Minimum lot area for a recreational vehicle park shall be five acres. 
B.  Density. Maximum density shall not exceed 15 recreational vehicle unit locations per acre with no more than one recreational vehicle or travel trailer per unit location. If no county water or sewer is available, the maximum density shall not exceed 4 recreational vehicles (4 bedrooms) per ½ acre and 8 recreational vehicles (8 bedrooms) per acre with community water and private sewer. 
C.  Water and Sewer. Each unit location shall be served by a community or public water system and a community engineered sewer approved by either the McIntosh County Health Department or the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, sized for the number of units it is intended to serve. If public water services are available within 500 feet, the park shall be connected to the public services. 
D.  Electrical Hookup. Each unit location shall have an individual electrical hookup connection. 
E.  Stormwater Management. A stormwater management plan for the park shall be designed in compliance with the McIntosh County Natural Resource Protection Ordinance. This stormwater management plan shall be designed and stamped by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Georgia and required as part of the development plan of the park. 
F.  Setbacks. No unit parking space or community building shall be located closer than 30 feet to a right-of-way line or closer than 20 feet to a property line. 
G.  Common Recreational Space. All parks shall have a minimum of 150 square feet of common recreational space for each unit, with a minimum of 15% of the total area of the park designated for open space and recreational facilities. 
H.  Buffers. Parks shall establish and maintain an aesthetically pleasing visual buffer such as a continuous planted buffer strip, consisting of shrubbery or a hedgerow, or a solid brick, concrete block or stone wall or a board fence that is at least six feet in height between the park and adjacent residential uses and property. Such buffer strip, if planted, shall be composed of healthy plants which possess growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact planting screen not less than six feet in height, or if wood, stone, block or brick shall not be less than six feet high. 
I.  Unit Parking Space. Each unit area shall have a permanent unit parking space that shall be paved and abut on an interior paved drive. 
J.  Interior Drives. Interior drives shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall have unobstructed access to a public street. 
K.  Use of Impervious Surface Materials. One of the major challenges faced in RV parks, due to their compact nature, is the control of stormwater runoff and protecting areas of the park on both individual unit location and in common spaces to promote infiltration of rainwater and stormwater, as well as wastewater effluent. Due to this special need identified in this compact development type, impervious surface, which is recommended primarily for unit parking spaces, shall be limited to 20 percent of total lot area. The use of pervious materials pavers, gravel and other porous materials is strongly encouraged in lieu of paving whenever feasible. 
L.  Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one parking space per site. This is in addition to the area set aside for the unit parking spaces. Additional parking shall be constructed of pavement, pervious pavement, pavers, or gravel sufficient enough that automobiles may be located on each unit parking lot space. One space for additional vehicles shall be provided for each five-unit parking space. 
M.  Access. All park accesses to the roadway shall meet the requirements for a commercial driveway. 
N.  Evacuation. All units staying in the park must be attached to a pull vehicle or be self-powered so they may be removed in the event of pending inclement weather. 
O.  Licensing. All units staying in the park must be currently licensed in the state and county in which the unit is registered. 
P.  Stability. All units shall, prior to occupancy or other use, be stabilized in such a way as to prevent tilting of the unit. 
Q.  Solid Waste Management. Each park must have a designated area for solid waste management. This area shall be paved and fenced. The park owner will be responsible to provide covered dumpsters for disposal of solid waste and must make private arrangements for garbage collection. It will also be the owners responsibility to keep this area free of trash and debris. 
R.  Unit Location Permits. Unit location permits are required before placement of any recreational park trailer/ recreational vehicle to insure that the requirements dictated in this ordinance are being complied with. Initial unit location or placement on any individually owned lot shall require the identification/marking of the lot corners to assist county staff with the proper establishment of setbacks. Unit location permits shall only be issued after approval of the final RV Site Development Plan and inspection by the McIntosh County Code Enforcement Officer. 
S.  Occupational License. All parks must obtain an occupational license from McIntosh County to operate as a business. In addition there shall be a charge of $50.00 per parking lot per year, paid at the time the occupational license is renewed, paid to McIntosh County by the park owner. RV parks existing on the date of adoption of this ordinance are exempt from the $50.00 per parking lot per year fee. 
T.  Ownership. The park shall remain under single ownership. Subdivision of the land within an operating RV Park or fee simple sale of unit locations is prohibited. 
U.  Residency. Permanent residency of recreational vehicles and travel trailers is prohibited. RV's that are continuously occupied by residents for a period longer than 120 days shall be considered permanent residency. 
7.5. Development Plan for Permitted Uses. 
The applicant shall be required to provide information necessary for determining that the RV developmental site plan complies with the requirements of this ordinance and other factors necessary to render a decision on the suitability of the particular site for the proposed use. 
A.  RV Developmental Plan Approval Authority. From and after the passage of this ordinance, the county planning commission shall be the official developmental site plan approval authority for recreational park trailer/recreational vehicle parks. The county manager, or appropriate designee, is authorized to make reasonable administrative determinations to establish procedures and insure compliance with the standards set forth herein where this division does not indicate a specified procedure. No unapproved developmental site plan or plat of a recreational park trailer/recreational vehicle park shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county without the approval of the county planning commission inscribed thereon. 
B.  Use of RV Developmental Plan. The transfer of, sale, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell or rent or lease a portion of land being referenced to or exhibited thereon, or other use of a RV Park developmental site plan or plat of a recreational vehicle trailer/recreational vehicle park that has not been given final approval by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, if applicable, is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in an instrument of transfer or lease of or use of any other document shall not exempt the transaction from penalty. 
C.  Erection of Buildings/Structures. No building permit, nor any unit location permit, shall be issued and no building or recreational park trailer/recreational vehicle shall be erected or placed on any development lot in the unincorporated areas of the county where there has been no final approval of said developmental site plan or plat. 
D.  New Work Prohibited. No developer shall institute or proceed with any construction work in any recreational park trailer/recreational vehicle park before obtaining a preliminary site plan approval from the planning commission. Specifically, and without limiting the scope of this paragraph, no zoning amendments shall be approved for the area encompassed by the development, any portion thereof, until the preliminary developmental site plan and the required improvements/construction plan is approved. 
E.  Development Plan Requirements. A development plan for the park will be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for approval prior to submittal of an application for rezoning. Said plan of operation shall include a plan showing all proposed manufactured housing sites, including roads, service areas, recreation facilities, utility easements, covenants, and a plan of operation of the park including the rules intended be enforced by the operator upon the park residents. The development plan must be compliant with the requirements of the McIntosh County Natural Resources Protection Ordinance. 
F.  Information to be Provided on Development Plan. The Development Plan shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the owner of record and of the developer, including telephone numbers; 
2.  Proposed names of the development and its acreage; 
3.  North arrow, graphic scale and date; 
4.  Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the development and inset showing access to major thoroughfares; 
5.  Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearing and distances; 
6.  Names of owners of record of adjoining land; 
7.  Existing streets, utilities and easements on and adjacent to tract; 
8.  Proposed layout including street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, and land to be reserved; 
9.  Block numbers and unit location numbers; 
10.  Provisions for water supply, sewage and drainage; 
11.  Minimum building setback lines; 
12.  Such street cross sections and centerline profiles as may be required by the director of public works; 
13.  All plans shall comply with all state law requirements for recording of developmental site plans or plats in the office of the clerk of the superior court (these requirements are currently set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 15-6-67); 
14.  The plan shall show ground elevations based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey; 
15.  Certificate of Health Department review. A signed affidavit of preliminary consultation with the county health department must accompany the preliminary plan. Preliminary consultation with the health department does not guarantee or imply final approval from the county health department; 
16.  Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved for common use; 
17.  A statement, either directly on the plan or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants; 
18.  The final plan shall clearly show the unit location of each recreational park trailer/ recreational vehicle, and shall clearly indicate required building setback lines. 
(Ord. No. 2013-3, 6-11-2013) 
Section 8. - C-N, Neighborhood Commercial District. 
8.1. District Intent. 
This district is created to provide nearby residential areas with convenient shopping and service facilities. Uses will include those businesses and services which are desired by neighborhood residents on a day-to-day basis. Regulations are designed to encourage a stable, healthy and compatible environment, reduce traveling and parking inconveniences, avoid strip commercial development, and prevent industrial and other encroachment capable of destroying the neighborhood commercial character of the district. 
8.2. Uses Permitted. 
Property and buildings in a C-N, Neighborhood Commercial District shall be used for the following purposes: 
A.  Generally recognized retail business which supplies no more than two of the following categories of commodities on the premises and without outdoor display of goods: groceries, drugs, or clothing. 
B.  Personal service establishment which performs services on the premises such as but not limited to beauty parlors or barbershops, self-service laundries, dry cleaners. 
C.  Business establishments which perform services on the premises, such as but not limited to banks, loan companies, insurance offices, and real estate offices. 
D.  Professional services including the following: medical clinics (out-patient only), and offices of doctors, dentists and similar or allied professions. 
E.  Post office and similar governmental office buildings serving persons living in the adjacent residential area. 
F.  Private clubs, fraternal organizations lodge halls. 
G.  Residential uses lawfully existing within the district at the time of adoption of this ordinance. 
H.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses (See Article Six [VI]). 
I.  Day care and kindergarten. 
J.  Bed and breakfast (six rooms or less). 
K.  Educational establishments. 
8.3. Special Permit Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
A.  Automobile service station provided that all pumps and parking areas are situated at the side or back of the lot and set back at least 25 feet from right-of-way line of all abutting streets, and parking or service areas are entirely separated from adjoining residential properties by a suitable planting screen, fence or wall at least six feet in height. 
B.  Restaurants and other eating or drinking establishments, excluding drive-ins, provided that outside lighting and advertisement arrangements are directed away from adjoining residential properties; and parking service areas are separated from adjoining residential properties by a suitable planting screen, fence, or wall at least six feet in height. 
C.  Public utility installations and buildings including water towers, electric transformer stations, water and sewage pumping stations provided that no storage is permitted at the site; the area is fenced in by a wall or fence at least six feet in height; a landscaped strip not less than 10 feet in width is planted and maintained. 
8.4. Limitations on Permitted Uses in C-N Zone. 
Every use permitted shall be subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
A.  All uses shall be conducted wholly within a building except such uses as electrical transformer substations and nurseries for sale of plants and flowers and similar enterprises customarily conducted in the open. 
B.  Permitted signs shall be limited to identification of occupants, type of use or commodity sold or serviced on the premises, or the lease, sale or rental of the premises. 
C.  "Big-Box" type architecture is not allowed within the C-N district. 
D.  Storage shall be limited to accessory storage of commodities sold on the premises. 
8.5. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the C-N, Neighborhood Commercial District shall conform to the following requirements: 
A.  Minimum lot area: 4,000 square feet if community/public water and sewer are provided in accordance with the requirements of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, otherwise McIntosh County Health Department Standards will apply to minimum lot area. 
B.  Minimum lot width, at building line: 50 feet if community/public water and sewer are provided, otherwise McIntosh County Health Department Standards will apply to minimum lot width. 
C.  Minimum front yard setback from street: 20 feet. 
D.  Minimum side yard setback from property line: 10 feet. 
E.  Minimum side yard setback from street: 15 feet. 
F.  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 10 feet. 
G.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
I.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 60%. 
Section 9. - C-G, General Commercial District. 
9.1. District Intent. 
The intent of this district is to encourage an economically healthy environment for a wide variety of businesses and services which benefit from close proximity to each other. The regulations shall encourage intense land development and discourage uses requiring large areas of land in proportion to the number of pedestrians. The regulations are concerned with excluding all uses involving heavy trucking which are not related to the predominant retail activity and particularly in excluding manufacturing and warehousing. 
9.2. Uses Permitted. 
Property and buildings in a C-G, General Commercial District shall be used for the following purposes: 
A.  All uses permitted in the C-N, Neighborhood Commercial District 
B.  All retail business, service establishments or processing uses as follows: 
1.  Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed building. 
2.  Any service establishment of an office, showroom or workshop nature, including but not limited to, of an electrician, decorator, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer, or television, radio or home appliance repair; and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct. 
C.  Restaurants or other places serving food or beverage, except "drive-in" types. 
D.  Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls, or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 
E.  Vehicle repair, laundry, sales and service, truck and heavy equipment repairing, overhaul and rental. 
F.  Indoor commercial recreation centers. 
G.  Hotel or motel. 
H.  Commercial airfields. 
I.  Radio and television stations. 
J.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. 
9.3. Special Permit Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
A.  All Special Permit Uses in the C-N, Neighborhood Commercial District, according to the same conditions, unless identified as a Permitted Use in Section 8.7 of this Article. 
B.  Outdoor sales space for exclusive sale of new or second-hand automobiles, mobile or modular homes, boats and other such items provided that ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection of any streets. 
C.  Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided all activities are conducted within a totally enclosed main building, or provided the lot is of sufficient size and setbacks to disallow nuisances to adjacent properties. 
D.  Drive-in Restaurants provided that outside lighting and advertisement arrangements are directed away from adjoining districts (if any); and parking service areas are separated from adjoining districts (if any) by a suitable planting screen, fence or wall at least six feet in height. 
E.  Drive-In Theaters provided that outside lighting and advertisement arrangements are directed away from adjoining districts (if any) and that all adjoining properties are separated by a suitable planting screen, fence, or wall at least six feet in height. 
9.4. Limitations on Permitted Uses. 
Every use permitted in a C-G District shall be subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
A.  All uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building except such uses as drive-in restaurants, gasoline stations, electrical transformer substations and horticultural nurseries, and similar enterprises customarily conducted in the open. 
B.  Products made incident to a permitted use and processed on the premises shall be sold only at retail on the premises, and not more than five (5) persons may be employed in such processing and treatment of products. 
C.  Storage shall be limited to accessory storage of commodities sold at retail on the premises. 
9.5. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the C-2, General Commercial District shall conform to the following requirements: 
A.  Minimum lot area: 2,000 square feet if community/public water and sewer are provided, otherwise McIntosh County Health Department Standards will apply to minimum lot area. 
B.  Minimum lot width at building line: 40 feet if community/public water and sewer are provided, otherwise McIntosh County Health Department Standards will apply to minimum lot width. 
C.  Minimum front yard setback from street: 20 feet. 
D.  Minimum side yard, setback from property line: 10 feet; setback from street: 20 feet. 
E.  Minimum rear yard, setback from property line: 10 feet. 
F.  Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
G.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 75%. 
Section 10. - C-I, Interchange Commercial District. 
10.1. District Intent. 
This district is created to serve the needs of inter-regional traffic at interchanges on limited access thoroughfares. The uses allowed in this district should be limited to the needs of tourists, visitors, truckers and other travelers, which are food, service, fuel, souvenirs, and lodging. 
10.2. Uses Permitted. 
Property and buildings in a C-I, Interchange Commercial District, shall be used for the following purposes: 
A.  Filling stations. 
B.  Auto or truck repair shops. 
C.  Restaurants and lounges. 
D.  Hotels and motels. 
E.  Gift shops. 
F.  Tent campgrounds. 
G.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to the above uses (see Article Six [VI]). 
H.  Plant nurseries. 
I.  Retail stores, offices, and banks. 
10.3. Special Permit Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
A.  Any commercial use not listed above. 
10.4. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the C-I, Interchange Commercial District, shall conform to the following regulations: 
A.  Minimum lot area: as required to meet district regulations and intent if community/public water and sewer are provided, otherwise McIntosh County Health Department Standards will apply to minimum lot area. 
B.  Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet if community/public water and sewer are provided, otherwise McIntosh County Health Department Standards will apply to minimum lot width. 
C.  Minimum front yard setback from street: 50 feet. 
D.  Minimum side yard setback from property line: 10 feet. 
E.  Minimum side yard setback if corner lot: 35 feet. 
F.  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 15 feet. 
G.  Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
H.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 75%. 
Section 11. - I-R, Restricted Or Light Industrial District. 
11.1. District Intent. 
This district is established to provide land for various types of light industrial, manufacturing, or warehousing operations which are compatible to adjoining districts. Such uses generally require storage of materials or goods either before or after the manufacturing process, but are of low noise or nuisance level. Land for this district should be located in relation to the thoroughfare network of the community as well as rail and air if required, and designated so as to not disrupt normal traffic flow. Planned industrial parks are encouraged in this district. 
11.2. Uses Permitted. 
Property and buildings in an I-R, Restricted Industrial District shall be used for the following purposes, and shall be conducted in such a manner that noxious odors, fumes, or dust and particles will not be emitted beyond the property lines of the lots on which the uses are located. Uses shall also be in conformance with applicable rules and regulations administered and enforced by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
A.  Building material sales yard and lumber yard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel, and the like. 
B.  Contractors' equipment storage yard or plant, and with equipment commonly used by contractors. 
C.  Freight, truck yard, or terminal. 
D.  Warehouse and wholesale establishments. 
E.  Public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards, and other related uses. 
F.  Research or experimental stations and laboratories. 
G.  Radio and/or television station with transmission towers. 
H.  Repair garages. 
I.  Office buildings for business, governmental, professional, or other general purposes. 
J.  Horticultural nursery. 
K.  Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. 
11.3. Special Permit Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
A.  Food and kindred processing plants. 
B.  Any other industrial use in keeping with the intent of this district, and which involves manufacturing, processing, assembly or storage operations, provided that the use does not involve any junk or salvage operations; that there is no open storage of junk or salvage materials; and that any noises, vibrations, smoke, gases, fumes, odors, dust, fire hazards, or other obnoxious or unsafe conditions related to the operation do not extend beyond the property of the industry. 
C.  Any industrial use proposed adjacent to a residential district. 
D.  Retail business provided such business is incidental to a permitted use and located on the premises of such permitted use. 
11.4. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the I-R, Restricted Industrial District shall conform to the following regulations: 
A.  Minimum lot area: As required to meet district's regulations and intent if community/public water and sewer are provided, otherwise McIntosh County Health Department Standards will apply to minimum lot area. 
B.  Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet if community/public water and sewer are provided, otherwise McIntosh County Health Department Standards will apply to minimum lot width. 
C.  Minimum front yard setback from street: 30 feet. 
D.  Minimum side yard setback from property line: 25 feet; setback from street: 30 feet. 
E.  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 25 feet. 
F.  Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
G.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 60%. 
Section 12. - I-G, General Industrial District. 
12.1. District Intent. 
This district is created to provide land for industrial, manufacturing, and warehousing operations which require buildings and open areas for fabricating, processing, extracting, or repairing equipment, raw materials, manufactured products, or wastes. The traffic networks of the county and region are to be considered in order to discourage disruption and congestion of traffic. The intensity of uses permitted in this district makes it desirable that they be located downwind, as determined by the prevailing wind direction, and separated from residential and commercial uses. It is a requirement that all development within an I-G district be masterplanned. 
12.2. Uses Permitted. 
Property and buildings in an I-G General Industrial District shall be used for the following purposes, and shall be in conformance with applicable rules and regulations administered and enforced by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources: 
A.  All uses permitted in the I-R, Restricted Industrial District. 
B.  Any industrial use which involves manufacturing, processing or assembly operations, or the storage and sale of heavy materials, products, or equipment. (Subject to the requirements of Section 12.3.B below). 
C.  Accessory buildings, structures, and uses and customarily incidental to the above uses. 
12.3. Special Permit Use. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
A.  Retail business provided such business is incidental to a permitted use, and located on the premises of such permitted use. 
B.  Any industrial use that may produce injurious or obnoxious noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard, or other objectionable conditions as a result of its operations, and that such use is located at least 200 feet from any adjoining property lines, and provided that such use be in conformance with applicable rules and regulations administered and enforced by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
C.  Any industrial use proposed adjacent to a residential district. 
D.  Open yard use for the sale, dismantling and/or storage of salvage or junk materials and equipment provided that such use is separated from adjoining properties by a planting screen, fence or wall at least six feet in height. 
12.4. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance or outlined in an approved masterplan, uses permitted in the I-G, General Industrial District shall conform to the following regulations: 
A.  Minimum lot area: as required to meet district's regulations and intent if community/public water and sewer are provided, otherwise McIntosh County Health Department Standards will apply to minimum lot area. 
B.  Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet if community/public water and sewer are provided, otherwise McIntosh County Health Department Standards will apply to minimum lot width. 
C.  Minimum front yard setback from street: 50 feet. 
D.  Minimum side yard setback from property line: 40 feet; setback from street: 50 feet. 
E.  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 40 feet. 
F.  Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
G.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 50%. 
Section 13. - CP, Conservation Preservation District. 
13.1. District Intent. 
This district is established to preserve and control development within certain land, marsh, and water areas of this county. These areas serve as wildlife refuges, possess great natural beauty, are of historical or ecological significance, are utilized for outdoor recreational purposes, or provide needed open space for the health and general welfare of the county's inhabitants. The regulations are designed to discourage encroachment of uses capable of destroying the undeveloped character of the district. 
13.2. Permitted Uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted in CP, Conservation-Preservation District. All uses in wetlands areas shall be compatible with adjacent uses (e.g., private docks only in residential areas). Any use not compatible with adjacent uses shall be a special permit use. Adjacent property is defined as that which is within 300 feet of the property in question. 
A.  Private dock or boathouse. 
B.  Marina. 
C.  Bait house. 
D.  Public utility lines, fire or water tower, utility sub-stations. 
E.  Publicly owned park, open space, or recreational facilities. 
F.  Farms for the growing of agricultural products or timber, with dwelling units for owner or operator. 
G.  Wildlife refuges, including dwelling units of caretakers. 
H.  Museum or exhibit area on or near land of historic, aesthetic, or educational significance. 
13.3. Special Permit Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
A.  Any dredging, or land fill must comply with local and state regulations. Furthermore, plans for the alteration of lands in a CP District must be submitted to the County Planning Commission and approved by the County Commission. 
B.  Uses not compatible with the character of adjacent property (e.g., a bait house in a residential area). 
13.4. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in the CP, Conservation Preservation District shall conform to the following regulations: 
A.  Minimum lot area: two acres. 
B.  Minimum lot width at building line: 150 feet. 
C.  Minimum front yard setback from street: 50 feet. 
D.  Minimum side yard setback from street: 30 feet. 
E.  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 20 feet. 
F.  Maximum percentage of impervious lot coverage: 15%. 
Section 14. - BDO, Beach and Dune Overlay District. 
14.1. District Intent. 
An overlay district does not revoke any regulations set forth in the primary district. The regulations stated in an overlay district are added to that of the primary district. Development within the overlay district must meet all regulations of the primary district as well as the overlay district. It is intended that development within this district be protected from tides and high water storm surges, winds and erosion; that development within this district occur without adversely affecting the existence or natural function of the beach and dune areas; and the development within this district occur without subjecting property adjacent and further inland to additional potential danger from actions of wind and water. The mapped beach and dune districts of this ordinance are hereby designated to be used as overlay zoning districts to the existing land use districts. Thus, the land may be utilized only under the conditions and regulations of both zones. Where conflicts occur, the more restrictive standards shall apply. The boundaries of the Beach and Dune Protection Districts shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map. Within these BDO Districts, all uses not allowed as Permitted Uses or Special Permit Uses shall be prohibited. 
14.2. Permitted Uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within the BDO, Beach and Dune Protection Overlay District. 
A.  Active and passive recreational uses not inherently destructive to the existence of integrity of the beach and dunes. 
14.3. Special Permit Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
A.  Residences, buildings or other structures shall be permitted if that use is allowed in the underlying zoning district and provided that: 
1.  All development, grading, filling or land alteration shall not occur seaward of the Beach and Development setback line which is 40 feet landward of the most seaward stable dune (see Definitions, Article III). 
2.  If the proposed site is lacking an active-stable dune sequence then the site shall not be developed until the developer establishes an active-stable dune sequence with respect to dune height, dune row spacing, vegetation type, vegetation density, width of high-tide beach, slope and orientation of dunes. 
3.  Minimum lot size shall be two acres. 
4.  Any residential development shall be in conformance with the construction standards for R-1 in Article IV, Section 3.6. 
5.  All permanent structures shall be built a minimum of 14 feet above mean sea level by means of pilings rather than filling. 
Section 15. - MT, Maritime District. 
15.1. District Intent. 
The purpose of this district is to reserve those waterfront areas which have significant value for commercial fishing activities. Those uses which may conflict with these uses are excluded, while those uses which support or do not pose a threat to the long term vitality of the commercial fishing industry are permitted. The scale of these uses is limited to prevent an intensity of use which will detract from the traditional scale and scenic quality of the district. 
15.2. Uses Permitted. 
The following uses shall be permitted within the MT, Beach and Dune Protection District: 
A.  Marinas. 
B.  Boat repair and building. 
C.  Chandlers. 
D.  Bait and tackle, marine supplies and accessories stores. 
E.  Marine equipment rental shops. 
F.  Commercial fishing activities. 
15.3. Special Permit Uses. 
There are no uses allowed under Special Permit Approval. 
15.4. Area Regulations. 
A.  Minimum lot area: As required to meet district's regulations and intent if community/public water and sewer are provided, otherwise McIntosh County Health Department Standards will apply to minimum lot area. 
15.5. Design Standards. 
A.  No building shall be more than two stories or 35 feet in height except for those structures used for boat building and repair. 
B.  Buildings within 75 feet of mean high water must be at least 50 feet from other buildings. 
C.  Buildings taller than 25 feet shall be positioned so as to minimize visual impact. 
Section 16. - HH, Hog Hammock District. 
16.1. District Intent. 
The purpose of this district is to allow continued use and activities of the community of Hog Hammock on Sapelo Island. This community has unique needs in regard to its historic resources, traditional patterns of development, threat from land speculators and housing forms. It is the intent of this district to reserve this area for low intensity residential and cottage industry uses which are environmentally sound and will not contribute to land value increases which could force removal of the indigenous population. 
16.2. Permitted Uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within the HH, Hog Hammock District: 
A.  Single-Family Residences. (More than one residence may be permitted per lot if Health Department Requirements can be met.) 
B.  Home Occupations (No requirement of having the commercial activity conducted within the principle structure, no limit on number of non-family member employees, nor is there a prohibition of offering for sale of items not produced by the family Article XI, Section 1). 
C.  Home Business Offices, exempt from Article VII: Additional Regulations, Section 6.1.B. 
D.  Bed and Breakfast. (Limited to six guest rooms.) 
E.  Churches. 
F.  General gardening, farming, keeping of poultry or livestock, and not limited by provisions listed in Article VII: Additional Regulations, Section 2. 
G.  Schools, Day Cares, Lodge Halls. 
16.3. Special Permitted Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in Article Nine [IX], Section 905, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
A.  Scientific research or educational facilities. 
B.  Tourism based commercial business. 
16.4. Area Regulations. 
A.  Minimum lot area: 
1.  Lot with public/community water and individual sewage disposal systems: 21,780 square feet per dwelling unit. 
2.  Lot with an individual wells and individual sewage disposal systems: 43,560 square feet per dwelling unit. 
3.  All water and sewer systems comply with the minimum lot and design standards established by the State of Georgia and locally regulated by the McIntosh County Health Department and any other applicable ordinances. 
B.  In no case shall land parcels be assembled in areas greater than one acre unless it is for the purposes of community conservation by a certified land trust. 
C.  In no case shall condominiums or multifamily housing be permitted. 
D.  In no case shall a structure which is deemed eligible for the National Register of Historic Places be demolished before a demolition permit is secured from the County Building Inspector. An applicant must wait 90 days after the permit is issued before beginning demolition. 
E.  In no case shall any lot area be paved or covered with impervious surface except for building footprints. 
F.  Maximum dwelling unit size: 1,400 square feet (heated and cooled). 
G.  Dwelling units and other structures of more than one and a half (1.5) stories in height shall be prohibited. 
H.  In no case shall building footprints, foundations, support, pillars, etc., be higher than the minimum allowable height for the particular flood zone in which the property is located. 
16.5. Design Standards. 
All new development, infill development and redevelopment shall be encouraged to comply with the design guidelines presented in Chapter 4: Design Guidelines of "Hog Hammock Design Guidelines; Sapelo Island, McIntosh County," The University of Georgia College of Environment and Design, December 2005. Where conflicts occur between the recommended guidelines and the standards of this ordinance, the standards of this ordinance shall apply. 
Section 17. - WVO, Waterfront View Overlay District. 
17.1. District Intent. 
An overlay district does not revoke any regulations set forth in the primary district. The regulations stated in an overlay district are added to that of the primary district. Development within the overlay district must meet all regulations of the primary district as well as the overlay district. This particular overlay district is designed to promote public safety and maintain the aesthetic quality of waterfront and nearby properties throughout the County. Because the waterfront is exposed to more immediate and dangerous weather conditions, it is necessary that structures located in this area have the ability to withstand climatic adversity. Housing design standards are enforced to ensure that only the more structurally sound dwellings are placed in this area. Also due to the amount of revenue such waterfront properties provide to the tax base of the county, it is in the public interest that property values are well maintained in these areas. For the purposes of this ordinance "waterfront properties" shall constitute any properties that abut or are within 75 feet of any Water of the State or Coastal Marshland as defined herein. 
17.2. Uses Permitted. 
Any use permitted within the primary zoning district. This overlay zone does not alter the use of the land. Regulations within this overlay district only pertain to the design of any structure placed or constructed. 
17.3. Special Permit Use. 
Any special use permitted within the primary zoning district. 
17.4. Area Regulations. 
A.  Minimum structure placement regulations of the primary district apply. 
B.  This overlay zone does require that no structure other than a pier, dock or boat house be placed closer than 75 feet to a body of water as measured at mean sea level. 
17.5. Structural Standards. 
All structures, whether site built or manufactured housing, must meet the following standards in the Waterfront View Overlay District: 
A.  All structures including the primary structure and accessory structures shall be constructed with a pitched roof having a pitch of 3 in 12 or greater. 
B.  The roof of all structures shall be covered with asphalt composition shingles, 5-V metal roofing, tile materials, corrugated metal or similar material. Flat sheet metal roofs are prohibited. 
C.  The exterior wall of all structures shall be material similar to traditional site-built housing. These materials may include clapboards, simulated clapboards such as conventional vinyl or metal siding, wood shingles, shakes, stucco, brick, brick veneer, concrete block, or similar materials, but shall not include smooth, ribbed or corrugated metal or plastic panels. 
D.  The minimum horizontal dimension of the primary structure as installed on the site shall be 24 feet. Horizontal dimension is defined as heated living space measured from outside wall to outside wall as sitting on the foundation. 
E.  The minimum floor area of the primary structure shall be 1,000 square feet. 
F.  All structures shall be placed on a permanent foundation. For the purposes of this section, a permanent foundation shall mean a concrete slab, concrete footers, foundation wall, pilings, concrete piers, or post construction which complies with the County Building Code. 
G.  In no case shall wheels, chassis, any undercarriage or transporter unit be left on any structure. Manufactured housing must have skirting around the entire unit. 
H.  All structures must meet wind loading requirements of Federal Emergency Management Administrator and the SCCI Codes. 
Section 18. - R-3 Multi-Family Residential District. 
18.1 District Intent. 
It is the intent of this section that the R-3 Multi-Family Residential District be developed and reserved for medium to high density residential purposes served by adequate water and sewer facilities. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, healthy environment for several different types of dwellings. 
18.2. Uses Permitted. 
Property and building in R-3, Multi-Family Residential Districts shall be used for the following purposes: 
I.[A.] Any use permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District. 
J.[B.] Multi-Family dwellings including: Townhouses, Condominiums, apartments and duplexes. 
K.[C.] Accessory structures incidental to the above uses. 
18.3. Special Permit Uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in Article XI, Section 1 and Article VIII and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
I.[A.] Medical facilities and offices. 
J.[B.] Public buildings and utilities. 
K.[C.] Bed and breakfast, limited to six rental rooms. 
L.[D.] Churches. 
M.[E.] Public and private schools. 
N.[F.] Day care centers or kindergartens. 
O.[G.] Country clubs, golf courses. 
P.[H.] Libraries, museums, non-profit institutions. 
18.4. Area Regulations. 
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in R-3, Multi-Family Residential Districts shall conform to the following requirements: 
J.[A.] Minimum lot area: 
1.  Multi-Family Dwelling: 10,000 square feet for the first two dwelling units and 6,000 square feet for each additional unit if on individual septic systems. Density can be increased to 9 units per gross acre if on a public sewer system. If dwelling units are connected to in ground community waste treatment systems, they are not to exceed 8 units per acre. 
K.[B.] Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet. 
L.[C.] Minimum front yard setback from street: 30 feet. 
M.[D.] Minimum side yard setback from street: 25 feet: setback from other property line: 15 feet. 
N.[E.] Minimum rear yard setback from street: 25 feet: setback from other property line: 15 feet. 
O.[F.] Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 40%. 
P.[G.] Maximum building height: 45 feet or 3 stories— whichever is lower. 
18.5. On-street Parking Requirements. 
Streets may contain 8 foot by 22 foot (8′ × 22′) parking spaces parallel to the travel lane for visitor or neighborhood amenity uses. All lots shall provide for off-street parking in accordance with Article VIII. 
(Ord. No. 2013-3, 6-11-2013) 
ARTICLE VII. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - Accessory Uses and Structures. 
In addition to the principal uses which are designated herein as being permitted within the zoning districts established by the ordinance, it is intended that certain uses customarily incidental or accessory to such principal uses shall also be permitted. For the purposes of this ordinance, therefore, each of the following uses is considered to be a customary accessory use, and, as such, may be situated on the same lot with the principal use or uses to which it serves as an accessory, unless otherwise prohibited within this ordinance. Accessory structures must comply with the setback and height requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. 
1.1. Accessory Structures and Uses for Dwellings. 
A.  Private garage for the occupant's automobiles or vehicles. Must be non-commercial usage of garage. 
B.  Parking area or open storage space for motor vehicles belonging to the occupant, and provided that this regulation shall not be misconstrued to mean commercial uses are allowed. 
C.  Shed for the storage of equipment. 
D.  Children's playhouse or play equipment. 
E.  Private kennel, pens, or cages for occupant's pets provided it does not create a nuisance to neighbors. 
F.  Private swimming pool and bath house or cabana. 
G.  Structures designed and used for the purposes of shelter in the event of catastrophes. 
H.  Non-commercial flower, ornamental shrub or vegetable garden, greenhouse or slat house. 
I.  Private boat dock, boat house. 
1.2. Accessory Structures and Uses for Church Buildings. 
A.  Religious education buildings, except for elementary school, secondary school, and college buildings. 
B.  Parsonage, pastorium, or parish house, together with any use accessory to a dwelling as listed above. 
C.  Off-street parking area for the use without charge to members and visitors to the church. 
1.3. Accessory Structures and Uses for Commercial and Industrial Uses. 
A.  Off-street parking or storage area for customer, client or employee-owned vehicles. 
B.  Completely enclosed building for the storage of supplies, stock or merchandise. 
C.  Light manufacturing and/or repair facility incidental to the principal use provided that dust, odor, smoke, noise, vibration, heat or glare produced as a result of such manufacturing or repair operation is not perceptible from any boundary line of the lot on which said principal and accessory uses are located and provided such operation is not otherwise specifically prohibited in the district in which the principal use is located. 
D.  Sheltered roofs, awnings or canopies incidental to retail and commercial use, where such use is permitted, provided that no part shall, in any case, be located any closer than ten (10) feet to any property line. 
1.4. Setback and other Requirements for Accessory Uses and Structures. 
In any district, all accessory uses and structures, shall observe all setbacks, yard, and other requirements set forth for the district in which they are located. 
Section 2. - Requirements for the Keeping of Animals in Residential Districts. 
2.1.  Animals may be kept in all Residential districts for personal pleasure and use, but not for commercial activities. 
2.2.  In no case shall poultry or livestock be permitted on lots less than 1 acre in size. Roosters shall not be allowed in R-1, R1-CS, or R-2 zoning districts. 
2.3.  All structures which house livestock and poultry must be kept at least 50 feet from property lines which abut property in residential use. 
2.4.  There shall be no more than one individual livestock per acre, unless otherwise specified within this ordinance. 
2.5.  Domesticated pets may be kept in all residential districts, except that kennels (commercial and non-commercial) shall not be kept on any lot less than one acre. 
Section 3. - Buffer Strips. 
Any institutional, commercial, or industrial uses, off-street loading areas, or off-street parking areas for five or more automobiles shall be separated from adjoining residential property by a continuous planted buffer strip of at least 10 feet in width or as otherwise permitted by the McIntosh County Development Standards. Such buffer strip, if planted, shall be composed of healthy plants which possess growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact planting screen not less than six feet in height, or if wood, stone, block, or brick shall not be less than six feet high. 
Section 4. - Area Regulation Exceptions. 
4.1. Double Frontage Lots. 
On lots having frontage on more than one street, but not located on a corner, the minimum front yard setback shall be provided for each street in accordance with the regulations for the Land Use District in which the lot is zoned. 
4.2. Front Yard Setback Requirements. 
The front yard requirements of this ordinance shall not apply to any lot where the average front yard on already built-upon lots located within one hundred (100) feet on each side of such lot and within the zoning district and fronting on the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such a lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the developed lots. However, in no case shall setback be less than ten (10) feet. 
4.3. Exceptions to Height Regulations. 
The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy, monuments, roof signs, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, silos, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flag poles, masts, and aerials. 
Section 5. - Home Occupations and Home Business Offices. 
Commercial activities conducted in homes fall into two classes: Home Occupations and Home Business Offices. 
5.1. Home Occupation. 
If permitted in a land use district, must comply with the following requirements. It shall be allowed, provided that it: 
A.  Is carried on by a member(s) of the family residing in the dwelling unit only. One employee who is not part of the family is permitted; 
B.  Is conducted entirely within the principal building; 
C.  Utilizes not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the principal building; 
D.  Produces no alteration or change in the character or exterior or change in the principal building from that of a dwelling; 
E.  Involves no sale or offering for sale of any article not produced or assembled by members of the family, or any service not entirely performed by members of the family, residing on the premises; 
F.  Creates no disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, traffic hazard, unhealthy or unsightly condition; 
G.  Is not visibly evident from the outside of the dwelling except by one non-illuminated sign two square feet or smaller in size; 
H.  A yearly certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the proposed used; and 
I.  The County Building and Zoning Administrator/Code Enforcement Officer shall verify that the home occupation conforms with the preceding standards. 
5.2. Home Business Office. 
If permitted in a land use district, must comply with the following requirements: 
A.  There shall be no sign or external indication of the business office. 
B.  No more than one vehicle used in the conduction of the business may be parked at the home location. Signage on this vehicle is limited to the area of the driver and passenger front doors of said vehicle. 
C.  No material, other than office supplies may be stored on site. 
D.  The office may occupy no more than 25% of the floor area of the principle structure. 
E.  The office must be located in the principle structure. 
F.  Only residents of the dwelling may engage in work at the office. 
G.  Customers shall not visit the office. 
Section 6. - Junk Yards. 
A.  All junk yards shall be completely screened from roads or developed areas with a solid fence or wall a minimum of eight (8) feet in height, maintained in good condition as determined by the governing authority, and painted except for masonry construction. 
B.  Signs are permitted on the required screen, provided such signs are in conformance with Article Eight [VIII] of this Ordinance. 
C.  No operations shall be conducted which shall cause a general nuisance, endanger the public health, or be in violation of any local, State or Federal environmental regulations. 
Section 7. - Lots of Record. 
7.1.  No permit for the use of any lot which is smaller in total area than the minimum size permitted for the district within which it is located shall be issued unless said lot was legally and properly recorded prior to the passage of this ordinance. 
7.2.  Yards or lots recorded after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with the requirements established by this ordinance. 
Section 8. - Non-Conforming Uses and Structures. 
The lawful use of any building, structure or land existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance may be continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance, provided the following conditions are met: 
8.1.  Unsafe structures. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a building or structure declared unsafe by a proper authority. 
8.2.  Alterations. A non-conforming building or structure may be altered, improved or reconstructed provided such work is not to an extent exceeding 10 percent of the current (reasonable fair market value) value of the building or structure, unless the building or structure is changed to a conforming use. 
8.3.  Extension. A non-conforming use shall not be extended, unless permitted in accordance with Article VII, 9.4. 
8.4.  Request for extension of non-conforming use. The Planning Commission may authorize upon appeal in specific cases an extension of an a lawful use in a non-conforming building or structure which existed prior to the enactment of this ordinance. Said extension may be granted in a non-conforming building or structure. Said extension may be granted in an individual case upon a finding by the Planning Commission that: 
A.  The use is a lawful use as defined in these regulations; and 
B.  The use is in full compliance with all requirements of these regulations applicable to nonconforming uses; and 
C.  The extension of said use will not further injure a permitted use on adjacent property in the same zoning district. 
D.  In no case shall the Planning Commission permit the enlargement of a building for purpose of enlarging a non-conforming use. 
8.5.  Changes. No non-conforming building, structure or use shall be changed to another non-conforming use. 
8.6.  Restoration. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing, rebuilding and continued use of any non-conforming building or structure damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or acts of God, subsequent to the date of this ordinance, wherein the expense of such work does not exceed 60 percent of its current (reasonable fair market value) value of the building or structure at the time such damage occurred. 
8.7.  Abandonment. A non-conforming use of a building or structure which has been abandoned shall not thereafter be returned to such non-conforming use. A non-conforming use shall be considered abandoned: 
A.  When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent; 
B.  When the use has been inactive for more than one year; 
C.  When it has been replaced by a conforming use; or 
D.  When it is being changed to another use requiring permit or certificate of occupancy. 
Section 9. - Construction on Closed and Abandoned Landfills, Dumps and Refuse Areas. 
No building or subdivision shall be permitted over the location of a former dump, landfill or refuse area unless the applicant for a building permit or subdivision can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that construction can be safely accomplished. Such demonstration must include a report by a geologist or registered engineer. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE AND VEHICLE PARKING AND LOADING 

Section 1. - General Intent and Application. 
It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking and loading facilities be provided off the street for each use of land within the jurisdiction of this ordinance. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use. These requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts. 
Section 2. - Control (via Ownership or Lease). 
The control of land upon which the off-street parking is provided shall be the same as the ownership of land on which the principal use is located, unless a legally binding easement or other agreement that is attached to the deed can be provided to assure the County that adequate parking will be provided for the principal use. 
Section 3. - Size and Access. 
Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of access drives or aisles and be in usual shape and condition. There shall be adequate ingress and egress to all parking spaces. There shall be provided an access drive leading to the parking or loading spaces. Such access drive shall not be less than 10 feet in width. 
Section 4. - Number of Parking Spaces Required. 
The number of off-street parking spaces required are set forth in the following table. Where the of the premises is not specifically mentioned, requirements for similar uses shall apply. 

 
Section 5. - Location of Off-Street Parking Areas. 
5.1.  The parking spaces for all dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the residence. 
5.2.  Parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot with the main building of the principal use. 
5.3.  Two or more principal uses may utilize a common area in order to comply with off-street parking requirements, provided that the number of spaces required for each use is met. 
5.4.  Portions of the public right-of-way on minor streets may be allowed for maneuvering incidental to parking when determining parking area requirements for individual uses. 
5.5.  On collector streets, major streets, and controlled access highways, parking facilities shall provide space outside the public right-of-way for maneuvering incidental to parking. This aisle on drive system shall be separated from the road by a 10-foot landscaped buffer. 
Section 6. - Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements. 
Areas suitable for loading and unloading motor vehicles in off-street locations shall hereafter be required at the time of the initial construction of any building or structure used or arranged to be used for commercial, industrial, governmental, or multi-family residential purposes. Such off-street loading areas shall have access to a public alley or street and shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the following requirements, the computation of which shall not be included in the off-street parking requirements. 
6.1.  Amount of Area Required for Each Loading Space. Each off-street loading and unloading space required by the provisions of this ordinance shall be at least ten (10) feet wide, fifty (50) feet long and fourteen (14) feet high. Such space shall be clear and free of obstructions at all times. 
6.2.  Location of Off-Street Loading Areas. Required off-street loading and unloading areas shall in all cases be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve. In no case shall the required off-street loading space be considered as part of the area provided to satisfy off-street parking requirements as listed herein. 
6.3.  Adequacy of Loading Area. All uses, whether specified in this ordinance or not, shall provide off-street loading areas sufficient for their requirements. Such space shall be adequate so that no vehicle loading or unloading in connection with normal operations shall stand in or project into a public street walk, alley or way. 
Section 7. - Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces. 
7.1.  Retail business uses with from 4,000 to 25,000 square feet in total floor area: one (1) space. 
7.2.  Wholesale, industrial, governmental and institutional uses, including public assembly places, hospitals, and educational institutions shall provide one (1) space for the first 25,000 square feet of total floor area, and two (2) spaces for the first 49,999 square feet of total floor area. For anything in excess of 25,000 square feet, such uses shall provide loading spaces according to the following schedule: 
A.  25,000—49,999 square feet: 2 spaces. 
B.  50,000—99,000 square feet: 3 spaces. 
C.  100,000—199,999 square feet; 4 spaces. 
D.  200,000—350,000 square feet; 5 spaces. 
E.  For each 50,000 square feet above 199,999 or fraction thereof, 1 additional space shall be provided. 
7.3.  Multi-family Dwellings: 
A.  Multi-family residences with less than ten (10) dwelling units: None. 
B.  Multi-family residence with 10 to 30 dwelling units: one (1) space. 
C.  Multi-family residences with more than thirty (30) dwelling units: one (1) space for each thirty (30) dwelling units or fraction thereof. 
ARTICLE IX. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - General Sign Provisions. 
1.1.  No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with the regulations of this Article. 
1.2.  Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not permitted to become dilapidated. 
1.3.  All signs located on sites abutting or visible from the I-95 right-of-way shall conform with section 95A-916 of the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Code and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under said code. In instances where the sign controls of this ordinance are stricter, these regulations shall apply. 
1.4.  The creation, construction or maintenance of signs in areas adjacent to and/or visible from primary and interstate highway system rights-of-way shall be limited to property zoned: C-N Neighborhood Commercial, C-G General Commercial, C-I Interchange Commercial, I-R Restricted Industrial, and I-G General Industrial Land Use Districts. 
1.5.  No signs, except as otherwise specified, shall exceed the height limit of the district in which they are located. 
1.6.  Any sign which advertises an activity, business, product, or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within one (1) month of the discontinuance of said activity. 
Section 2. - Sign Permit Required. 
2.1.  A sign permit is required before a sign or banner may be erected or attached to, suspended from or supported on a building or structure; and before an existing sign may be enlarged, relocated or materially improved, except for painting of the structure or sign frame or the replacement of lights or mechanical parts. 
2.2.  A sign permit shall be issued by the Building and Zoning Administrator when the plans, specifications and intended use of the applied sign conforms in all respects to the applicable provisions of this Ordinance and in accordance with Article X, and any other applicable law or ordinance. 
2.3.  The Building and Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to issue a temporary permit for a Special Event Sign to be placed along the rights-of-way, county owned properties, or private owned properties zoned commercial or industrial whereby the public will be informed about an upcoming event or directed to the location of an event. Said temporary permit shall require a one hundred dollar ($100.00) cash bond and shall allow the signs to be posted no earlier than fourteen (14) days on private property or five (5) days on county property prior to the event nor longer than five (5) days after the event, regardless of the property's ownership. Signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area. The location and size of any sign must be approved by the Building and Zoning Administrator and Road Superintendent before a temporary permit is issued. 
2.4.  The Building and Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to issue a temporary permit for Political Signs during any normal campaign period for any election for public office. Political signs located on private property shall not exceed the area limitations set forth in each particular zoning district. Said temporary permit shall require a one hundred dollar ($100.00) cash bond and shall be from last day of qualification (as established by applicable federal, state or local law) till five (5) days after the election date. 
2.5.  All temporary signs must be removed by the permittee or erector of the sign by the fifth (5th) day after the occurrence of the event, including but not limited to any special event, election, sale or lease of real estate, or the conveyance of seventy-five percent (75%) of the subdivision lots. If such temporary signs are not removed by the fifth (5th) day, the permittee of those signs requiring permits shall forfeit the one hundred dollar ($100.00) cash bond. Upon forfeiture of the bond by the permittee, the McIntosh County Public Works Department shall be authorized to remove and dispose of the affected signs. Those temporary signs not requiring permits shall be removed according to the provisions of this article. 
2.6.  Signs must be maintained in good condition and not permitted to become dilapidated. Each application and sign permit shall contain an agreement to indemnify and hold the county harmless of all damages, demands or expenses of every character which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure, either permanent, or temporary. 
2.7.  Permits shall not be required for official signs, real estate signs, construction signs, temporary subdivision signs, temporary window signs, instructional/informational signs, official notices issued by any court, public agency or officer, and allowed home occupation signs under the regulations set forth in this Article. 
2.8.  A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six (6) months after the date of issuance. For purposes of this section, an outdoor advertising sign shall be completed if the sign base has been constructed. 
2.9.  The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to the ordinary servicing, repainting of existing sign message, cleaning of a sign, nor to changing of advertising on a sign specifically designed for periodic change of message without change in structure, such as a billboard, or similar type of sign. 
2.10.  No permit shall be issued until fees have been paid as established by the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners and a sketch plan showing the following information has been filed with the Building and Zoning Administrator: 
A.  Sketch plan showing the exact location of signs, setbacks from right(s)-of-way, and proximity to driveways, curbs, buildings, and other structures; and 
B.  Elevation drawing(s) showing height, width, and style of sign(s) and other structures. 
2.11.  No permit shall be issued for signs to be located in excess of twenty (20) feet in height from ground level until the applicant provides signed and sealed engineering results certified by a Professional Engineer Registered in Georgia that such signs can withstand a one-hundred (100) miles per hour wind load. 
2.12.  A permit fee shall be paid to McIntosh County for each permit required by this Ordinance. The fee shall be increased in direct relation to the increase in the dollar value of the sign according to the rate schedule in the office of the Building and Zoning Administrator. 
Section 3. - Prohibited Signs. 
3.1.  Signs imitating warning signals are prohibited. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles; nor shall any signs use the words, slogans, dimensional shape and size, or colors of the governmental traffic signs. 
3.2.  No signs, except traffic signs and signals and informational signs erected by a public agency, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
3.3.  Signs painted or attached to natural features (such as trees or rocks), telephone poles, utility poles, or fence posts are prohibited. 
3.4.  Fluttering ribbons and banners are prohibited. 
3.5.  Signs within 300 feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument are prohibited. 
Section 4. - Regulations for Specific Types of Signs. 
4.1. Home Occupation Signs. 
One non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two square feet in area is permitted. 
4.2. Signs of Work Under Construction. 
One non-illuminated sign, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area displaying the name of the building, the contractors, the architects, the engineers, the owners, the financial selling and development agencies is permitted upon the premises of any work under construction, alteration, or removal. Such sign shall be removed from the site within thirty (30) days after the completion of the project. 
4.3. Temporary Subdivision Signs. 
Temporary signs, not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area announcing a land subdivision development, are permitted on the premises of the land subdivision. Such signs shall be spaced not less than three hundred (300) feet apart. They shall be removed when seventy-five (75%) of the lots are conveyed. 
4.4. Private Directional Signs. 
Signs indicating the location and direction of premises available for or in the process of development, but not erected upon such premises, and having inscribed thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder, or agent may be erected and maintained provided: 
A.  The size of any such sign is not in excess of six (6) square feet, and not in excess of four (4) feet in length; and 
B.  Not more than one (1) such sign is erected on each five hundred (500) feet of street frontage. 
4.5. Roof Signs. 
Not more than one (1) roof sign structure may be erected on the roof of any one (1) building. No roof sign structure shall extend more than twenty-five (25) feet above the elevation of the roof. 
4.6. Wall Signs. 
Signs on the walls of a building (including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs and projecting signs) shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Signs on the Front Surface of a Building. The total area of signs on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) percent of the front surface of the building, so long as the figure does not exceed the total amount of sign area permitted within the Zoning District where the sign or signs are to be located. 
B.  Signs on the Side and Rear Surface of a Building. The total area of signs on a side or rear surface of building shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the exterior side or rear surface of the building respectively, so long as this figure does not exceed the total amount of sign area permitted within the Zoning District where the sign or signs are to be located. 
C.  The combined sign area on the front, side and rear surface of a building must not exceed the total sign area permitted within the Zoning Districts where the sign or signs are to be located. 
D.  Projecting Signs. Wall signs attached flat to a wall may not extend more than twenty-four (24) inches from the wall. 
E.  Signs attached at an angle to a wall may extend outward from the wall of a building not more than five (5) feet. 
4.7. Illuminated Signs. 
Illumination devices shall be so placed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast into any residential district, sleeping rooms in any district or the eyes of an automobile or vehicular driver. 
4.8. Outdoor Advertising Signs. 
If visible from the Interstate 95 right-of-way, shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Uniform Size. The outside measurements of all such signs shall be twelve (12) feet in height and fifty (50) feet in length, with or without trim. 
B.  Illumination. All illuminated signs shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photo-electric cells. Additional lighting including, but not limited to, neon, animation and running lights is prohibited. 
C.  Height above Interstate grade. All signs shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet above adjacent interstate pavement measuring from the lower portion of the sign face. Signs shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height. Two signs in the same location (back-to-back) or "V" formation) shall be the same height above the interstate's surface. 
D.  Extrusions Prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
E.  Number of signs per location. Only one sign shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back-to-back or "V" formation signs but prohibits two signs (side-by-side) facing the same direction. 
F.  Spacing. Sign locations shall be no less than five hundred (500) feet apart measuring from the two closest points. 
G.  Sign structures shall be no less than ten (10) feet from any property or right-of-way line. 
H.  Locations limited per quadrant. A maximum of three sign locations shall be permitted per interchange quadrant provided that spacing requirements can be met. 
I.  Marsh and historic area locations prohibited. No sign shall be placed in or obstruct the view of a marshland area or an area of designated historic interest. 
J.  Advertisement limitations. Outdoor advertising shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Travel service facilities including lodging, gas, food, camping; 
2.  Areas of scenic beauty; 
3.  Public attractions including historic, natural, scientific or recreational amenities; and 
4.  Any combination of the above-listed facilities. Further, the content of all advertising shall be directional in nature. 
4.9. Spotlights. 
The use of spotlights and other similar illumination devices may be permitted in commercial zoning districts upon issuance of a special use permit, subject to the following additional restrictions: 
A.  No spotlight may be directed at lower than 22½ degrees. For purposes of determining the degree of angle, zero degrees shall be considered directly up and above the spotlight. The lowest illuminated portion of any such light shall not shine lower than 22½ degrees. 
B.  No spotlight shall shine or illuminate the atmosphere directly above any portion of a residential district. Therefore, neither the light nor the illuminated atmosphere or clouds shall not be visible using the naked eye from any residential district while looking straight up within a residential district. 
C.  By seeking a special use permit for a spotlight, applicants are hereby placed on notice that the issuance of a special permit for use of a spotlight shall be revocable by the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners, with or without the consent of the zoning board, at any time after issuance. Said applicants are hereby placed on notice that the nuisance caused by such a spotlight may not be determinable in advance of issuance of such permit. 
D.  For purposes of this section the term "spotlight" shall include any other similar illumination device. 
Section 5. - Signs Permitted in A-F District. 
5.1.  For permitted home occupations, one non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding 2 square feet in area. 
5.2.  For uses other than dwellings, a single illuminated or non-illuminated institution or business identification sign or bulletin board not exceeding 20 square feet in area. Such sign shall be set back not less than 15 feet from the street right-of-way line unless attached to the front wall of a building. 
5.3.  Temporary subdivision signs and private directional signs, under the provisions set forth in Section 4, 4.3 and 4.4. 
5.4.  Off-premise signs, provided such signs are not visible from the rights-of-way of I-95 and U.S. 17 and do not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
Section 6. - Signs Permitted in A-R, R-1, R1-CS and R-2 Districts. 
6.1.  For permitted home occupations, one non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding 2 square feet in area. 
6.2.  For uses other than dwelling, a single illuminated or non-illuminated institution or identification sign or bulletin board not exceeding 6 square feet in area. 
6.3.  Temporary subdivision signs and private directional signs, under the provisions set forth in Section 4, 4.3 and 4.4. 
Section 7. - Signs Permitted in MH and RV Districts. 
7.1.  One non-illuminated professional or business name plate not exceeding two (2) square feet in area mounted flat against the wall of a building in which there is conducted a permitted home occupation. 
7.2.  Signs, illuminated or non-illuminated; not to exceed a combined total sign area of 100 square feet per mobile home park or recreational vehicle park; and that where a mobile home park abuts a federal primary or interstate highway, only one (1) business identification sign, illuminated or non-illuminated, not to exceed a total sign area of 100 square feet per mobile home park. 
Section 8. - Signs Permitted in C-N Districts. 
8.1.  All signs as permitted by Section 4. 
8.2.  The number of signs shall be limited to three for each street on which the establishment fronts. The maximum size of a sign for any business establishment shall be 64 square feet. 
Section 9. - Signs Permitted in C-G, C-I, and I-G Districts. 
9.1.  All signs permitted in A-F, A-R, R-1, R-2, C-N Districts are permitted in commercial and industrial districts. 
9.2.  On any occupied zoning lot in a commercial or industrial district, not more than four (4) signs of any type having a total area of not more than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet shall be permitted. 
9.3.  Commercial or industrial uses located on or adjacent to major streets or controlled access thoroughfares in commercial or industrial districts may include as part of their total permitted sign area, one (1) business identification pylon sign which shall be erected so that no portion of the sign shall be less than ten (10) feet back from the street right-of-way line. 
9.4.  Signs in any commercial or industrial district may be illuminated. 
9.5.  Each commercial use in a C-I district shall be allowed one business identification sign not to exceed 80 feet in height as part of its total permitted sign area. 
Section 10. - Signs Permitted in CP Districts. 
10.1.  One non-illuminated business identification sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area may be erected for each use permitted in a Conservation Preservation District. 
10.2.  Other directional or historical signs approved by the Planning Commission and County Commission may be allowed. 
Section 11. - Signs Permitted in Maritime Districts. 
11.1.  One non-illuminated business identification sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area may be erected for each use permitted in the Maritime District. 
11.2.  Other directional or historical signs approved by the Planning Commission and County Commission. 
Section 12. - Signs Permitted in the Hog Hammock District. 
12.1.  Signs shall be in conformance with Article VIII, Section 6. 
12.2.  Other directional or historical signs approved by the Planning Commission and County Commission. 
Section 13. - Signs Permitted in the Waterfront Overlay District. 
13.1.  One non-illuminated business identification sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area may be erected for each use permitted in a Waterfront Overlay District. 
13.2.  Other directional or historical signs approved by the Planning Commission and County Commission. 
ARTICLE X. - ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 

Section 1. - Building and Zoning Administrator. 
1.1.  All provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced and administered by the Building and Zoning Administrator. He/she may be provided with assistance of other people if directed by the County Commission. 
1.2.  The duties/powers of the Building and Zoning Administrator shall be: 
A.  To receive and check all applications for building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
1.  Prior to issuance of any building permit the Building and Zoning Administrator shall ensure that the building structure, or use proposed conforms in all respects to the provisions of this zoning ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
2.  Prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy the Building and Zoning Administrator shall determine that the work completed is in accordance with all provisions of this zoning ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
B.  To require any information necessary to determine the conformity of the application with the regulations of this ordinance and building codes. This information may include: 
1.  Proposed uses of building, structure or land; 
2.  Placement of the building or structure on the lot; 
3.  Size, dimensions or other characteristics of the building, structure and the lot itself; 
4.  Placement, size, and number of signs; 
5.  Number, size, and location of parking and unloading spaces; 
6.  Any other relevant information under this ordinance (such as access points). 
C.  To inspect premises of applicant's property, building, or structure. 
D.  To issue the building permit or certificate of occupancy after compliance with this zoning ordinance and other applicable regulations is established. 
E.  To notify any person responsible for violating the provisions of this ordinance and to order the action necessary to correct the violation. The Building and Zoning Administrator shall order: 
1.  Discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; 
2.  Removal of illegal buildings or structures; 
3.  Discontinuance of any illegal work being done. 
F.  To record all non-conformities and notify landowners of such non-conformities within a reasonable time after the adoption of the "Official McIntosh County Zoning Map". 
G.  To issue temporary permits and demolition permits, provided that the permit includes necessary safeguards for the public safety, health, and welfare. 
H.  To inform the applicant of a building permit if his proposed use, building, or structure is designated as a Special Permit Use and to advise said applicant of the procedures necessary to acquire this permit. 
I.  To inform the applicant for any new developments proposed within the County which meet or exceed the minimum thresholds identified in the Department of Community Affairs' Procedure and Guidelines for the Review of Developments of Regional Impact (DRI), of the requirement to comply with the intergovernmental review procedures. The County will not take any official action to further any such developments until the DRI Review Process is completed or a minimum of thirty (45) days has transpired from the date the completed DRI Request for Review Form was forwarded to the Coastal Regional Commission. 
Section 2. - Building Permit. 
2.1. Building Permit Required. 
It shall be unlawful to begin the excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building, including accessory buildings, until the Building and Zoning Administrator has issued a building permit for such work. 
2.2. Requirements for Building Permit. 
A.  Building Permit Application. 
1.  The applicant shall submit to the Building and Zoning Administrator a dimensioned plat or scale plan indicating the shape, size and location of all buildings to be erected, and of any building already on the lot. 
2.  When a proposed development is to be served by wells, or by septic tanks, or by a private water system and/or a private sewage disposal system, then the applicant for a permit for such development shall submit with his application for a permit a certificate from the County Health Department approving such water system, waste disposal system, septic tank, or well. 
3.  Applicant shall also state the existing and intended use of all such buildings and structures. 
B.  Issuance of Building Permit. 
1.  If the proposed work as set forth in the application, conforms to the provisions of this ordinance the Building and Zoning Administrator shall issue the building permit upon payment of the required fee within ten (10) days. 
C.  Building Permit Denied. 
1.  If the building permit is refused, the Building and Zoning Administrator shall give the applicant a written explanation of reasons for the refusal. 
D.  Conditions of the Permit. 
1.  Building permits must be renewed if construction has not begun within six months of the initial date of issuance. 
Section 3. - Demolition Permit. 
3.1.  No principal building or structure shall be demolished before the issuance of a demolition permit. 
Section 4. - Certificate of Occupancy. 
4.1.  Certificate of Occupancy Required.  No land or building hereafter erected or altered in its use shall be used until a Certificate of Occupancy has been granted. 
4.2.  Electrical power shall not be connected, reconnected, or otherwise turned on to any building, mobile home or other outlet until an electrical inspection has been made and a Certificate of Occupancy issued. 
A.  Temporary electrical service may be provided at construction sites if a proper building permit has been obtained. A Certificate of Occupancy must be obtained prior to connection of permanent electrical service. 
B.  Electrical power may be reconnected to the same unit/dwelling without a Certificate of Occupancy if service has not been interrupted for a period exceeding 90 days and the reason for interruption did not involve fire or other damage or repair, renovation or upgrading of electrical service. 
C.  The National Electrical Code, 1984 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269, is adopted by reference as the Electrical Code of McIntosh County, Georgia. 
4.3.  Occupancy Permit to be Denied.  An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the development for which such permit is requested complies with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance. A record of all such occupancy permits shall be filed in the office of the Building Inspector. 
Section 5. - Temporary Permit. 
5.1.  The Building and Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue temporary permits for the following uses, subject to the applicable conditions for each individual temporary use and provided it is determined such uses will cause no traffic congestion, and will not adversely affect surrounding areas. Any temporary use not allowed for in this ordinance shall be requested from the County Commission. 
A.  Carnival or circus, in approved open areas, for a period not to exceed three weeks, and subject to approval by the County Commission. 
B.  Religious meeting in a tent or other temporary structure, in an approved open area, for a period not to exceed forty (40) days. 
C.  Open lot sale of Christmas trees or pumpkins, in the approved area, for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. 
D.  Contractor's office and equipment sheds, for a period of twelve months, provided that such office is placed on the property to which it is appurtenant. 
ARTICLE XI. - SPECIAL PERMIT USES, VARIANCES, APPEALS, AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 1. - Special Permit Uses. 
The uses listed under the various land use zoning districts as "special permit uses" are so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses which are called permitted uses. Special permit uses are uses which would not normally be appropriate in a district unless strictly controlled as to size, lot coverage, impact on public services, visibility, traffic and other such characteristics. The following procedure is established to integrate the special permit uses with other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedure: 
1.1.  When applying for a building permit, the applicant shall be informed by the Building and Zoning Administrator that the proposed use is a Special Permit Uses. The matter will then be referred to the Planning Commission. 
1.2.  An application for special permit use shall be filed with the Building and Zoning Administrator at least 30 days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the County Planning Commission. Such application shall contain all information requested and any other material or information pertinent to the request which the Planning Commission may require, and shall contain the notation of the Building and Zoning Administrator that the appropriate fee has been paid to McIntosh County. 
1.3.  Required Public Hearings. No official action shall be taken on any proposed Special Permit unless one (1) public hearing has been held. The public hearing shall be conducted by the Planning Commission. 
1.4.  Procedure for Calling a Public Hearing. 
A.  Prior to scheduling required public hearings, applicants shall complete all submission requirements provided by the Building and Zoning Inspector (e.g., forms, fees, deeds, maps, etc.). 
B.  The Building and Zoning Inspector shall then notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of the required public hearing. 
C.  At least 15, but not more than 45 days prior to scheduled public hearings, the Building and Zoning Inspector shall publish in the newspaper of general circulation, notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
D.  Not less than 15 days prior to the date of a public hearing, the Building and Zoning Inspector shall post in a conspicuous location on the property in question a sign which shall contain information regarding the proposed Special Permit; specifically the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
E.  The primary goal of conducting public hearings on proposed special permit shall be to solicit pertinent factual information which will be beneficial in helping the Planning Commission judge the merits of each specific proposed special permit. 
1.5.  Action of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may approve the application as requested, or it may require conditions for approval, or it may deny the application. A Special Use Permit may be granted by the Planning Commission only if the applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that: 
A.  Neither the proposed use nor the proposed site upon which the use will be located is of such a character that the use will have significant adverse impact upon the value or quiet possession of surrounding properties greater than would normally occur from generally permitted uses in the zoning district. In reaching a determination on this standard, the Planning Commission shall consider: 
1.  The size of the proposed use compared with the surrounding uses; 
2.  The intensity of the proposed use, including amount to be generated, hours of operation, expanse of pavement, and similar measures of intensity of use, compared with surrounding uses; 
3.  The potential generation of noise, dust, odor, vibration, glare, smoke, litter and other nuisances; 
4.  Unusual physical characteristics of the site, including size of the lot, shape of the lot, topography, and soils, which may tend to aggravate adverse impacts upon surrounding properties; 
5.  The degree to which landscaping, fencing and other design elements have been incorporated to mitigate adverse impacts on surrounding properties. 
B.  County or other facilities serving the proposed use will not be overburdened or hazards created because of inadequate facilities. In reaching a determination on this standard, the commission shall consider: 
1.  The ability of the traffic to safely move into and out of the site at the proposed location; 
2.  The presence of facilities to assure the safety of pedestrians passing by or through the site; 
3.  The capacity of the street network to accommodate the proposed use; 
4.  The capacity of the sewerage and water supply systems to accommodate the proposed use; 
5.  The capacity of the storm drainage system to accommodate the proposed use; 
6.  The ability of the fire department to provide necessary protection services to the site and development. 
C.  The natural characteristics of the site, including topography, drainage, and relationship to ground and surface waters and floodplain, shall not be such that the proposed use when placed on the site will cause undue harm to the environment or to neighboring properties. 
1.6.  Denial of Special Permits. If the decision of the Planning Commission is to deny the Special Permit, then the same property may not again be considered for a Special Permit until the expiration of at least six (6) months immediately following the defeat of the Special Permit by the Planning Commission. 
1.7.  Appeals of Decision. Appeals of the Planning Commission decision shall go to Board of Appeals. A written appeal must be submitted to the Building and Zoning Administrator within 15 days. 
1.8.  Conditions of Special Uses. 
A.  Upon consideration of the standards listed above the Planning Commission may require, such conditions, in addition to those required by other provisions of this Ordinance, as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with those standards and all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance. Violation of any of those conditions shall be a violation of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, specifications for: type of landscaping/vegetation, increased setbacks and yards, specified sewage disposal and water supply facilities, hours of operation, operational controls, professional inspection and maintenance, sureties, location of piers, docks, parking and signs, and types of construction. 
Section 2. - Variances. 
2.1.  The Planning Commission may authorize a variance from the requirements of this ordinance where it can be shown that owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific lot, strict application of the ordinance would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow the use of property for a purpose not authorized within the zone in which the proposed use would be located. In granting a variance, the Planning Commission may attach conditions which it finds necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or vicinity and otherwise achieve the purposes of this ordinance. 
2.2.  Conditions Governing the Granting of a Variance. A variance may be granted by the Planning Commission only in the event that all of the following circumstances exist: 
A.  Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do not apply to other properties in the same zone or vicinity, and result from lot size or shape, topography, or other circumstances over which the owners of property since enactment of this ordinance have had no control. 
B.  The variance is necessary to provide the applicant the same basic property rights that other property owners in the same zone or vicinity possess. 
C.  The variance would not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this ordinance, or to property in the same zone or vicinity in which the property is located, or otherwise conflict with the objectives of any county plan or policy. 
D.  The variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the hardship. 
2.3.  Procedure for Taking Action on a Variance Application. Variances shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedure: 
A.  A property owner may initiate a request for a variance by filing an application with the Building and Zoning Administrator. All applications must be filed a minimum of two weeks prior to the Planning Commission meeting where the request will be heard. 
B.  The Planning Commission shall hold one or more public hearings thereon. 
C.  The Planning Commission shall render its decision on the application and notify the applicant within five days of that decision. 
2.4.  Time Limit on Permit for Variance. Authorization of a variance shall be void after one year unless substantial construction has taken place. However, the Planning Commission may extend authorization for an additional period not to exceed one year, on request. The Building Administrator shall monitor variances to ensure compliance with this section. 
Section 3. - Official Zoning Map Interpretation. 
3.1.  The Planning Commission shall provide interpretation of the Official Zoning Map. In case of any question as to the location of any boundary line between zoning districts, a request for interpretation of the Official Zoning Map may be made of the Planning Commission and a determination shall be made by the Planning Commission. All decisions rendered in this regard by the Planning Commission shall be based upon the criteria set forth in Section 402 of this Ordinance. 
Section 4. - Violations. 
4.1.  Any person violating any provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues, it constitutes a separate offense and will be treated as such. In case any building, structure, or land is used, erected, repaired, converted, or maintained in violation of this ordinance, the building inspector or any other appropriate authority, or any county resident who would be damaged by such violation, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action to prevent the use of the building, structure, or land. 
Section 5. - Appeals. 
5.1.  Establishment of Board of Appeals. 
A.  Members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the County Commission. 
B.  The Board of Appeals shall consist of not less than three members, but not more than five members. 
C.  The members shall serve for overlapping terms of not less than three or more than five years. 
D.  Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner that the initial appointment was made. 
E.  No member of the board shall hold any other elected public office, except that one member shall also be a member of the Planning Commission. 
F.  The local governing authority shall determine the amount of compensation to be paid to the Board of Appeals, if any. 
G.  Members shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
5.2.  Procedure for the Board of Appeals. 
A.  To elect one member as chairman for a one-year term. The Chairman may be re-elected. 
B.  To appoint a secretary who may be an officer of the governing authority or the Planning Commission. The secretary may not vote. 
C.  Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at other times the board may determine. 
D.  Minutes shall be kept of meetings, including vote counts, and other official actions for public record. 
E.  The chairman, or in her/his absence the acting chairman, has authority to administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
F.  All meetings of the board are open to the public. 
G.  The board shall inform, in writing, all parties involved in its decisions concerning appeals, applications, and other matters, and the reasons for the decision within thirty (30) days. 
5.3.  Powers of the Board of Appeals. 
A.  To hear and decide appeals where an error is alleged in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building and Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of any section or article adopted in this Ordinance. 
B.  To hear and decide appeals on any action or ruling of the Planning Commission pursuant to this ordinance within 45 days after the Planning Commission has rendered its decision. Written notice of appeal shall be filed with the Building and Zoning Administrator. If the appeal is not filed within the 15-day period, the decision of the Planning Commission shall be final. If the appeal is filed, the Board of Appeals shall receive a report and recommendation thereon from the Planning Commission and shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days. 
C.  In exercising the above powers, the Board of Appeals may reverse, affirm, or modify the orders or requirements, and to that end shall have the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue the necessary permit. 
D.  The Board of Appeals does not have the power to: 
1.  Amend the zoning ordinance; 
2.  Rezone land; 
3.  Declare any part of this ordinance invalid; 
4.  Permit a use prohibited by the ordinance. 
5.4.  Legal Proceedings Stayed. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Building and Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason or facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by McIntosh County or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Building and Zoning Administrator, and on due cause shown. 
5.5.  Court Review of Board of Appeals. 
A.  Any person(s) aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to the Superior Court. The appeal must be made to the court within thirty (30) days after the Board of Appeals decision. Otherwise, its decision is final. Request must be made for a jury trial within thirty (30) days after filing for appeal before the Superior Court. 
ARTICLE XII. - AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE 

Section 1. - Zoning Amendment Petition. 
1.1.  The Planning Commission will review Zoning Amendment applications and make a recommendation to the County Commission to approve or disapprove the petition. 
1.2.  The County Commission may amend the regulations, restrictions, boundaries, or any provision of this ordinance. 
1.3.  Any member of the County Commission may introduce an amendment, and any official, board, or other person may present a petition to the County Commission requesting an amendment to this Ordinance. 
Section 2. - Zoning Amendment Petition Application. 
2.1.  Application for an amendment shall be submitted to the Building and Zoning Administrator at least 30 days prior to the meeting at which it will be considered. 
2.2.  The County Commission, Planning Commission, and their designated representatives shall have the authority to conduct independent inquiries to verify the representations made on the site map. The site map shall be kept on file in the offices of the Planning Commission, where it will be made available for public examination. 
Section 3. - Planning Commission, Review of Zoning Amendment. 
3.1.  No amendment shall be considered by the County Commission until it is first submitted to and approved or disapproved by the Planning Commission. 
3.2.  If the proposed amendment is approved or disapproved by the Planning Commission, it shall require the favorable vote of a majority of the entire membership of the County Commission to make the amendment effective. 
3.3.  The amendment shall be deemed approved if the Planning Commission fails to approve or disapprove within thirty days of the public hearing at which the amendment is first heard. 
Section 4. - Public Hearing and Public Notice on Proposed Amendment or Action. 
4.1.  All amendments to the McIntosh County Zoning Ordinance not initiated by the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners require a minimum of one (1) public hearing. Additional public hearings may be held, if deemed appropriate by the local governing authority. 
4.2.  Prior to scheduling the required public hearing applicants shall first complete all submission requirements contained in the McIntosh County Zoning Ordinance. (e.g., forms, fees, deeds, maps, etc.) or as otherwise required by the Building and Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, or Board of Commissioners. 
4.3.  The McIntosh County Planning Commission shall then notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of the required public hearings. 
4.4.  At least 15, but not more than 45 days prior to the scheduled public hearing the McIntosh County Planning Commission shall publish in the newspaper of general circulation, notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
4.5.  If a zoning amendment is for the rezoning of property, then the public notice shall also include: (1) the location of the property; (2) the present zoning classification of the property; and (3) the proposed zoning of the property. 
4.6.  Not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing the McIntosh County Planning Commission shall post in a conspicuous location on the property in question a sign which shall contain information regarding the proposed rezoning; specifically, the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
4.7.  Any site map required by this ordinance shall be made available for public review not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. Such site map will be available for public review at the office of the Building and Zoning Administrator during regular business hours. 
4.8.  No official action shall be taken on the proposed amendment by McIntosh County Planning Commission or Board of Commissioners until after at least one public hearing has been conducted. 
Section 5. - Procedures for Conducting a Public Hearing. 
5.1.  All public hearings on zoning amendments shall be chaired by either the Chairman of the Planning Commission or the County Commission Chairman or their designees. 
5.2.  A secretary shall record the proceedings of the public hearing. If requested by any party, verbatim transcripts of the public hearing can be prepared, only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party. 
5.3.  The record of the public hearing and all evidence submitted at the public hearing shall be recorded as such and become a permanent part of the particular zoning amendment's file. 
5.4.  The official zoning map and the McIntosh County Comprehensive Plan shall be available at the public hearing for reference by the Planning Commission. 
5.5.  Copies of this Article of this Ordinance shall be available upon request by the public at each public hearing. 
5.6.  The Chairman of the Planning Commission or County Commission Chairman shall preside at the public hearing and shall identify speakers, maintain order, and conduct the public hearing. 
5.7.  The process to be followed in conducting these hearings shall be as follows: 
A.  The presiding officer shall state the specific zoning amendment being considered at the public hearing. 
B.  When there are a large number of individuals wishing to testify at a hearing, the presiding officer may invoke time limits on individual speakers. In such cases, these time limits shall apply to all speakers. 
C.  The presiding officer shall recognize the individual parties wishing to testify or present evidence and allow them to present this information. 
D.  Once all parties have concluded their testimony, the presiding officer shall adjourn the public hearing. Hearings may be continued from time to time and, if the time and place of the continued hearing be publicly announced at the time of the adjournment no further notice of such continued hearings shall be required; otherwise, notice thereof shall be given, as in the case of the original hearing. 
5.8.  Re-hearings. An application for a rehearing may be made in the same manner as provided for an original hearing. 
5.9.  Time limit on Board's decision. The Planning Commission shall reach a decision following a public hearing within a reasonable period of time; however, said period shall not exceed forty-five (45) days. 
Section 6. - Application for Amendment. 
6.1.  Applications for amendment of these regulations may be in the form of proposals for amendment of the text of these regulations or proposals for amendment of the zoning map. Applications for amendment shall be submitted to the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners. 
6.2.  Signature of Applicant Required. All applications shall be signed by the applicant and shall state his name and address. When a change in the zoning classification of a piece of property is requested, the applicant shall be only the owner of such property or his authorized agent. 
6.3.  Application for Text Amendment. In the case of a text amendment, the application shall set forth the new text to be added and the existing text to be deleted. 
6.4.  Application for Map Amendment. An application for a map amendment shall include the following information: 
A.  The community or area in which is located the land proposed to be reclassified and the street number, lot numbers, the location with respect to the nearby public roads in common use; 
B.  A suitable description of the land which may be by a plat of the land in question, or by a description by metes and bounds, or by the lot, block and subdivision designations with appropriate plat reference or by other suitable description; 
C.  The present zoning classification and the classification proposed for such land; 
D.  The name and address of the owners of the land; 
E.  The area of the land proposed to be reclassified stated in square feet if less than one (1) acre, and in acres if one (1) acre or more; 
F.  The county tax map reference number; 
G.  Site Analysis Map: Any person petitioning for the rezoning of a parcel of land, must submit two (2) hard copies a professionally prepared site fingerprint map, drawn at a scale of 1:200, that contains the following information: 
1.  A wetland delineation prepared by an environmental engineer or consultant, using the techniques and procedures found in the Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual, Technical Report Y-87-1 (January 1987). The site map shall indicate the location of both jurisdictional wetlands, as classified by Army Corps and Environmental Protection Agency guidelines and regulations, and non-jurisdictional, isolated wetlands. The engineer or consultant preparing the site map shall indicate, in conspicuous writing on the face of the site map, that s/he certifies that s/he has conducted a thorough wetlands delineation in accordance with the procedures contained in the 1987 Army Corps Wetland Delineation Manual, and that all jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional wetlands identified by the delineation are shown on the site map; 
2.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
3.  Riparian buffer zones in accordance with the Riparian Buffer Ordinance of McIntosh County; 
4.  Coastal Marshlands that meet the definition of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Coastal Zone Management Act 9; 
5.  Populations of rare, endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species, as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in the Coastal Habitat Assessment of the 11 counties conducted by DNR, Wildlife Resources Division, Coastal Nongame Conservation Program; 
6.  Important, known archaeological sites and historic structures. 
Section 7. - McIntosh County Rezoning Criteria. 
7.1.  The following criteria is to be used by the Planning Commission and County Commission in determining whether a particular rezoning request should be approved. A negative finding on any or some of the above criteria does not preclude the Planning Commission or County Commission from approving a rezoning. 
A.  Is this request an illogical extension of a zone boundary which would intrude a damaging salient of (a) commercial, (b) industrial, (c) high-density apartment use into a stable neighborhood of well-maintained single-family homes, and would be likely to lead to neighborhood deterioration, the spread of blight, and requests for additional zoning of a similar nature which would expand the problem? 
B.  Is this spot zoning and generally unrelated to either existing zoning or the pattern of development of the area? 
C.  Could traffic created by the proposed use or other uses permissible under the zoning sought traverse established single-family neighborhoods on minor streets, leading to congestion, noise, and traffic hazards? 
D.  Does this request conform/alter general expectations for population growth and distribution? 
E.  Will this request eliminate options for the acquisition of future public facility sites, roads, open-space, etc.? 
F.  Will this request require a major change in existing, (1) levels of public service, (b) county operators, and/or (c) fiscal stability? 
G.  Does this request have the potential of achieving short-term, to the disadvantage of long-term, development goals? 
H.  Could a change in classification adversely affect market values and/or tax rates of nearby properties? 
I.  Are nearby residents in favor of or support the proposed zoning change? 
J.  Is the proposed area to be developed located in or near an area of rare natural beauty which would be damaged by the permitting of the proposed rezoning? 
K.  Could the proposed zoning allow uses that overload both existing public facilities or those that are proposed? 
L.  Would rezoning be reasonable in light of development restrictions in wetlands on the parcel and/or the potential for wetland or water quality impairment on or off of the parcel? 
M.  If the proposed rezoning requires or permits the installation of septic systems on the parcel, do the surrounding soil conditions, including the presence of wetlands, impede effective treatment of human waste on site or transport of treated material? 
N.  Does the request conform to the McIntosh County Comprehensive Plan and Future Development Strategy? 
Section 8. - Conflict of Interest in Zoning Actions. 
8.1.  Any government official, as defined in Georgia Law, Chapter 67A, who has a financial interest in any real property affected by a rezoning or has a member of the family with such an interest, shall immediately disclose the nature and extent of such interest as required by 36-67-A O.C.G.A. 
8.2.  Applicants for rezoning shall file concurrent with the rezoning application, a Disclosure Report listing all campaign contributions or gifts made to local government officials of McIntosh County within the two years preceding the filing of the application. 
8.3.  Opponents of zoning actions, who have made campaign contributions, as defined in 36-67-A O.C.G.A. shall file a disclosure statement at least five calendar days prior to the first public hearing. This disclosure statement shall list the local government officials to whom campaign contributions were made totaling over $250 each during the previous two years. 
ARTICLE XIII. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) 

Section 1. - Purpose and Intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this ordinance to maintain the quality of life for citizens of McIntosh County by accommodating a new type of unified residential and mixed-use development, available to be applied countywide, that is sensitive to existing land use and the protection of the marshland habitat and historic resources of the County. 
Therefore, herein is written a Planned Unit Development Ordinance (PUD) to be applied on appropriate lands within McIntosh County. It is additionally intended that this PUD shall: 
A.  Provide an option for a unified residential and/or mixed-use development that may be applied on appropriate properties throughout the County; 
B.  Encourage a broader mix of residential housing types, including detached and attached dwellings, than would normally be constructed in conventional subdivisions; 
C.  Encourage growth to occur in areas which are best suited for increased density in accordance with our Comprehensive Plan; 
D.  Create a built environment that fosters a sense of community, provides connectivity, and provides opportunities for interaction of its inhabitants; 
E.  Provide for compatibility between new higher density development and existing lower-density land use; 
F.  Provide proper building typology and compatible development form that will support the existing neighborhoods and development patterns found within the County; 
G.  Provide for protection of sensitive marshland and waterfront habitat; 
H.  Promote a pattern of development which permits the efficient delivery of municipal services and will provide for the recreational and open space needs of the residents. 
Section 2. - Permitted Uses. 
In the PUD zone the following uses are permitted and as hereinafter specifically provided and allowed by this chapter [article]: 
A.  Multi-family dwellings (such as patio apartments, garden apartments, townhouses, and condominiums); accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to such residential dwellings and when used exclusively for the residents of the planned unit development. 
B.  Single-family and two-family dwellings only as a part of planned residential community. 
C.  Piers and boat docking facilities when a part of a specific planned residential community. Community dock facilities are encouraged. 
D.  Mixed use and/or non-residential consisting of compatible service, office, retail, recreational, and civic uses. 
Section 3. - Area and Density Regulations. 
3.1. Minimum Parcel Size. 
The PUD shall only be applied to a parcel of five acres or greater. The PUD may apply to parcels less than five acres, only if it is an existing lot of record, as of the date of adoption of this ordinance, and not a newly subdivided parcel. 
3.2. Lot Area. 
Lots within the planned unit development may be of any size provided they are a part of master planned community consisting of private lots, or condominium ownership, and common open space. All lot sizes and configurations must be compliant with the requirements of the State of Georgia and McIntosh County Health Department. 
3.3. Maximum Lot Coverage. 
There are no specific requirements for lot coverage, however, the Master Development Plan Text must specify maximum lot coverage to be provided. 
3.4. Maximum Density. 
A.  For inland property the residential density (not adjacent to a coastal marshland) shall not exceed six units per gross acre. For purposes of this article, the term gross acre represents the area within the legal boundaries of the property to be developed, less any land that falls within the definition of coastal marshland. 
B.  For property abutting a coastal marshland, the residential density shall not exceed four units per gross acre. 
C.  For PUD projects in any location exceeding the minimum open space requirement provided in this Article by an additional 15%, the residential density can be increased by two units per gross acre. This is an incentive based density bonus, for developers volunteering additional open space within the PUD project. 
3.5. Yard, Buffer, and Placement of Building Requirements. 
A.  As it is the intent for the PUD zone to be applied to parcels which are to be developed in a well-designed and environmentally sensitive manner, there is no minimum yard, minimum lot frontage, or minimum width requirements for the interior relationship of lots and buildings. 
All PUDs shall provide for perimeter buffers for the purposes of visual screening and noise abatement between their property and all abutting properties where compatibility of adjacent uses cannot be enhanced by the type of building architecture alone. The buffers will be provided on the Master Development Plan and set forth in the Master Development Plan Text of the enacting ordinance. 
B.  All development is required to abide by the Riparian Buffer provision of the McIntosh County Water Resources Protection Ordinance. 
C.  No habitable building or parking area shall occupy a required perimeter buffer or marshland buffer. 
D.  The minimum distance between buildings used for human habitation and between buildings used for human habitation and accessory buildings shall be ten feet or as required by the current building code and current fire code. 
3.6. Height. 
No building in the PUD zone shall exceed a height of 35 feet or shall exceed three habitable stories whichever is lower. Building elements, such as towers, cupolas and spires, not to exceed 300 square feet in collective floor area, are allowed up to 45 feet in height. For individual buildings that are shown in the Master Development Plan to be located to provide increased public vista protection, the maximum building height shall be 45 feet. 
For the purposes of this article, maximum building height is measured from the lowest allowable finished floor elevation to the average roof height. 
3.7. Design Requirements. 
A Master Development Plan (MDP) shall accompany a petition to rezone property to the PUD designation. Besides general building, street, and perimeter buffer features, the MDP shall show how the proposed development will accommodate the following requirements: 
A.  Common amenity area: Active recreational areas comprising at least ten percent of the total net development area to include amenities such as: swimming pools; basketball courts; tennis courts; playgrounds; ball fields; walking or jogging paths; community buildings. 
B.  Vista protection: In addition to the minimum distance between building requirement as defined in this zone, the building and landscape layout shall maintain to the maximum degree possible the existing vista of the marshland and waterways from public right-of-way. 
C.  Open space: 20 percent of the net development area shall be in open space. This open space shall include perimeter and marshland buffers, Common Amenity Area, and other non-impervious areas including storm water retention and treatment areas. At least 25 percent of the required open space area shall be contiguous in that it may be accessed by a continuous pedestrian movement not withstanding the need to cross streets or common amenity areas. The use of greens and squares within a new PUD development is encouraged when they are consistent with surrounding development. These squares shall not be less than a ratio of 4 to 1 (length to width). 
D.  Parking: 
1.  Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to requirements defined in this Ordinance. 
2.  On-street parking designed as parallel to the travel lane along local streets, meeting the minimum size of eight feet by 22 feet, may be counted toward the overall PUD recommendation for parking. This on-street parking must be located within 600 feet of the proposed uses to be considered toward the parking requirement. 
E.  Pervious surfaces are encouraged in all PUD projects. 
Section 4. - Environmental Quality Standards. 
4.1.  The PUD shall identify any existing historic, cultural or environmentally sensitive or unique resources within the PUD and explain how the resource is proposed to be protected and managed. 
4.2.  The PUD shall include specific design and development criteria to reduce energy demands for the project, conserve and reduce potable water and reduce maintenance and water demand of new landscape plant material. Other sustainable planning and building techniques are encouraged to be part of the PUD. 
Section 5. - PUD Incentives. 
The developer may reduce certain PUD requirements as specified in this Code by adopting targeted community initiatives within the PUD. Any such incentive allowed in this Code shall only be granted upon the approval by the local government after review and recommendation of the Planning Commission. The developer shall submit a written statement with the PUD application identifying the incentive being requested and demonstrate that the reduction in the PUD requirement(s) does not negatively impact the PUD or surrounding area. All other land development codes shall be met. 
Targeted Community Initiatives 
Adopt Character Design Guidelines as part of PUD 
Adopt Low Impact Development (LID) standards as part of PUD pursuant to the Green Growth Guidelines 
Adopt LEED-ND or local equivalent site standards as part of PUD 
Exceed minimum Open Space requirements by 25% 
Exceed minimum Civic Space requirements by 25% 
Any targeted community initiatives adopted shall apply to the entire PUD. Each targeted community initiative adopted as part of the PUD, shall allow the developer to be eligible for one (1) PUD incentive. Both PUD incentives may be granted for a PUD, if two or more community initiatives are adopted. Each PUD incentive shall only be applied once. 
PUD Incentives 

 
Section 6. - Review and Approval Procedures. 
The following procedures shall be followed for all zoning and development, construction, and redevelopment requests within a PUD: 
6.1. Pre-Application Conference. 
Prior to filing a formal application, the applicant shall meet with the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator in order to review the general character of the proposed development, i.e., its scope, nature and location. At this time, the applicant shall be fully advised of the approval procedures contained herein and the various information, studies, etc., which the applicant may need in order to continue with the said procedure. 
6.2. Application Submittal. 
An applicant shall submit an application, application fee, and petition to the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners through the Building and Zoning Administrator who shall deliver a copy of the petition to the Planning Commission for their review and recommendations of the application. This petition shall contain a written Master Development Plan Text (Text) and a Master Development Plan (Plan) and shall show the relation between the proposed development and the surrounding area, both proposed and existing. The Text and Plan create a unified development plan by which the project shall be developed. The Text and Plan shall apply to any and all developers, contractors, and buyers within the project. The McIntosh County Planning Commission followed by the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners shall make their determinations on the basis of the information contained in the Master Development Plan Text and Master Development Plan, any other information they so request and the purposes and standards of the application, as contained herein. 
6.3. Master Development Plan. 
The following information shall be provided, as a legible scaled drawing, prepared by a registered engineer or landscape architect, or certified land planner, as the Master Development Plan: 
A.  A general location map; 
B.  The present zoning pattern in the area; 
C.  A legal description of the subject property; 
D.  Existing and proposed land uses on the development site and in surrounding areas for a distance of 500 feet, including the approximate location of all buildings, structures, lots, and streets; 
E.  The approximate location of existing utilities and the proposed method for bringing utilities to the site including stormwater retention and treatment as needed; 
F.  The general development design including points of access, street systems, building locations, common amenity areas, perimeter and marshland buffers, open pace, and waterway vista, and connections to the public right-of-way; 
G.  Pedestrian circulation; 
H.  Parking configuration and vehicular circulation; 
I.  Land use tabulation showing the acreage of the project, total number of units for each type, residential density, and maximum non-residential square footage; 
In addition, the following maps and plans shall be submitted with the Master Development Plan: 
J.  A site analysis that identifies and precisely locates the following: 
1.  All primary and secondary conservation areas as defined the McIntosh County Subdivision Ordinance; 
2.  All elements required in the Site Fingerprint outlined in McIntosh County Water Resources Protection Ordinance; 
3.  Proposed Open Space; 
K.  One (1) copy of a reduced 11″ × 17″ copy of the Concept Plat suitable for distribution to the Planning Commission and the general public; 
L.  One (1) copy of the Stormwater Management Concept Plan; 
M.  Soil Survey (Level 3 Soil Report, McIntosh County Health Department); 
N.  Proposed method of water supply and sewage disposal; 
O.  Buffers, general landscaping, tree removal and tree protection; 
P.  Proposed name of the subdivision; 
Q.  Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the property owner of record and the developer or subdivider; 
R.  Name, address, and telephone number of each professional firm associated with the preparation of the Concept Plan; 
S.  Schematic or conceptual drawings of buildings which indicate the proposed architectural style and appearance. 
6.4. Master Development Plan Text. 
The Text shall be provided in a format consistent with the following requirements. The Text shall be written in a clear and concise manner fully addressing each subsection. The Text shall include a written description of the intended proposed project, including the following, as appropriate. Additional criteria may be requested, based upon the character, scope and location of the project. 
A.  A description related to the design, character and architectural style or theme of the project, which demonstrates an innovative, unified, cohesive and compatible plan of development for all uses; 
B.  The total number of gross acres and net acres; 
C.  Total number of residential dwelling units and density of project; 
D.  For mixed-use PUDs, the maximum amount of non-residential square footage; 
E.  The residential and non-residential structure setbacks; minimum size of residential lots; number of parking spaces for residential and non-residential uses, and maximum height of all structures; 
F.  The type and location of infrastructure needed to serve the project, including drainage facilities, internal vehicle and pedestrian access to the project, vehicle and pedestrian access to the project, interconnectivity access points to adjacent property (if applicable), open space and Common Amenity Center provided, fire protection, and solid waste collection; 
G.  The type of buffering provided, general landscaping, tree removal and tree protection; 
H.  The use, location and duration of temporary uses, including construction trailers, sales units, model homes; 
I.  The use and location of accessory uses for residential and non-residential structures including setbacks, swimming pools, fencing, and similar uses; 
J.  If applicable to the size of the development, a phasing schedule, which shall include the amount of residential and non-residential development to be completed within each phase; 
K.  A statement and agreement to comply, binding all successors and assigns in title to the commitments and conditions of the Mater Development Plan. 
6.5. Approval. 
A.  n application for approval of a development shall be considered administratively as a petition for rezoning and will be subject to the procedure established in the McIntosh County Zoning Ordinance. 
B.  After review and public hearing, the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the proposed Master Development Plan and Master Development Plan Text, after receiving the recommendations of the Planning Commission. 
C.  If the proposed zoning and development application is approved as submitted, the zoning administrator shall cause the official zoning map to be changed to indicate the new development. If the Master Development Plan and Master Development Plan Text are approved with modifications, the applicant shall file written notice of consent to the modifications and a properly reviewed Master Development Plan with the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator prior to changing the map. The Master Development Plan, Master Development Plan Text and all other accompanying information shall be properly identified and permanently filed with the zoning administrator. 
6.6. Revision of Development Plan. 
Any change in the approved Master Development Plan and/or Master Development Plan Text, which affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes, must be reviewed and approved by the McIntosh County Board of Commissioners. A request for a revision of the Master Development Plan or Master Development Plan Text shall be supported by a written statement as to why the revisions are necessary or desirable. 
6.7. Subsequent Development to be Consistent. 
All subsequent development plans including, but not limited to site development plan, subdivision plat/plan, utilities plan, landscaping plan, building plans shall be deemed consistent with the Master Development Plan, by the Zoning and Building Administrator, prior to the issuance of building or other work permits. The developer/applicant may appeal any adverse decision of the Zoning and Building Administrator in accordance with the provisions defined in this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PLANNED AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (PAD) 
These regulations shall officially be known, cite[d], and be referred to as the Planned Agricultural District of McIntosh County, Georgia (hereafter "PAD"). The Planned Agricultural District (PAD) is intended to provide a residential development option that supports sustainable development goals, protects open space and agricultural lands, and retains the predominantly rural character. It is not the intended to create a zone for future expansion of urban services through this ordinance. 

Section 1. - Intent. 
The regulations set forth in this Ordinance are intended to serve the following purposes. 
A.  To preserve the rural character through the permanent preservation of agricultural lands; 
B.  To allow development that permanently preserves agricultural lands, and a portion of associated agriculture protection buffers such as woodlands, floodplains, wetlands, critical views and other natural features of rural community; 
C.  To allow for limited development in rural areas; 
D.  To allow limited development in areas outside the Urban Growth Boundary where urban services will not be extended; 
E.  To allow flexibility in the placement and type of dwelling units within the subdivision; 
F.  To promote the use of shared septic, drinking water and stormwater systems that prevent the degradation of water quality; 
G.  To reduce the amount of impervious surfaces in subdivisions, including roads, sidewalks and driveways. 
Section 2. - Size and Composition. 
An individual Planned Agricultural District shall be composed of two distinct areas: the Legacy Area and the Community Area. The total Planned Agricultural District shall be contiguous in location and configuration provided that roads, utility easements or other similar features may divide the site. The Planned Agricultural District shall be configured in such a manner as to permit continuation of any farming use on the Legacy Area. 
2.1.  Design Requirements. 
A.  Minimum Area of Development: The minimum size of subdivision in the Planned Agricultural District is forty (40) acres. 
B.  The maximum allowed gross density is one (1) unit per ten (3) acres. 
2.2.  Legacy Area. 
A.  Definition: The Legacy Area in the Planned Agricultural District is open space that is generally comprised of large connected areas that have agricultural characteristics and uses on the property. The Legacy Area shall not be part of any individual residential lots or other part of the Community Area. It shall be substantially free of structures, but may contain historic structures and archaeological sites including Indian mounds, and/or such recreational facilities for residents as indicated on the approved development plan. Agricultural and farming activities may and are encouraged to continue within the Legacy Area. 
B.  The following criteria must be met in order to designate a Legacy Area: 
1.  The proposed area shall demonstrate consistency with agricultural land preservation. The preservation of agricultural land shall guide the location and use of the designated Legacy Area. 
2.  The Legacy Area shall be designated as permanent preservation lands through a conservation easement that is held in perpetuity as defined by Georgia Statutes. Agricultural and similar rural uses shall be identified in the easement recorded in the Official Records of McIntosh County. The purpose of the easement is preservation of land for its availability for agricultural use. 
3.  No more than thirty percent (30%) of the Legacy Area shall be non-agricultural land such as important buffers to agricultural lands composed of forested uplands, wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, unique habitat, and other natural buffers. 
C.  One or more of the following criteria must be met in order to be eligible for becoming a PAD. The defining agricultural characteristic must be included in the Legacy Area: 
1.  Lands include prime agriculture soils as mapped by the National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), regardless of current usage. 
2.  Lands support existing or historically active agriculture, including cropland, tree farms, and pasture. 
3.  Lands are currently designated by an agricultural land use or zoning code regardless of actual use or characteristics. 
2.3.  Community Area. 
A.  Definition: The Community Area is comprised of all land in a proposed Planned Agricultural District that is not defined as part of the Legacy Area. Development within the Community Area shall be clustered and transition away from the boundary of the Legacy Area to ensure functional agricultural and similar rural uses and compatibility with adjacent property. The allowable gross density in Planned Agricultural Districts and the relative size of the Legacy Area and Community Area shall adhere to the following standards: 
B.  Density in Community Area. If 67% or more of the gross area of the parcel is designated as a Legacy Area, then the residential density in the Community area shall be one residential unit per acre. 
C.  Density Bonus: The gross density may be increased if the Planned Agricultural District complies with one or more of the following four (4) standards. Each standard provides a density bonus of 5% in addition to the gross density (maximum bonus permitted is 10%). 
1.  Creating an endowment where the principal would generate sufficient annual interest to cover the conservation easement holder's yearly costs (taxes, insurance, maintenance, enforcement, etc.). 
2.  Providing for shared or community drain fields for septic systems. 
3.  Providing affordable housing, to include a minimum of 25% of all units that would be affordable to moderate-income households, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
4.  Reusing historical buildings and structures, including those sites inventoried by the Georgia Department of Archives and History. The U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties shall apply. 
D.  Commercial Area. Planned Agricultural Districts containing greater than one hundred (100) residential dwelling units may also include neighborhood-scale commercial uses within the Community Area. 
1.  Maximum Area: The maximum size of a commercial parcel is three (3) acres. 
2.  Floor Area Ratio: The Floor Area Ratio is the total building square footage (building area) divided by the site size square footage (site area). The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of allowable neighborhood-scale uses is 0.175. 
3.  Commercial area shall comply with the standards of the C-N District. 
4.  If neighborhood-scale commercial uses are to be included, the Community Area's permissible density shall be calculated by reducing the total Community Area by the acres constituting the neighborhood-scale commercial uses. The remaining acres are then multiplied by the appropriate density standard. 
2.4.  Buffers. Within Development Areas, a native vegetation buffer consistent with the McIntosh County Water Resources Protection Ordinance shall be maintained around all open water areas, unless a specific common beach or grassed area is identified. Also, a perimeter buffer at least 50 feet wide shall be maintained along all sides of the Community Area. This 50-foot perimeter buffer may consist of wetland and upland and may be included within either the Community Area or the Legacy Area. Uses within the perimeter buffer shall be limited to those associated with passive recreation. The perimeter buffer areas shall be left in their natural state or appropriately planted with native grasses and/or shrubs and trees. At the discretion of the McIntosh County Building and Zoning Administrator, roads may be substituted for a portion of the perimeter buffer (up to 25 feet) if the road creates an effective barrier separating yards from agricultural uses. 
Section 3. - Site Design. 
3.1.  Lot Design. 
A.  Individual lots need not meet a minimum lot size and shall be clustered to provide for a compact and contiguous Community Area design. Lots and building sites shall be designed to achieve the following objectives listed in order of priority: 
If development contains individual or communal septic systems, lot sizes and configuration of drain fields must be approved by the McIntosh County Health Department and these systems must be located on the most suitable soils for sub-surface septic disposal. 
B.  Lots and building sites should be located on the least fertile soils for agricultural uses, and in a manner which maximizes the usable area remaining for such agricultural use. 
C.  Building sites should be located to minimize the impact of blocks of forest land and to maximize the continuity of agricultural lands. 
D.  Building sites should be located in areas least likely to block or interrupt scenic vistas as viewed from roads. 
3.2.  Utilities. 
A.  Individual Septic Systems: Individual well and septic systems are allowed in Planned Agricultural Districts, and these systems must be approved by the McIntosh County Health Department. 
B.  Common Utilities: Common utilities (shared water and/or sewer or septic systems) shall meet Georgia Environmental Protection Division standards for sewage treatment systems and be approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division or McIntosh County Health Department, as appropriate. Communal drain fields for shared septic systems may be partially or completely located in Legacy Areas, provided that: 
1.  The communal drain field be placed in a dedicated parcel owned in fee by a common ownership association which owns non-Legacy Area land within the subdivision and in which membership in the association by all landowners in the subdivision shall be mandatory; 
2.  The common ownership association is responsible for maintenance and repair of the communal drain field; 
3.  The ground cover is restored to its natural condition after installation; 
4.  Recreational uses are prohibited above or within fifty (50) feet of communal drain fields; and 
5.  The conservation easement for the dedicated Legacy Area parcel describes the location of the communal drain field. 
Section 4. - Ownership and Management. 
4.1.  All lands and improvements within the Legacy Area shall be established, managed and maintained in accordance with the following guidelines: 
A.  Designated open space (Legacy Area) shall be surveyed and subdivided as a separate parcel or parcels. 
B.  The areas to be preserved shall be identified on a case-by-case basis in an effort to conserve and provide the best opportunities to restore and enlarge the best quality agricultural features of each particular site. 
C.  The following areas or structures may be located within the Legacy Area and shall be counted toward the overall proportion required: 
1.  Privately-held buildings or structures provided that are accessory to the use of the Legacy Area. 
2.  Shared septic systems and shared potable water systems. 
D.  Any passive recreational trails shall be designed to avoid fragmenting agricultural areas within the Legacy Area. 
E.  Designated preserved agricultural lands must be restricted from further development by a permanent conservation easement (in accordance with Georgia Statutes) running with the land. The permanent conservation easement must be submitted with the preliminary site plan and approved by the Planning Commission and County Attorney. 
4.2.  Conservation Easement Holder. The permanent conservation easement may be held by the following entities, but in no case may the holder of the conservation easement be the same as the owner of the underlying fee: 
A.  McIntosh County or another governmental body empowered to hold an interest in real property. 
B.  A private, nonprofit conservation organization that has been designated by the Internal Revenue Service as qualifying under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
4.3.  Conservation Easement Content. The permanent conservation easement must specify the following information: 
A.  What entity will own the designated Legacy Area; 
B.  What entity will maintain the designated Legacy Area; 
C.  The purposes of the conservation easement and the conservation values of the property; 
D.  The legal description of the land under the easement; 
E.  The restrictions on the use of the land; 
F.  The restriction from future development of the land; 
G.  To what standards the agricultural land will be maintained; and 
H.  Who will have access to the agricultural land. 
Section 5. - Land Use Regulations. 
5.1.  Permissible Uses. The following are uses permitted by right in the Planned Agricultural District: 
A.  Agriculture, including farm dwellings and agricultural related buildings and structures subject to State of Georgia pollution control standards, but not including animal feedlots or other commercial operations; 
B.  Neighborhood-scale commercial (where more than 100 residential uses are planned); 
C.  Public parks, recreational areas, wildlife areas and game refuges; 
D.  "Green" industry including solar farms and wind turbine fields; 
E.  Single-family detached dwellings (maximum height of 35 feet); 
F.  Attached residential dwellings, no more than 5 units per building (maximum height of 35 feet); 
G.  Hotel or Bed and Breakfasts, restricted to six (6) or fewer bedrooms; 
H.  Day care home, restricted to applicable local and Georgia Department of Human Resources law. 
5.2.  Accessory Uses. The following are accessory uses permitted by right in the Planned Agricultural District: 
A.  Private garages, parking spaces and car ports. Private garages are intended for use to store the private passenger vehicles of the family or families resident upon the premises, and in which no business, service or industry is carried on; 
B.  Parking of recreational vehicles and equipment; 
C.  Accessory uses in side yards shall be limited to garages and carports only; 
D.  Accessory buildings are permitted in any rear yard; 
E.  Home occupations in accordance with the McIntosh County Zoning Ordinance requirements; 
F.  Greenhouses and conservatories; 
G.  Swimming pool, tennis courts and other recreational facilities which are operated for the enjoyment and convenience of the residents of the principal use and their guests; 
H.  Tool houses, sheds and similar buildings for storage of domestic supplies and noncommercial recreational equipment; 
I.  Fencing, screening and landscaping as permitted and regulated by other local regulations; 
J.  Boat houses, piers and docks; and 
K.  Signs in compliance with R-A and C-N signage restrictions in residential and commercial areas respectively. 
Section 6. - Review and Approval Procedures. 
Application procedures shall be the same as for the Planned Unit Development (PUD) approval procedures as written in Article XII, Section 6. 
ARTICLE XV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Section 1. - Provisions of Ordinance Declared to be Minimum Requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, morale, or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. 
Section 2. - Separability Clause. 
Should any section, subsection, or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Section 3. - Conflicting Ordinances Repealed. 
The provisions of any ordinance or regulations or parts thereof in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Section 4. - Effective Date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force as of [September 13, 2011]. Enacted an ordained by the County Commission of McIntosh County, Georgia. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 

 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within these Special Acts and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 