CODE OF ORDINANCES BURKE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1998 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted: October 22, 1998 
Effective: October 22, 1998 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
OF 
BURKE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ellis Godbee, Chairman 
Frank Williams, Vice-Chairman 
Jimmy Dixon 
Herman Lodge  Woodrow Harvey 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
C. W. Hopper, Jr. 
County Administrator 
____________ 
Preston B. Lewis, Jr. 
County Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Burke County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and John Welch, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. C. W. Hopper, Jr., and Mr. Preston B. Lewis, Jr., County Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Burke County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Burke County, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Burke County, Georgia. 1998. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR BURKE COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF BURKE COUNTY, GEORGIA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Burke County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 to 42, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 13, 1996, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 13, 1996, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall be effective and in full force and effect from and after the date of its adoption. 
Passed and adopted this 22 nd day of October, 1998. 
BURKE COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 



Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the board of commissioners of Burke County, Georgia, held on the 22 nd day of October, 1998. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this County Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1911 Ga. Laws, page 390, which created the board of commissioners of the county. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference— Board of commissioners, § 2-31 et seq. 

ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1994 Ga. Laws, page 4180, which created the Burke County Board of Elections and Registration. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-66 et seq. 
State Law reference— Elections generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1 et seq.; Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Created. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authorization of O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40, there is created the Burke County Board of Elections and Registration. 
(b)  For the purposes of this Act, the terms "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," "public office," "special election," and "special primary" shall have the meanings ascribed to those words by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-2, unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act; the term "board" means the board of elections and registration created by subsection (a) of this section; the term "county" means Burke County; and the term "superior court" means the Superior Court of Burke County. 
Sec. 2. - Membership. 
The board shall be composed of five members, each of whom shall be an elector and resident of the county and who shall be appointed as provided in this section. One member of the board shall be appointed by the political party which received the highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for Governor in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of the member. One member of the board shall be appointed by the political party which received the second highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for Governor in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of such member. Each of these two respective members appointed by political parties shall be nominated by the chairperson and ratified by the county executive committee of the respective political party at least 30 days before the beginning of the term of office or within 30 days after the creation of a vacancy in the office. Two members of the board shall be selected by the Board of Commissioners of Burke County, one of whom shall be elected chairperson by the board of elections. One member shall be appointed by the Burke County delegation to the Georgia General Assembly. In making the initial appointments to the board, the members shall be selected at least 45 days prior to the next general primary held after the effective date of this Act. Initial members and their successors shall be appointed for terms of four years and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. The term of each initial member shall commence upon the date of their appointment. 
Sec. 3. - Eligibility. 
No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member during the term of such elective office, and the position of any member shall be deemed vacant upon such member's qualifying as a candidate for elective public office. 
Sec. 4. - Appointment of members. 
The appointment of each member shall be made by the respective appointing authority filing an affidavit with the clerk of the superior court no later than 30 days preceding the date on which such member is to take office stating the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifying that such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. The clerk of the superior court shall record each of such certificates on the minutes of the court and shall certify the name of each such appointed member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members within the same time and in the same manner as provided by law for registrars. In the event any appointing authority fails (1) to make a regular appointment within the time specified in this section and in Section 2, or (2) to make an interim appointment to fill a vacancy within 90 days after the occurrence of such vacancy, such regular member or the member to fill such vacancy shall be appointed forthwith by the county governing authority. 
Sec. 5. - Successive terms; resignation; removal from office. 
Each member of the board shall be eligible to serve successive terms, shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of such resignation to the appointing body and to the clerk of the superior court, and shall be subject to removal from the board by the appointing body at any time, for cause, after notice and hearing, in the same manner and by the same authority as provided for removal of registrars. 
Sec. 6. - Filling of vacancies. 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any appointed member before the expiration of his or her term, by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the original appointing body shall appoint a successor to serve the remainder of the unexpired term as provided for in Section 2 of this Act. The clerk of the superior court shall be notified of interim appointments and record and certify such appointments in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. 
Sec. 7. - Oath of members. 
Before entering upon the member's duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
Sec. 8. - Organization. 
(a)  The board shall be authorized to organize itself, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate to the management of the affairs committed to its supervision; provided, however, no such action shall conflict with state law. Action and decision by the board shall be by a majority of the members of the board. The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in primaries and elections. 
(b)  The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall hold regular meetings and shall meet not fewer than six times per year. Any specially called meeting shall be called by the chairperson or any three members. The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions amended to include additions or deletions. Such written records shall be made available for the public to review. 
Sec. 9. - Contract with municipality for conduct of election. 
The board shall have the authority to contract with any municipality located within Burke County for the holding by the board of any primary or election to be conducted within such municipality. 
Sec. 10. - Compensation. 
Compensation for the members of the board, clerical assistants, and other employees shall be fixed by the Board of Commissioners of Burke County. Such compensation shall be paid wholly from county funds. 
Sec. 11. - Chief executive officer; board directives. 
The chairperson of the board shall be the chief executive officer of the board and shall generally supervise, direct, and control the administration of the affairs of the board pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board. The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. 
Sec. 12. - Assistance from Board of County Commissioners. 
The Board of Commissioners of Burke County shall provide the board with such proper and suitable offices, equipment, materials, and supplies and with such clerical assistance and other employees as the Board of Commissioners of Burke County shall deem appropriate. 
Sec. 13. - Effective date; oath of members. 
The official capacity of the board provided for under this Act shall become effective as soon as all members are duly appointed. Before entering upon his or her duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
ARTICLE III. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1991 Ga. Laws, page 4120, which created the Burke County Economic Development Authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-66 et seq. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act may be referred to as the "Burke County Economic Development Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Legislative purpose. 
The purpose of this Act is to provide for the economic development of Burke County, to develop and promote for the public good and general welfare infrastructure, trade, commerce, business, industry, research, training support services, eleemosynary institutions, and employment opportunities and promote the general welfare of this state by creating a climate favorable to the location of new industry, trade, business, commerce, research, training support services, and eleemosynary institutions and the development of existing industry, trade, business, commerce, research, training support services, and eleemosynary institutions within Burke County. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  Authority means the Burke County Economic Development Authority. 
(2)  Cost of the project or cost of any project means and includes: 
(A)  All costs of acquisition (by purchase or otherwise), construction, assembly, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation incurred in connection with any project or any part of any project; 
(B)  All costs of real property, fixtures, or personal property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project or for any facilities related thereto, including, but not limited to, the cost of all land, estates for years, easements, rights, improvements, water rights, connections for utility services, fees, franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, and certificates; the cost of securing any such franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, or certificates; and the cost of preparation of any application therefor and the cost of all fixtures, machinery, equipment, furniture, and other property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project; 
(C)  All interest and other financing charges and loan fees and all interest on revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority which accrue or are paid prior to and during the period of construction of a project and during such additional period as the authority may reasonably determine to be necessary to place such project in operation; 
(D)  All costs of engineering, surveying, and architectural and legal services and all expenses incurred by engineers, surveyors, architects, and attorneys in connection with any project; 
(E)  All expenses for inspection for any project; 
(F)  All fees of fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees for bondholders under any trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement; all expenses incurred by any such fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees; and all other costs and expenses incurred relative to the issuance of any revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations for any project; 
(G)  All fees of any type charged by the authority in connection with any project; 
(H)  All expenses of or incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of any project; 
(I)  All costs of plans and specifications for any project; 
(J)  All costs of title insurance and examinations of title with respect to any project; 
(K)  Repayment of any loans made for the advance payment of any part of the foregoing costs, including interest thereon and any other expenses of such loans; 
(L)  Administrative expenses of the authority and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any project or the financing thereof or the placing of any project in operation; and 
(M)  The establishment of a fund or funds for the creation of a debt service reserve, a renewal and replacement reserve, or such other funds or reserves as the authority may approve with respect to the financing and operation of any project and as may be authorized by any bond resolution, trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement pursuant to the provisions of which the issuance of any revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority may be authorized. 
Any cost, obligation, or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of proceeds of revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by the authority. 
(3)  Project means the acquisition, construction, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation of land, interests in land, buildings, structures, facilities, or other improvements located or to be located within Burke County, and the acquisition, installation, modification, renovation, rehabilitation, or furnishing of fixtures, machinery, equipment, furniture, or other property of any nature whatsoever used on, in, or in connection with any such land, interest in land, building, building structure, facility, or other improvement, all for the essential public purpose of the development of trade, commerce, industry, and employment opportunities in Burke County. A project may be for any industrial, commercial, business, office, parking, distribution, retail, eleemosynary, research, training, testing, service, agribusiness, communications, professional, transportation, or other similar use, or a public infrastructure use directly supporting the development of trade, commerce, and industry, provided that a majority of the members of the authority determine, by a duly adopted resolution, that the project and such use thereof would further the public purpose of this Act. 
(4)  Revenue bonds or bonds means any bonds of the authority which are authorized to be issued under the Constitution and laws of Georgia, including refunding bonds but not including notes or other obligations of the authority. 
Sec. 4. - Creation of authority. 
(a)  There is created the Burke County Economic Development Authority which shall be a body corporate and politic and is declared to be a public corporation created for the economic development of Burke County and for the improvement of the general welfare of the people of Burke County and the State of Georgia. The authority shall have a board of directors which shall consist of seven members, five of whom shall be the same as and coexistent with the members of the Board of Commissioners of Burke County and two of whom shall be the chairman and vice-chairman of the Development Authority of Burke County created pursuant to the authority of the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. The directors shall elect one of their members as chairman and another as vice-chairman and shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer, either of whom may but need not be a director. The authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(b)  (1)  (A) The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3 shall apply to all directors of the authority, and a director of the authority shall not engage in any transaction with the authority. 
(B) The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3(9) and subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall be deemed to have been complied with and the authority may purchase from, sell to, borrow from, loan to, contract with, or otherwise deal with any director or any organization or person with which any director of the authority is in any way interested or involved, provided: 
(i)  That any interest or involvement by such director is disclosed in advance to the directors of the authority and is recorded in the minutes of the authority; 
(ii)  That no director having a substantial interest or involvement may be present at that portion of any authority meeting during which discussion of any matter is conducted involving any such organization or person; and 
(iii)  That no director having a substantial interest or involvement may participate in any decision of the authority relating to any matter involving such organization or person. 
As used in this subsection, the term "substantial interest or involvement" means any interest or involvement which reasonably may be expected to result in a direct financial benefit to such director as determined by the authority, which determination shall be final and not subject to review. 
(2)  Nothing contained in paragraph (1) of this subsection or in O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3 shall be deemed to prohibit any director who is present at any meeting or who participates in any decision of the authority from providing legal services in connection with any of the undertakings of the authority or from being paid for such services. 
(c)  The directors of the authority shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
Sec. 5. - Powers of authority generally. 
(a)  The authority shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Act, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(1)  To bring and defend actions; 
(2)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(3)  To make and execute contracts, agreements, and other instruments necessary or convenient to exercise the powers of the authority or to further the public purpose for which the authority is created, including, but not limited to, contracts for construction of projects, leases of projects, contracts for sale of projects, agreements for loans to finance projects, and contracts with respect to the use of projects; 
(4)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character, or any interest therein, in furtherance of the public purpose of the authority; 
(5)  To finance (by loan, grant, lease, or otherwise), construct, erect, assemble, purchase, acquire, own, repair, remodel, renovate, rehabilitate, modify, maintain, extend, improve, install, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate, or manage projects and to pay the cost of any project from the proceeds of revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority or any other funds of the authority, or from any contributions or loans by persons, corporations, partnerships (whether limited or general), or other entities, all of which the authority is authorized to receive, accept, and use; 
(6)  To borrow money to further or carry out its public purpose and to execute revenue bonds, notes, other obligations, leases, trust indentures, trust agreements, agreements for the sale of its revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations, loan agreements, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds, security agreements, assignments, and such other agreements or instruments as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the authority, to evidence and to provide security for such borrowing; 
(7)  To issue revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority and use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying, or loaning the proceeds thereof to pay, all or any part of the cost of any project and otherwise to further or carry out the public purpose of the authority and to pay all costs of the authority incidental to, or necessary and appropriate to, furthering or carrying out such purpose; 
(8)  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, whether public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in furtherance of the authority's public purpose and to accept and use the same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by such federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
(9)  To enter into agreements with the federal government or any agency thereof to use the facilities or services of the federal government or any agency thereof in order to further or carry out the public purposes of the authority; 
(10)  To contract for any period, not exceeding 50 years, with the State of Georgia, state institutions, or any municipal corporation or county or other political subdivision of this state for the use by the authority of any facilities or services of the state or any such state institution, municipal corporation, or county, or for the use by any state institution or any municipal corporation or county of any facilities or services of the authority, provided that such contracts shall deal with such activities and transactions as the authority and any such political subdivision with which the authority contracts are authorized by law to undertake; 
(11)  To extend credit or make loans to any person, corporation, partnership (whether limited or general), or other entity for the costs of any project or any part of the costs of any project, which credit or loans may be evidenced or secured by loan agreements, notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds, security agreements, assignments, or such other instruments, or by rentals, revenues, fees, or charges, upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall determine to be reasonable in connection with such extension of credit or loans, including provision for the establishment and maintenance of reserve funds; and, in the exercise of powers granted by this Act in connection with any project, the authority shall have the right and power to require the inclusion in any such loan agreement, note, mortgage, deeds to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, assignment, or other instrument of such provisions or requirements for guaranty of any obligations, insurance, construction, use, operation, maintenance, and financing of a project, and such other terms and conditions, as the authority may deem necessary or desirable; 
(12)  Whenever revenue bonds of the authority have been validated as provided in this Act, to issue, from time to time, its notes in anticipation of the issuance of such bonds as validated and to renew, from time to time, any such notes by the issuance of new notes, whether the notes to be renewed have or have not matured. The authority may issue notes only to provide funds which would otherwise be provided by the issuance of the bonds as validated. The notes may be authorized, sold, executed, and delivered in the same manner as bonds. As with its bonds, the authority may sell such notes at public or private sale. Any resolution or resolutions authorizing notes of the authority or any issue thereof may contain any provisions which the authority is authorized to include in any resolution or resolutions authorizing bonds of the authority or any issue thereof; and the authority may include in any notes any terms, covenants, or conditions which it is authorized to include in any bonds. Validation of such bonds shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of the notes, but it shall not be required that such notes be judicially validated. Bond anticipation notes shall not be issued in an amount exceeding the par value of the bonds in anticipation of which they are to be issued. 
(13)  As security for repayment of any revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority, to pledge, mortgage, convey, assign, hypothecate, or otherwise encumber any property of the authority (including, but not limited to, real property, fixtures, personal property, contracts, rights, and revenues or other funds) and to execute any lease, trust indenture, trust agreement, agreement for the sale of the authority's revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations, loan agreement, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, assignment, or other agreement or instrument as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the authority, to secure any such revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations, which instruments or agreements may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default in any obligation of the authority, either in payment of principal, premium, if any, or interest or in the performance of any term or condition contained in any such agreement or instrument. The State of Georgia, on behalf of itself and each county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district therein, waives any right it or such county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district may have to prevent the forced sale or foreclosure of any property of the authority upon such default and agrees that any agreement or instrument encumbering such property may be foreclosed in accordance with law and the terms thereof; 
(14)  To receive and use the proceeds of any tax levied by Burke County or any municipal corporation within Burke County to pay the costs of any project or for any other purpose for which the authority may use its own funds pursuant to this Act; 
(15)  To make, receive, and administer gifts, gratuities, grants, and devises of money and property of any kind and to administer trusts; 
(16)  To use and operate any real property, personal property, or fixtures or any interest therein and to carry on any commercial activity in connection therewith or to rent or lease such property to or from others or make contracts with respect to the use and operation thereof, or to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or grant options for any such property in any manner as it deems to the best advantage of the authority and the public purpose thereof; 
(17)  To acquire, accept, or retain equitable interests, security interests, or other interests in any real property, personal property, or fixtures by loan agreement, note, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, assignment, pledge, conveyance, contract, lien, loan agreement, or other consensual transfer in order to secure the repayment of any moneys loaned or credit extended by the authority; 
(18)  To appoint, select, and employ engineers, surveyors, architects, urban or city planners, fiscal agents, attorneys, and others and to fix their compensation and pay their expenses; 
(19)  To encourage and promote the economic development of Burke County and to make, contract for, or otherwise cause to be made long-range plans or proposals for the economic development of Burke County; 
(20)  To make grants and incentives of money, property, or services designed to promote the growth of employment and the tax receipts in Burke County; 
(21)  To invest its funds, from whatever source derived, in such manner as it may deem appropriate, without further restriction, including without limitation equity investments in corporations or other legal entities including common stock, preferred stock, convertible debentures, stock options, and warrants; 
(22)  To adopt bylaws governing the conduct of business by the authority, the election and duties of officers of the authority, and other matters which the authority determines to deal with in its bylaws; 
(23)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of this state to public or private corporations which is not in conflict with the public purpose of the authority; and 
(24)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers conferred by this Act. 
(b)  The powers enumerated in each paragraph of subsection (a) of this Code section are cumulative of and in addition to those powers enumerated in the other paragraphs of subsection (a) of this section and elsewhere in this Act; and no such power limits or restricts any other power of the authority. 
Sec. 6. - Revenue bonds. 
(a)  Revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by the authority shall be paid solely from the property (including, but not limited to, real property, fixtures, personal property, revenues, or other funds) pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated, or otherwise encumbered to secure or to pay such bonds, notes, or other obligations. 
(b)  All revenue bonds, notes, and other obligations shall be authorized by resolution of the authority, adopted by a majority vote of the directors of the authority present at a regular or special meeting. 
(c)  Revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bear such date or dates, shall mature at such time or times (not more than 40 years from their respective dates), shall bear interest at such rate or rates (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time), shall be subject to redemption on such terms, and shall contain such other terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions as the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds, notes, or other obligations may permit or provide. The terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions contained in or provided or permitted by any resolution of the authority authorizing the issuance of such revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bind the directors of the authority then in office and their successors. 
(d)  The authority shall have power from time to time and whenever it deems it expedient to refund any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether or not the bonds to be refunded have matured, and may issue bonds partly to refund bonds then outstanding and partly for any other purpose permitted under this Act. The refunding bonds may be exchanged for the bonds to be refunded, with such cash adjustments as may be agreed upon, or may be sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase or redemption of the bonds to be refunded. 
(e)  There shall be no limitation upon the amount of revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations which the authority may issue. Any limitations with respect to interest rates or any maximum interest rate or rates found in O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," the usury laws of this state, or any other laws of this state shall not apply to revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority. 
(f)  Bonds and other obligations of the authority shall be validated under and in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., known as the "Revenue Bond Law." 
(g)  Bonds issued by the authority may be in such form, either coupon or fully registered, or both coupon and fully registered, and may be subject to such exchangeability and transferability provisions, as the bond resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or any indenture or trust agreement may provide. 
(h)  Bonds of the authority shall bear a certificate of validation. The signature of the clerk of the Superior Court of Burke County may be made on the certificate of validation of such bonds by facsimile or by manual execution, stating the date on which such bonds were validated; and such entry shall be original evidence of the fact of judgment and shall be received as original evidence in any court in this state. 
(i)  With respect to the validation of bonds, in lieu of specifying the rate or rates of interest which bonds to be issued by the authority are to bear, the notice to the district attorney or the Attorney General, the notice to the public of the time, place, and date of the validation hearing, and the petition and complaint for validation may state that the bonds when issued will bear interest at a rate not exceeding a maximum per annum rate of interest (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time) specified in such notices and petition and complaint or may state that, in the event the bonds are to bear different rates of interest for different maturity dates, none of such rates will exceed the maximum rate (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time) so specified; provided, however, that nothing in this Act shall be construed as prohibiting or restricting the right of the authority to sell such bonds at a discount, even if in doing so the effective interest cost resulting therefrom would exceed the maximum per annum interest rate specified in such notices and in the petition and complaint. 
(j)  The terms "cost of the project" and "cost of any project" shall have the meaning prescribed in this Act whenever those terms are referred to in bond resolutions of the authority, in bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority, or in notices or proceedings to validate such bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority. 
Sec. 7. - Authorized contents of agreements and instruments of authority generally; use of proceeds; subsequent issues. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations and procedures provided by this Act, the agreements or instruments executed by the authority may contain such provisions not inconsistent with law as shall be determined by the board of directors of the authority. 
(b)  The proceeds derived from the sale of all bonds, notes, and other obligations issued by the authority shall be held and used for the ultimate purpose of paying, directly or indirectly, as permitted by this Act, all or part of the cost of any project, or for the purpose of refunding any bonds, notes, or other obligations issued in accordance with this Act. 
(c)  Issuance by the authority of one or more series of bonds, notes, or other obligations for one or more purposes shall not preclude it from issuing other bonds, notes, or other obligations in connection with the same project or with any other projects; but the proceeding wherein any subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations are issued shall recognize and protect any prior loan agreement, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, or other agreement or instrument made for any prior issue of bonds, notes, or other obligations, unless in the resolution authorizing such prior issue the right is expressly reserved to the authority to issue subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations on a parity with such prior issue. 
Sec. 8. - Obligations of authority not public debt of state or political subdivision thereof. 
No bonds, notes, or other obligations of, and no indebtedness incurred by, the authority shall constitute an indebtedness or obligation of the State of Georgia or any county, municipal corporation, or political subdivision thereof, nor shall any act of the authority in any manner constitute or result in the creation of an indebtedness of this state or any county, municipal corporation, or political subdivision thereof. No holder or holders of any such bonds, notes, or other obligations shall ever have the right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of the state or county, municipal corporation, or political subdivision thereof, nor to enforce the payment thereof against the state or any such county, municipal corporation, or political subdivision. 
Sec. 9. - Constitutional authority for enactment of Act; tax exemption. 
This Act is enacted pursuant to authority granted the General Assembly by the Constitution of Georgia. The authority is created for nonprofit and public purposes; and it is found, determined, and declared that the creation of the authority and the carrying out of its corporate purposes is in all respects for the benefit of the people of this state and that the authority is an institution of purely public charity and will be performing an essential governmental function in the exercise of the power conferred upon it by this Act; and for such reasons the state covenants with the holders from time to time of the bonds, notes, and other obligations issued under this Act that the authority shall not be required to pay any taxes of any kind or assessments imposed by this state or any counties, municipal corporations, political subdivisions, or taxing districts thereof upon any property acquired by the authority or under its jurisdiction, control, possession, or supervision or leased by it or others or upon its activities in the purchase, use, sale, disposition, operation, or maintenance of any such property or on any income derived by the authority in the form of fees, recording fees, rentals, charges, purchase price, installments, or otherwise; and that the bonds, notes, and other obligations of the authority, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall at all times be exempt from taxation within this state. Deeds to secure debt and similar instruments given and recorded to support or to secure the bonds, notes, or obligations of the authority or to support or to secure obligations pledged in support of the bonds, notes, or obligations of the authority shall be exempt from all intangibles, intangibles recording, and other taxation within this state. 
Sec. 10. - Construction of Act; applicability of the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973." 
This Act shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. The offer, sale, or issuance of bonds, notes, or other obligations by the authority shall not be subject to regulation under O.C.G.A. § 10-5-1 et seq., known as the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973." 
ARTICLE IV. - COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1991 Ga. Laws, page 4136 known as the Burke County Project Financing Community Improvement Districts Act. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known as the "Burke County Project Financing Community Improvement Districts Act." 
Sec. 2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Act shall be to provide for the creation of one or more community improvement districts within Burke County and each municipality therein, and such districts shall be created for the provision of such of the following governmental services and facilities as may be provided for in the resolution activating each district created by this Act or any supplemental resolution amending same: 
(1)  Street and road construction and maintenance, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights, and devices to control the flow of traffic on streets and roads; 
(2)  Parks and recreational areas and facilities; 
(3)  Stormwater and sewage collection and disposal systems; 
(4)  Development, storage, treatment, purification, and distribution of water; 
(5)  Public transportation; 
(6)  Terminal and dock facilities and parking facilities; and 
(7)  Such other services and facilities as may be provided for by general law. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  Agricultural means the growing of crops for sale or raising of animals for sale or use, including the growing of field crops, fruit, or nut trees, the raising of livestock or poultry, and the operation of dairies, horse-boarding facilities, and riding stables. 
(2)  Board means the governing body created for the governance of each community improvement district authorized by this Act. 
(3)  Bonds or general obligation bonds means any bonds of a district which are authorized to be issued under the Constitution and laws of Georgia, including refunding bonds but not including notes or other obligations of a district. 
(4)  Cost of the project or cost of any project means and includes: 
(A)  All costs of acquisition (by purchase or otherwise), construction, assembly, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation incurred in connection with any project or any part of any project; 
(B)  All costs of real property, fixtures, or personal property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project or for any facilities related thereto, including, but not limited to, the cost of all land, estates for years, easements, rights, improvements, water rights, connections for utility services, fees, franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, and certificates; the cost of securing any such franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, or certificates; and the cost of preparation of any application therefor and the cost of all fixtures, machinery, equipment (including all transportation equipment and rolling stock), furniture, and other property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project; 
(C)  All interest and other financing charges and loan fees and all interest on bonds, notes, or other obligations of a district which accrue or are paid prior to and during the period of construction of a project and during such additional period as the board may reasonably determine to be necessary to place such project in operation; 
(D)  All costs of engineering, surveying, and architectural and legal services and all expenses incurred by engineers, surveyors, architects, and attorneys in connection with any project; 
(E)  All expenses for inspection of any project; 
(F)  All fees of fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees for bondholders under any trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement; all expenses incurred by any such fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees; and all other costs and expenses incurred relative to the issuance of any bonds, notes, or other obligations for any project; 
(G)  All expenses of or incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of any project; 
(H)  All costs of plans and specifications for any project; 
(I)  All costs of title insurance and examinations of title with respect to any project; 
(J)  Repayment of any loans made for the advance payment of any part of any of the foregoing costs, including interest thereon and any other expenses of such loans; 
(K)  Administrative expenses of the board and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any project or the financing thereof or the placing of any project in operation; and 
(L)  The establishment of a fund or funds for the creation of a debt service reserve, a renewal and replacement reserve, or such other funds or reserves as the board may approve with respect to the financing and operation of any project and as may be authorized by any bond resolution, trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement pursuant to the provisions of which the issuance of any bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district may be authorized. 
Any cost, obligation, or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of proceeds of bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by the district. 
(5)  District means the geographical area designated as such by the resolution of the governing body or bodies consenting to the creation of the community improvement district or as thereafter modified by any subsequent resolution of the governing body or bodies within which the district is or is to be located, or a body corporate and politic being a community improvement district created and activated pursuant to this Act, as the context requires or permits. 
(6)  Equitably apportioned among the properties subject to such taxes, fees, and assessments according to the need for governmental services and facilities created by the degree of density of development of each such property , with reference to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board, means that the burden of the taxes, fees, and assessments shall be apportioned among the properties subject thereto based upon: 
(A)  The values established in the most recent ad valorem tax reassessment of such properties certified by the chairman of the Burke County Board of Tax Assessors; or 
(B)  If so specified, such other method specified in the project specifications. 
(7)  Forestry means the planting and growing of trees for sale in a program which includes reforestation of harvested trees, regular underbrush and undesirable growth clearing, fertilizing, pruning, thinning, cruising, and marking which indicate an active tree-farming operation; it does not include the casual growing of trees on land otherwise idle or held for investment, even though some harvesting of trees may occur thereon. 
(8)  Hereby, herein, hereinunder, or herewith means under this Act. 
(9)  Project means the acquisition, construction, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation of land, interest in land, buildings, structures, facilities, or other improvements located or to be located within the district, and the acquisition, installation, modification, renovation, rehabilitation, or furnishing of fixtures, machinery, equipment, furniture, or other property of any nature whatsoever used on, in, or in connection with any such land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, or other improvement, all for the essential public purposes set forth in Section 2 of this Act, which project is a project described in the project specifications for the district. 
(10)  Project specifications means a description of the project or projects to be undertaken by the district. The project specifications must include the rates for taxes, fees, and assessments that the district may levy. The project specifications may also include as a matter of election any or all of the following: 
(A)  The maximum amounts that may be raised for any annual period by taxes, fees, and assessments; 
(B)  The maximum period of time during which such taxes, fees, and assessments may be levied; and 
(C)  A method for the equitable apportionment of such taxes, fees, and assessments. 
(11)  Property owner or owner of real property means any entity or person shown as a taxpayer for one or more parcels of real estate on the most recent ad valorem tax records of Burke County within the district as certified by the Burke County tax commissioner. Multiple owners of one parcel shall constitute one property owner and shall designate in writing one of their number to represent the whole. 
(12)  Property used nonresidentially means property used for neighborhood shopping, planned shopping center, general commercial, tourist services, office of institutional, office services, light industry, heavy industry, central business district, or other commercial or business use which does not include residential. 
(13)  Taxpayer means any entity or person paying ad valorem taxes on real property, whether on one or more parcels of property within the district. Multiple owners of one parcel shall constitute one taxpayer and shall designate in writing one of their number to represent the whole. 
Sec. 4. - Creation; project specifications; conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Pursuant to Article IX, Section VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, there is created one or more community improvement districts to be located in Burke County, Georgia, either wholly within the unincorporated area thereof, or wholly within any municipality therein, or partly within one or more municipalities and partly within the unincorporated area thereof, each of which shall be activated upon compliance with the conditions hereinafter provided, and which shall be governed by a board as hereinafter constituted. The conditions for such activation shall be: 
(1)  The delivery of a petition by any taxpayer, containing the project specifications for the proposed district, to the Board of Commissioners of Burke County and, if applicable, the governing authority of any municipality in which any part of the proposed district is to be located; 
(2)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the creation of each community improvement district and to the project specifications by: 
(A)  The Board of Commissioners of Burke County if the district is located wholly within the unincorporated area of Burke County; 
(B)  The governing authority of the municipality if the district is located wholly within the incorporated area of a municipality and wholly within Burke County; or 
(C)  The governing authorities of Burke County and any municipality in which the district is partially located if it is located partially within the unincorporated area of Burke County and partially within the incorporated area of any municipality within Burke County; and 
(3)  Written consent to the creation of the community improvement district and to the project specifications by all of the owners of real property within the district which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board of the district. 
The written consents provided for above shall be submitted to the Burke County tax commissioner who shall certify whether subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of paragraph (2) of this subsection, as applicable, have been satisfied with respect to each such proposed district. No district or board created under this Act shall transact any business or exercise any powers under this Act until the foregoing conditions are met. A copy of such resolutions shall be filed with the Secretary of State, who shall maintain a record of all districts activated under this Act, and with the Department of Community Affairs. 
(b)  The project specifications may be amended, changed, or expanded from time to time, but not so as to reduce taxes, fees, and assessments pledged to holders of bonds or other indebtedness of the district without such holder's written consent, by the adoption, certification, and filing of consents as described in paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  (1) The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3 shall apply to all directors of the district, and a director of the district shall not engage in any transaction with the district. 
(2)  The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3(9) shall be deemed to have been complied with and the district may purchase from, sell to, borrow from, loan to, contract with, or otherwise deal with any director or any organization or person with which any director of the district is in any way interested or involved, provided: 
(A)  That any interest or involvement by such director is disclosed in advance to the directors of the district and is recorded in the minutes of the district; 
(B)  That no director having a substantial interest or involvement may be present at that portion of a district meeting during which discussion of any matter is conducted involving any such organization or person; and 
(C)  That no director having a substantial interest or involvement may participate in any decision of the district relating to any matter involving such organization or person. 
As used in this paragraph, a "substantial interest or involvement" means any interest or involvement which reasonably may be expected to result in a direct financial benefit to such director as determined by the district, which determination shall be final and not subject to review. 
(3)  Nothing contained in paragraph (1) of this subsection or in O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3 shall be deemed to prohibit any director who is present at any meeting or who participates in any decision of the district from providing legal services in connection with any of the undertakings of the district or from being paid for such services. 
Sec. 5. - Administration and appointment of board members. 
(a)  Each district created pursuant hereto which lies wholly within unincorporated Burke County shall be administered by a seven-member board appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Burke County; provided, however, that so long as the directors of the Burke County Economic Development Authority, created pursuant to the provisions of an Act adopted at the 1991 regular session of the General Assembly of Georgia, shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Burke County, the members of the board of each community improvement district created under this Act shall be the same as and shall serve terms coextensive with the board of directors, as now or hereafter constituted, of the Burke County Economic Development Authority. 
(b)  Each district created pursuant hereto which lies wholly within an incorporated area in Burke County or partially within unincorporated Burke County and partially in an incorporated area of Burke County shall be administered by a board of which seven members are appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Burke County and one member is appointed by each municipality within which the community improvement district wholly or partially lies; provided, however, so long as the directors of the Development Authority of Burke County are appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Burke County, the seven members of the board of each community improvement district to be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Burke County shall be the same as and shall serve terms coextensive with the board of directors, as now or hereafter constituted, of the Burke County Economic Development Authority. The board member or members appointed by each municipality within which the community improvement district wholly or partially lies shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body which appointed such member. 
Sec. 6. - Taxes, fees, and assessments. 
(a)  The board may levy taxes, fees, and assessments within the district only on real property used nonresidentially, specifically excluding property exempt from ad valorem taxation under the Constitution or laws of the State of Georgia and all property used for residential, agricultural, or forestry purposes and specifically excluding tangible personal property and intangible property. Any tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall not exceed 2½ percent of the aggregate assessed value of all such real property; provided, however, that no tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall exceed any lesser limitation designated in the project specifications and that no tax, fee, or assessment shall be levied beyond any time limitation designated as provided in the project specifications. The taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board shall be equitably apportioned among the properties subject to such taxes, fees, and assessments according to the need for governmental services and facilities created by the degree of density of development of each such property. The proceeds of taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board shall be used only for the purpose of providing the projects described in the project specifications and not for the purpose of providing those governmental services and facilities provided to Burke County or the municipality as a whole. Any tax, fee, or assessment so levied shall be collected by Burke County if the district lies wholly or partly within the unincorporated area of Burke County, and by the municipality within which it lies if it is wholly within a municipality, in the same manner as taxes, fees, and assessments are levied by Burke County or the municipality, respectively. Delinquent taxes shall bear the same interest and penalties as Burke County or municipal ad valorem taxes, respectively, and may be enforced and collected in the same manner. The proceeds of taxes, fees, and assessments so levied shall be transmitted by Burke County or the municipality which collects same to the board and shall be expended by the board only for the purposes authorized by this Act. 
(b)  The board shall levy the taxes provided in subsection (a) of this section between January 1 and June 1 each calendar year and notify in writing the collecting governing bodies by June 15 each year so they may include the levy on their regular ad valorem tax bills. 
(c)  If, but for this provision, a parcel of real property is removed from a district or otherwise would become nontaxable it shall continue to bear its tax millage then extant upon such event, for bonded indebtedness of the district then outstanding, until said bonded indebtedness then outstanding is paid or refunded. 
Sec. 7. - Boundaries of the districts. 
(a)  The boundaries of each district shall be as designated as such by the Board of Commissioners of Burke County if wholly within the unincorporated area of Burke County and such municipalities within which the district may be partially located if partially within the unincorporated area of Burke County and partially within one or more municipalities, or by the governing authority of a municipality if wholly within the incorporated area thereof, as set forth in the resolutions required in Section 4 of this Act, or as may thereafter be added as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The boundaries of a district may be increased after the initial creation of a district pursuant to the following: 
(1)  The acquisition of written consent of all of the owners of real property within the area sought to be annexed and which will be subject to taxes, fees, and assessments levied by the board of the district; 
(2)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the annexation by the board of the district; and 
(3)  The adoption of a resolution consenting to the annexation by the governing authorities of Burke County, if any portion of the district is or is to be in the unincorporated area of Burke County, and such municipalities as may have area within the district before or after the annexation. 
Sec. 8. - Debt. 
Each district may incur debt without regard to the requirements of Section V of Article IX of the Constitution of Georgia, or any other provision of law prohibiting or restricting the borrowing of money or the creation of debt by political subdivisions of the State of Georgia, which debt shall be backed by the full faith, credit, and taxing power of the district but shall not be an obligation of the State of Georgia or any other unit of government of the State of Georgia other than the district. 
Sec. 9. - Cooperation with local governments. 
The services and facilities provided pursuant to this Act shall be provided for in a cooperation agreement executed jointly by the board and the governing body of Burke County and any municipalities within which the district is partially located. The cooperation agreement may provide that such private persons as are designated by the district perform the actual construction or improvement of the services and facilities provided by the district. The provisions of this section shall in no way limit the authority of Burke County or any such municipality to provide services or facilities within the district, and Burke County or such municipalities shall retain full and complete authority and control over any of its facilities located within its respective areas of any district. Said control shall include but not be limited to the modification of, access to, and degree and type of services provided through or by facilities of the municipality or Burke County. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit or preempt the application of any governmental laws, ordinances, resolutions, or regulations to the district or the services or facilities provided therein. 
Sec. 10. - Powers. 
(a)  Each district and its board created pursuant to this Act shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Act, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(1)  To bring and defend actions; 
(2)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(3)  To make and execute contracts, agreements, and other instruments necessary or convenient to exercise the powers of the board or to further the public purposes for which the district is created, including, but not limited to, contracts for construction of projects, leases of projects, contracts for sale of projects, agreements for loans to finance projects, and contracts with respect to the use of projects; 
(4)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character, or any interest therein, in furtherance of the public purposes of the district; 
(5)  To finance (by loan, grant, lease, or otherwise), construct, erect, assemble, purchase, acquire, own, repair, remodel, renovate, rehabilitate, modify, maintain, extend, improve, install, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate, or manage projects and to pay the cost of any project from the proceeds of bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district or any other funds of the district, or from any contributions or loans by persons, corporations, partnerships (whether limited or general), or other entities all of which the board is authorized to receive, accept, and use; 
(6)  To borrow money to further or carry out its public purposes and to execute bonds, notes, other obligations, leases, trust indentures, trust agreements, agreements for the sale of its bonds, notes, or other obligations, loan agreements, security agreements, assignments, and such other agreements or instruments as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the board, to evidence and to provide security for such borrowing; 
(7)  To issue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district and use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project and otherwise to further or carry out the public purposes of the district and to pay all costs of the board incidental to, or necessary and appropriate to, furthering or carrying out such purposes; 
(8)  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, whether public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in furtherance of the district's public purposes and to accept and use the same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by such federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
(9)  To enter into agreements with the federal government or any agency thereof to use the facilities or services of the federal government or any agency thereof in order to further or carry out the public purposes of the district; 
(10)  To contract for any period, not exceeding 50 years, with the State of Georgia, state institutions, or any municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of this state for the use by the district of any facilities or services of the state or any such state institution, municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of this state, or for the use by any state institution or any municipal corporation, county, or political subdivision of the state of any facilities or services of the district, provided that such contracts shall deal with such activities and transactions as the district and any such political subdivision with which the district contracts are authorized by law to undertake; 
(11)  Whenever bonds of the district have been validated as provided in this Act, to issue, from time to time, its notes in anticipation of the issuance of such bonds as validated and to renew, from time to time, any such notes by the issuance of new notes, whether the notes to be renewed have or have not matured. The district may issue notes only to provide funds which would otherwise be provided by the issuance of the bonds as validated. The notes may be authorized, sold, executed, and delivered in the same manner as bonds. As with its bonds, the district may sell such notes at public or private sale. Any resolution or resolutions authorizing notes of the district or any issue thereof may contain any provisions which the district is authorized to include in any resolution or resolutions authorizing bonds of the district or any issue thereof; and the district may include in any notes any terms, covenants, or conditions which it is authorized to include in any bonds. Validation of such bonds shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of the notes, but it shall not be required that such notes be judicially validated. Bond anticipation notes shall not be issued in an amount exceeding the par value of the bonds in anticipation of which they are to be issued; 
(12)  To grant, mortgage, convey, assign, or pledge its property, revenues or taxes, fees, or assessments to be received as security for its bonds, notes, or other indebtedness and obligations; 
(13)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and devises of money and property of any kind and to administer trusts; 
(14)  To use any real property, personal property, or fixtures or any interest therein or to rent or lease such property to or from others or make contracts with respect to the use thereof or to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or grant options for any such property in any manner as it deems to be in the best advantage of the district and the public purposes thereof; 
(15)  To appoint, select, and employ engineers, surveyors, architects, urban or city planners, fiscal agents, attorneys, and others and to fix their compensation and pay their expenses; 
(16)  To encourage and promote the improvement and development of the district and to make, contract for, or otherwise cause to be made long-range plans or proposals for the district in cooperation with Burke County and any municipal corporations in which the district is wholly or partially located; 
(17)  To invest its funds, whether derived from the issuance of its bonds or otherwise, in such manner as it may deem prudent and appropriate, without further restrictions; 
(18)  To adopt bylaws governing the conduct of business by the board, the election and duties of officers of the board, and other matters which the board determines to deal with in its bylaws; 
(19)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of this state to public or private corporations which is not in conflict with the public purposes of the district; and 
(20)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers conferred hereby. 
(b)  The powers enumerated in each paragraph of subsection (a) of this section are cumulative of and in addition to those powers enumerated herein and elsewhere in this Act; and no such power limits or restricts any other power of the board. 
Sec. 11. - Bonds generally. 
(a)  Notes or other obligations issued by a district other than general obligation bonds shall be paid solely from the property pledged to pay such notes or other obligations. General obligation bonds issued by any district shall constitute a general obligation of the district to the repayment of which the full faith and credit and taxing power of the district shall be pledged (subject to the power of the district to tax only in accordance with any limitations established by the project specifications). 
(b)  All bonds, notes, and other obligations of any district shall be authorized by resolution of its board, adopted by a majority vote of the board members at a regular or special meeting. 
(c)  Bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bear such date or dates, shall mature at such time or times, not more than 40 years from their respective dates, shall bear interest at such rate or rates (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time), shall be subject to redemption on such terms, and shall contain such other terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions as the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds, notes, or other obligations may permit or provide. The terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions contained in or provided or permitted by any resolution of the board authorizing the issuance of such bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bind the board members of the district then in office and their successors. 
(d)  The board shall have power from time to time and whenever it deems it expedient to refund any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether or not the bonds to be refunded have matured, and may issue bonds partly to refund bonds, then outstanding and partly for any other purpose under this Act. The refunding bonds may be exchanged for the bonds to be refunded, with such cash adjustments as may be agreed upon, or may be sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase or redemption of the bonds to be refunded. 
(e)  There shall be no limitation upon the interest rates or any maximum interest rate or rates on any bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district; and the usury laws of this state shall not apply to bonds, notes, or other obligations of these districts. 
(f)  Bonds issued by a district may be in such form, either coupon or fully registered, or both coupon and fully registered, and may be subject to such exchangeability and transferability provisions as the bond resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or any indenture or trust agreement may provide. 
(g)  Bonds issued by a district shall be validated under and in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., known as the "Revenue Bond Law." Bonds shall bear a certificate of validation. The signature of the clerk of the Superior Court of Burke County shall be made on the certificate of validation of such bonds by facsimile or by manual execution, stating the date on which such bonds were validated; and such entry shall be original evidence of the fact of judgment and shall be received as original evidence in any court in this state. 
(h)  In lieu of specifying the rate or rates of interest which such bonds are to bear and the principal amount and maturities of such bonds, the notice to the district attorney or the Attorney General, the notice to the public of the time, place, and date of the validation hearing, and the petition and complaint for validation may state that the bonds when issued will bear interest at a rate not exceeding a maximum per annum rate of interest (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time) and that the principal amount will not exceed and the final maturity date will not be later than as specified in such notices and petition and complaint or may state that, in the event the bonds are to bear different rates of interest for different maturity dates, none of such rates will exceed the maximum rate (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time) so specified; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting or restricting the right of a board to sell such bonds at a discount, even if in doing so the effective interest cost resulting therefrom would exceed the maximum per annum interest rate specified in such notices and in the petition and complaint. 
(i)  The terms "cost of the project" and "cost of any project" shall have the meaning prescribed in this Act whenever those terms are referred to in bond resolutions of a board, in bonds, notes, or other obligations of the district, or in notices or proceedings to validate such bonds, notes, or other obligations of a district. 
Sec. 12. - Authorized contents of agreements and instruments of the board generally; use of proceeds of sale of bonds, notes, etc.; subsequent issues of bonds, notes, etc. 
(a)  Subject to the limitations and procedures provided by this section and by Section 11 of this Act, the agreements or instruments executed by a board may contain such provisions not inconsistent with law as shall be determined by such board. 
(b)  The proceeds derived from the sale of all bonds, notes, and other obligations issued by a district shall be held and used for the ultimate purpose of paying, directly or indirectly, as permitted in this Act, all or part of the cost of any project, or for the purpose of refunding any bonds, notes, or other obligations issued in accordance with this Act. 
(c)  Issuance by a board of one or more series of bonds, notes, or other obligations for one or more purposes shall not preclude it from issuing other bonds, notes, or other obligations in connection with the same project or with any other projects; but the proceeding wherein any subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations are issued shall recognize and protect any prior loan agreement, security agreement, or other agreement or instrument made for any prior issue of bonds, notes, or other obligations, unless in the resolution authorizing such prior issue the right is expressly reserved to the board to issue subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations on a parity with such prior issue. 
Sec. 13. - Construction; applicability of O.C.G.A. § 10-5-1 et seq., known as the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973"; notice, proceeding, publication, referendum. 
This Act shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes of this Act. The offer, sale, or issuance of bonds, notes, or other obligations by a district shall not be subject to regulation under O.C.G.A. § 10-5-1 et seq., known as the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973." No notice, proceeding, or publication except those required by this Act shall be necessary to the performance of any act authorized by this Act, nor shall any such act be subject to referendum. 
Sec. 14. - Termination. 
So long as a district has no debt outstanding, the board of a district may terminate and dissolve the district as of a certain date, and on such date all property, rights, and obligations of the district shall devolve to Burke County, unless the district shall lie wholly within an incorporated area, in which case the property rights and obligations of the district shall devolve to the municipality in which the district shall lie. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Related Laws. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances, resolutions and other enactments embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, Burke County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the county, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Board of commissioners, board, commissioners, commission, county commission, governing authority, governing body. Each such term shall mean the board of commissioners of Burke County, Georgia. 
Chairman, other officers and officials. Whenever the word "chairman" is used it shall mean the chairman of the board of commissioners of Burke County. Whenever titles of various officers or officials are used, they shall refer to the persons holding such positions with Burke County. 
Code. The word "Code" shall mean "Code of Ordinances, Burke County, Georgia," as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Burke County, Georgia. 
County administrator. The term "county administrator" means the county administrator of Burke County, Georgia. 
Day. The word "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males or any other legal entity when applicable under federal or state law. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as described in this section. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The word "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the clerk of the commissioners' office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The word "sheriff" shall mean the sheriff of Burke County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the county. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Board of Commissioners of Burke County, as follows:…." 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Burke County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Burke County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
(16)  The resolution adopted April 16, 1945, which created the Waynesboro-Burke County Hospital Authority. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners, which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; display of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— By resolution dated June 11, 1991, the board of commissioners approved and adopted the Burke County Comprehensive Plan as a general guide for future growth, change, development and progress in the county. The plan was approved by the state department of community affairs as having met the minimum planning standards of the 1989 Georgia Planning Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. An official copy of the comprehensive plan is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Regulations pertaining to county employees on such subjects as employment policy, employee benefits and leaves of absence, travel and employee appraisals are contained in the Burke County Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual which is compiled and published separately by the county. An official copy of such manual and the retirement plan for county employees are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-6(4); the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(13); civil emergencies, ch. 18; taxation, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; offenses involving public records, documents and other items, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-6; duty of incumbent to deliver office property to successor, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-7 et seq.; records as public property, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102; records management plans for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90; records management plan required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e); supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Related laws reference— Board of commissioners, art. I. 
State Law reference— Authority to control property of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(1); county government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; county a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1 et seq.; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; matters over which governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); counties a body corporate and politic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I; county officers; election; term; compensation, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ III; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I. 

Sec. 2-31. - Meetings. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall hold regular meetings on the second Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the board. 
(b)  Special meetings may be held upon call by the chairman of the board of commissioners or any three members. Due notice of such meetings shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
(c)  Meetings shall be held in the board of commissioners' meeting room at the Burke County Courthouse in Waynesboro, Georgia. 
Sec. 2-32. - Agenda. 
There shall be a written agenda prepared prior to each board meeting. Persons who desire to address the members of the board at a meeting shall notify the county administrator's office by an agenda deadline set by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 10-14-2003) 
Sec. 2-33. - Parliamentary procedure. 
The proceedings of the board of commissioners shall be generally governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, so far as applicable and not inconsistent with the special rules of the board of commissioners and this Code. 
Secs. 2-34—2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Animal control board, § 10-1; planning commission, § 26-7.03.00 et seq. 
Related laws references— Board of elections and registration, art. II; economic development authority, art. III. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-66—2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-86. - Establishment. 
There is hereby created a Human Relations Commission for the City of Waynesboro and the County of Burke to be called the Waynesboro-Burke County Human Relations Commission, referred to in this division as the human relations commission. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-87. - Composition. 
The human relations commission shall be composed of six members, with equal representation for the black and white communities, all bona fide adult residents of the city or county. Three members shall be appointed by the city council of Waynesboro (hereinafter, "city council") and three by the board of commissioners of the county. Its membership shall represent a cross section of the community. In the interest of harmony and good will, a strict ethnic balance shall be carefully maintained in the appointment of human relations commission members. The mayor of the City of Waynesboro and the chairman of the board of commissioners of the county shall be ex officio members of the human relations commission and shall be notified of each meeting. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 2) 
Sec. 2-88. - Terms of office. 
All appointments to the human relations commission shall be for a staggered term of three years. In the event of the death, resignation or removal from office of any member, his successor shall be appointed to serve the unexpired term. Members may be reappointed at the pleasure of the city council or the board of commissioners. All members shall continue in office until their successors shall have been appointed unless removed for nonattendance or other cause. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 3) 
Sec. 2-89. - Officers and their terms of office. 
The human relations commission shall elect a chairman and such other officers as it deems necessary from its members. Such officers shall serve in their respective offices for a term of one year or until their successors shall be elected. They may, at the pleasure of the human relations commission, be reelected. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 4) 
Sec. 2-90. - Compensation. 
All members of the human relations commission shall serve without compensation. They may, upon recommendation of the executive director and approval of the body, be reimbursed for travel, meals and registration fees for seminars or training sessions related to their service. Such reimbursements shall be documented in monthly financial reports to the city council and the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 5) 
Sec. 2-91. - Executive director. 
(a)  The executive director of the human relations commission shall be employed by the city council and the board of commissioners upon recommendation of the human relations commission. The applicant should have a minimum of two years of college, which may be waived if the applicant has commensurate and satisfactory experience in positions of leadership, management and personnel. He must be able to communicate effectively with all levels of the community's citizens, from laborers to company executives. He must possess sufficient office skills to prepare correspondence, compile records, and provide basic accounting and financial reports. 
(b)  The executive director may be terminated for cause by action of a majority of both the city council and county commission upon recommendation of either or upon recommendation of the human relations commission members. 
(c)  The position of executive director shall be part-time, 20 hours per week until activity requires and both the city council and county commission approve additional hours. Initial compensation shall be determined by the city council and county commission with consideration given in subsequent years to recommendations of the human relations commission. 
(d)  Should the work load justify additional staff, request shall be presented to the city council and county commission by the human relations commission. Until such approval, no other staff members shall be employed. Voluntary assistance should be accepted and encouraged. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 6) 
Sec. 2-92. - Office space and equipment. 
The city council and the county commission shall determine needs and make provision for office space, facilities, and equipment. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 7) 
Sec. 2-93. - Budget and finance. 
(a)  The human relations commission shall prepare annual budget requests to present to the city council and county commission. All expenditures of the human relations commission shall be limited to those specified in the budget as approved by the city and county. The human relations commission shall be authorized to contract with state and/or federal agencies provided that such contracts shall first be approved by city and county governments. 
(b)  A financial report and activity statement shall be presented to both the city and county each month detailing budget expenditures and operational expenses. The activity statement will report the number of cases handled in the period and the nature of each complaint or request. Names of persons, agencies, firms or industries involved will remain confidential. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 8) 
Sec. 2-94. - Inspection and audit of financial records. 
The financial records of the human relations commission shall be audited annually by a qualified external auditor approved by the city and county. Such audit, when completed, shall be submitted to the human relations commission for approval; and a copy shall be provided the internal auditors of both the city council and county commission. All financial records of the human relations commission shall be open for inspection by the county grand jury. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 9) 
Sec. 2-95. - Meetings. 
The human relations commission shall set forth the time, place and frequency of its meetings to accomplish the purpose of this division, and such meetings shall be open to the public. The right to deliberate in closed session is reserved by the human relations commission consistent with state open meeting laws. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 10) 
Sec. 2-96. - Quorum. 
Four members of the human relations commission and the executive director shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 11) 
Sec. 2-97. - Rules and bylaws. 
The human relations commission shall adopt such rules as it deems expedient for the conduct of its business. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 12) 
Sec. 2-98. - Reports. 
The human relations commission shall submit monthly written reports of its activities to the city council and county commission. At year end, an annual report shall be submitted with budget requests summarizing the number of cases or complaints submitted to the agency and the results obtained. Such other reports as requested by the city council or county commission will be promptly supplied. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 13) 
Sec. 2-99. - Mission statement. 
The human relations commission is hereby created for the purpose of asserting, protecting and preserving human rights and liberties. To achieve that purpose, this agency will dedicate its energies and influence to mediation, negotiation, communication and investigation in all issues or situations that pose threats to civic harmony and positive human relations. It shall, whenever possible, provide a forum for discussion, debate and resolution of problems or potential problems. It shall strive to establish credibility with the entire community and thus to collect and disseminate factual information in times of unrest or distrust. The human relations commission shall undertake its mission without regard to race, religion, ethnic origin, age or sex. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 14) 
Sec. 2-100. - Labor-management disputes. 
The human relations commission will strive to assist both employers and employees in resolving questions of equal employment based on equal employment opportunity commission guidelines. It will make itself available to assist local business and industry in cases of labor-management disputes, whether the case involves individuals or groups of individuals. To enhance its effectiveness in these areas, the executive director shall attempt to establish some rapport with plant managers, corporate officers, personnel managers or owners of businesses by personal visit and/or written communication outlining services offered. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 15) 
Sec. 2-101. - Procedures. 
(a)  Upon complaint by any person alleging unlawful practices, discrimination, or unfair treatment, the executive director shall reduce the complaint to written form to be signed by the complainant and permanently filed in human relations commission records. The director shall assist the client in exhausting every avenue of reconciliation. 
(b)  The director shall attempt to assist both parties to arrive at a fair and equitable settlement, carefully investigating all charges and countercharges. He may request records pertaining to the complainant's performance, attendance and other documents relevant to the case. 
(c)  If no solution can be reached and he deems it advisable, the director, with approval of all parties involved, may submit the matter to the human relations commission for arbitration. 
(d)  If violations of fair labor practices are discovered, the director shall endeavor to eliminate any such infraction by informal and voluntary means. If all efforts fail to provide a solution and the director and the human relations commission have exhausted every means at their disposal, the case may be referred to the equal employment opportunity commission for appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 16) 
Sec. 2-102. - Exemptions. 
This division shall not apply to religious corporations, religious associations, religious educational institutions, or religious societies with respect to the employment of individuals of a particular religion to perform work connected with the conduct by such corporations, associations, educational institutions or societies of its activities. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 17) 
Sec. 2-103. - Cooperation. 
The human relations commission is encouraged to invite and enlist the cooperation of all ethnic, racial, religious groups and community organizations in carrying on its work and to act as a coordinating agency among them and such other groups in the establishment and maintenance of educational programs designed to accomplish its purpose of improving human relations. It shall readily cooperate with the mayor and council, county commission, the board of education, and all other agencies to inform the community of services available and to encourage peaceful and effective methods of solving community problems. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 18) 
Sec. 2-104. - Legal services. 
Legal representation, advice and review of contracts and other records shall be provided by the city and county attorneys. Obtaining legal representation other than city or county attorneys shall require the written consent of both governing bodies. 
(Ord. of 8-8-93, § 19) 
Secs. 2-105—2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - JOINT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown development authority created, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-4; Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-126. - Statement of support. 
The board of commissioners hereby supports the formation of a joint development authority in the counties of Wilkes, Warren, Lincoln, Columbia, Jefferson, Washington, Burke, McDuffie, and Glascock and urges CEDO region 7 to pursue the formation and activation of such a joint authority. 
(Res. of 12-18-94) 
Sec. 2-127. - Appointment of members. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall appoint one member who shall serve initially for a period of two years and a second member that shall serve initially for a period of four years. Thereafter, all members appointed shall serve for a period of four years. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall appoint only two members to the Central Savannah River Area Unified Development Authority at any time. The term of office of such appointment shall be determined by the bylaws of the authority following its initial composition. Any person appointed to serve on the Central Savannah River Area Unified Development Authority shall be a resident of Burke County prior to the appointment. 
(Res. of 12-28-94) 
Secs. 2-128—2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-01, § 2, adopted March 8, 2005, repealed Div. 4, § 2-151, which pertained to the recreation commission. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 2-151—2-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-176. - Hospital authority. 
(a)  Pursuant to a resolution, adopted April 16, 1945, declaring the need for a hospital authority and in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72, the Waynesboro-Burke County Hospital Authority was created and established. 
(b)  Pursuant to unofficial opinion U70-217 (11-19-70) issued by the state attorney general and in accordance with 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2656 as amended by 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3976, it was provided that all vacancies on the hospital authority board would be filled by appointment of the governing authority of the county. Likewise, by resolution adopted February 20, 1979, it was agreed by the city and county that new members of the board would be appointed by the county. The resolution adopted April 9, 1991, provided that the hospital authority would consist of a five-member board of trustees serving staggered terms. 
Secs. 2-177—2-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-196. - Position created. 
There is hereby created the office of county administrator. The administrator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. In addition to the duties contained in this article, the administrator shall assume all such other duties as assigned by the board from time to time and as contained in any job description for the position as may be adopted by the board and as same may be amended. 
Sec. 2-197. - Qualifications. 
The county administrator shall be chosen by the board of commissioners solely upon the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with specific reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of the office as set forth in this division or as further defined by the board. No member of the board shall be appointed administrator during the term of office for which he is elected. 
Sec. 2-198. - Duties. 
The board of commissioners shall be the executive entity of the county. It shall be the duty of the board to set overall executive policy and procedures for the county. The county administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the county and head of the administrative branch of county government. The administrator shall be responsible to the board for the proper and efficient administration of all affairs of the county over which the administrator has jurisdiction. It shall be the duty of the administrator to: 
(1)  Supervise, direct, and evaluate assigned staff, processing employee concerns and problems, directing work, counseling, disciplining, and completing employee performance appraisals; appoint, suspend, discharge, or remove department managers with approval of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Direct daily operations and activities of the county. 
(3)  Enforce or assist in implementation of all ordinances, resolutions and orders of the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Develop and review comprehensive and strategic plans to meet county goals and objectives. 
(5)  Coordinate board of commissioners' meetings; prepare agendas for commission meetings; compile information for agenda items and make recommendations; record and prepare minutes of commission meetings. 
(6)  Conduct official correspondence on behalf of the board of commissioners; serve as custodian of all commission records. 
(7)  Consult with board of commissioners and elected/appointed officials as needed to review county activities, provide recommendations, resolve problems, and receive advice/direction. 
(8)  Communicate with county departments, employees, state/federal government representatives, the public, the media, and other individuals as needed to coordinate activities, review status of work, exchange information, resolve problems, or give/receive advice/direction. 
(9)  Consult with assigned staff to review work requirements, status, and problems; assist in interpreting laws and regulations; assist with complex or problem situations; provide direction, advice, and technical expertise. 
(10)  Perform public relations functions with the news media and the public; provide information and education relating to county programs, plans and policies; give speeches and presentations. 
(11)  Prepare proposed county budgets; review and enforce compliance with budget. 
(12)  Direct all financial and accounting functions, including payroll, accounts payable, accounts receivable, preparation of annual reports, and maintenance of records. 
(13)  Assist with the preparation of state and federal grants. 
(14)  Serve as county purchasing agent; approve expenditures for purchasing. 
(15)  Exercise responsibility for all county property. 
(16)  Serve as county personnel officer; oversee all personnel-related matters. 
(17)  Compile and/or monitor various administrative and/or statistical data pertaining to county operations; perform research as needed; make applicable calculations; identify and analyze trends; prepare or generate reports; maintain records. 
(18)  Attend meetings; serve on committees as needed make speeches or presentations. 
(19)  Maintain a comprehensive, current knowledge and awareness of applicable laws/regulations; maintain an awareness of new trends and advances in the profession; read professional literature; maintain professional affiliations; attend workshops and training sessions as appropriate. 
Sec. 2-199. - Board of commissioners authorized to assign or modify responsibilities. 
The board of commissioners shall have full authority to assign additional responsibilities to the administrator or to restrict or modify the responsibilities previously assigned. The modifications in responsibilities as contemplated in this section may be established by the board by ordinance, written directives to the administrator, modification of job descriptions or by such other method as may be determined by the board consistent with good management practices. 
Sec. 2-200. - Term of office. 
The county administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners and may be terminated by majority vote of the board. 
Sec. 2-201. - Bond required; amount. 
The county administrator shall be required to execute and deliver a good and sufficient bond payable to the county, such bond to be approved by the board of commissioners and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the administrator. The amount of the bond shall be determined from time to time by the board and the cost of procurement of the bonds shall be the responsibility of the county. The bond shall be delivered to the board within five days of the administrator assuming the duties of the office and shall be filed by the chairman of the board in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
Sec. 2-202. - Compliance with all applicable laws, policies, etc. 
All actions of the county administrator shall be taken and performed consistent with and in compliance with all federal and state laws, local ordinances, and policies and directives as may be established by the board of commissioners. 
Chapter 3 - COURTS 
ARTICLE I. - INDIGENT DEFENSE SERVICES 

Sec. 3-1. - Application 
for indigent defense services. 
Each person lacking the financial ability to provide, for themselves, representation in his or her defense in criminal proceedings in the state court and the Magistrate Court of Burke County, and desiring that the county provide such services to him or her, shall submit an application to the county requesting indigent defense representation and setting forth the specifics supporting their need for such indigent representation. 
The application shall be submitted to the public defender upon first appearance on a form approved by the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 3-8-2005) 
Sec. 3-2. - Application fee. 
Each applicant for indigent defense services shall pay an application fee of $50.00 to the clerk of the court in which indigent representation is being sought. Such fee must be paid either at the time the application is submitted or at the time representation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 3-8-2005) 
Sec. 3-3. - Waiver. 
The fee required by section 3-2 of this article may be waived only upon order of the presiding judge scheduled to hear the case in which the applicant is seeking a waiver of the application fee. The judge may order a waiver of the fee only upon finding by the court that the defendant is unable to pay the fee or that paying the fee would cause hardship to the defendant. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 3-8-2005) 
Sec. 3-4. - Transfer of funds. 
Within ten days after the end of each month, the clerks of the courts in receipt of application fees required by section 3-2 of this article shall remit the total of all application fees collected during the previous month to the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 3-8-2005) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, adopted Dec. 9, 2014, amended Ch. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-66, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 4-11-77, §§ 1—31; Ord. of 6-11-85, § I; Ord. of 8-13-96; Ord. of 9-9-86; Ord. No. 10-01 § 1, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 12-06, § 1, 12-11-2012. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Distilled spirits or liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Malt beverage and beer means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Retailer or retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes but is not limited to all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Sales on election days. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b)(2)(B), the sale by wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages, to wit, distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages, shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; however, nothing in this section shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Secs. 6-3—6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 6-36. - Sales; licenses; qualifications. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold in the unincorporated area of the county except at an established place of business that has been issued a license as provided in this article. 
(b)  A license shall be granted only to natural persons who are either owners, shareholders, directors, officers or managers of the proposed business. Each license shall be valid only for one establishment at the address stated in the license. No license shall be granted to any person who is not at least 21 years of age, of good moral character, financially responsible, and who meets all other requirements of state and federal laws and regulations governing the sale of such beverages, and who has submitted proper application and complied with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-37. - Duration. 
All alcoholic beverage licenses shall be issued for a period of one year at a time, effective from January 1 through December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-38. - Classes; licenses fees. 
(a)  Class A. A class A license shall authorize the sale of beer and wine in the broken package for consumption on the premises, only in restaurants, private clubs and golf courses. As used in this subsection, "restaurant" shall mean a business that serves hot food prepared on premises and which derives at least 60 percent of its total annual gross income from the sale of prepared meals. "Private club" shall mean a bona fide membership club affiliated with a nationally chartered organization which has at least 25 local regular dues-paying members and/or qualifies as a tax-exempt, nonprofit organization under the United States Internal Revenue Code. Such restaurants and clubs shall have a seating capacity of a least 20 people. "Golf courses" shall mean regular, standard golf courses of not less than nine holes. The annual fee for such license shall be $300.00. 
(b)  Class B. A class B license shall authorize the sale of beer and wine only in the unbroken package for take-out and consumption off the premises. The annual fee for such license shall be $300.00. 
(c)  Class C. A class C license shall authorize the sale of distilled spirits in the broken package for consumption on the premises, only in restaurants, private clubs and golf courses. As used in this subsection, "restaurant" shall mean a business that serves hot food prepared on premises and which derives at least 60 percent of its total annual gross income from the sale of prepared meals. "Private club" shall mean a bona fide membership club affiliated with a nationally chartered organization which has at least 25 local regular dues-paying members and/or qualifies as a tax-exempt, nonprofit organization under the United States Internal Revenue Code. Such restaurants and clubs shall have a seating capacity of a least 20 people. "Golf courses" shall mean regular, standard golf courses of not less than nine holes. The annual fee for such license shall be $800.00. 
(d)  Separate licenses required. A separate license shall be required for each separate establishment regardless of ownership. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-39. - Applications; advertisement; fee. 
(a)  All applications for licenses under this article shall be made in writing on forms to be furnished by the county administrator and shall contain such information as the administrator may require. The application shall disclose that the applicant has furnished the sheriff's department with the fingerprints of the applicant as required by state law. 
(b)  Each such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $125.00, to be paid by certified check, cashier's check or money order. Upon receipt thereof and determination by him that the application is in proper form, the administrator shall cause a notice of the application to be published once a week for three weeks in the newspaper in which sheriff's advertisements for the county are published. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-40. - Contents of application. 
(a)  All applications for licenses under this article shall be verified by or on behalf of the applicant and shall disclose, in addition to such other information as may be required: 
(1)  The name, residence, location and mailing address of the applicant. 
(2)  Whether the license is to be used in a business that is an individual proprietorship, partnership, corporation or trade name. If a corporation, the application shall include the names and addresses of all shareholders, directors, officers and real persons at interest. If a partnership, the application shall state the names and addresses of all partners therein. If a trade name or individual, the application shall also state the names and addresses of all owners or parties having an interest therein. In any event, the application shall state the names of all persons holding any note, mortgage, or bill of sale to secure debt against the business. 
(3)  The location at which the establishment is to be conducted, and a description of the building in which the business is to be conducted, indicating the size and type of construction. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any partner, shareholder, director, officer, owner or real party in interest has been convicted during the last ten years of any crime, misdemeanor or a violation of any municipal ordinance (other than minor traffic offenses) in any state, county, municipal or federal court, and the particulars of same. 
(5)  The prior business addresses of the applicant for the past ten years. 
(6)  Names and addresses of three persons who have known the applicant (or the shareholders, directors, officers, agents thereof) for the past five years. 
(7)  Whether the applicant or any shareholder, officer, director or other persons connected with the applicant holds or has held any beer, wine or liquor license in the state at any time prior to the application, and the particulars thereof. 
(8)  The name and address of the person who will manage the establishment or be responsible for its operation. 
(9)  A plat or drawing prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer showing the proximity of the proposed place of business to any of the institutions or facilities set forth in section 6-47. 
(10)  The certification required by section 6-62. 
(11)  Such other information as the county administrator or other county authority may require, either initially, at any time during consideration of the application, or at any time thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-41. - Notice to sheriff. 
The county administrator shall also furnish a copy of each application for a license under this article to the sheriff, who shall file his recommendation with the county commissioners' office within 15 days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-42. - Objections. 
Any person residing or doing business in the county may file objections in writing to the application for a license under this article. Such objections shall be filed not later than three days after publication of the last advertisement required under section 6-39. Such objections shall state: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the objectors; 
(2)  The interest of objectors and how they would be affected by the granting of the license; 
(3)  The distance in miles from the objector's residence or place of business to the establishment of the proposed licensee; 
(4)  The nature of the objection and the grounds thereof; and 
(5)  Where objection is filed on behalf of more than three persons, the name and address of one person or representative of the group authorized to receive notices relating to the application and all hearings thereon. 
It shall not be a valid objection to the issuance of a license that the objector is opposed generally to the sale of alcoholic or malt beverages. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-43. - Notice to applicant. 
A copy of all objections filed as provided in section 6-42 shall be mailed to the applicant for a license under this article at the address stated in the application, by certified mail, return receipt requested. Both the objectors and the applicant shall be given notice of the time and place of the hearing on the application by certified mail, return receipt requested, deposited in the U.S. mail at least five days prior to the hearing on the license. 
If the county administrator determines that the application for a license under this article is in proper form, that no valid objections have been filed thereto, that the sheriff has not recommended against grant of the license, and that no valid reason appears why the license should not be granted, he may issue the license without hearing upon receipt of the applicable fee, paid by certified check, cashier's check or money order. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-45. - Contested applications; denial. 
No license under this article shall be denied except after opportunity for a hearing has been given. If the county administrator determines that valid objections have been filed to the application, or if the sheriff has recommended against the application, or if the administrator has reason to believe that grounds exist for denying the license, or if the administrator is uncertain as to whether the license should be granted, he shall schedule the matter for hearing before the commissioners and give notice of the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall also be accompanied by a written statement of the grounds upon which the sheriff or county administrator opposes grant of the license; and if not already mailed as provided in section 6-43, a copy of all written objections filed to the application by any other person. Such notice shall be given within the same time and manner provided by section 6-43. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-46. - Hearing procedure. 
At the hearing provided for in section 6-45, all witnesses shall be sworn and subject to cross examination. The strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law shall not apply. The commissioners may designate any member of the state bar as hearing officer to conduct the hearing either in or outside its presence. If outside their presence, the hearing officer shall make written findings of fact, conclusions of law and recommendations and submit them to the commissioners within ten days after conclusion of the hearing. A copy of the findings, conclusions and recommendations shall be mailed to the applicant or his representative by certified mail, return receipt requested; and he shall be entitled to file written exceptions thereto within five days after the date of such mailing. Upon failure to file such exceptions, the applicant consents to a decision on the application by the commissioners without further hearing. If the applicant files such exceptions within the required time, the matter shall be heard at the next regular or special meeting of the commissioners held not sooner than five days thereafter; and the applicant or his representative shall be notified of the hearing. At all hearings, the county authorities shall be entitled to open and conclude. No objections filed by any person shall be considered unless such person or a representative is present at the hearing and presents evidence in support of the objection. If the applicant fails to appear at any hearing on the application, the application shall be denied forthwith without hearing; and if the applicant fails to furnish any information or to produce any records reasonably required by county authorities, the application may be denied without consideration of the merits thereof. Except when prevented by providential cause or due to the fault of the applicant, all applications shall be finally determined within six months of filing thereof. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-47. - Proximity; schools; churches; playgrounds. 
(a)  No license shall be issued under this article when the place of business of the licensee is located within 200 yards of any church, library, school, park or playground. As used herein, "park or playground" shall include, but is not limited to, parks or playgrounds owned or operated by the county or any municipality in the county. 
(b)  All distances set forth in subsection (a) shall be measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street or highway. Measurement starts at the property line of the school, church, library, parks and playgrounds to the entrance of the building or proposed building where beverages are sold. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-48. - Standards. 
In considering applications for licenses under this article, the commissioners shall be guided by the following: 
(1)  The moral character, reputation and prior criminal record of the applicant or of any shareholder, director, officer, agent or employee thereof, or of any person having any interest in the proposed establishment. 
(2)  The credit standing of the applicant and his reputation for payment of bills, debts and obligations. 
(3)  Whether the location of the proposed establishment would present a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(4)  The existence and number of existing licenses within the immediate vicinity of the location of the proposed establishment. 
(5)  The character of the community or neighborhood in which the establishment is to be located, whether residential, commercial or industrial. 
(6)  Whether due to proximity or other reasons, the proposed establishment would present a danger that substantial numbers of minors would be brought into contact with the establishment or persons frequenting same. 
(7)  Any valid objections made in writing by any person. 
(8)  Whether the applicant has furnished false information in connection with the application. 
(9)  Whether the proposed establishment has complied with all other state, federal and local laws or regulations, including but not limited to those promulgated by the state and local boards of health, and the state fire marshal. 
(10)  The number of such establishments or licenses already owned or held by the applicant or any other person connected therewith. 
(11)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, whether or not he has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(12)  If applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(13)  Whether the applicant or anyone connected therewith has previously had an alcoholic beverages license suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-49. - Transfers. 
No license granted under this article shall be transferred, but a new application for license must be filed. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-50. - Renewal. 
Licenses under this article are granted for one year at a time, and no person acquires any property interest or expectancy of continuation by reason of the grant of any license under this article. All applications for renewal of an existing license shall be filed in writing between November 1 and December 1 of each year and shall furnish such information as the county administrator may require and shall be accompanied by the license fee set forth in section 6-38. The renewal license shall be granted unless the administrator or commission has reason to believe that good cause exists for denying the renewal, in which event the applicant shall be given notice in writing setting forth the grounds upon which the license renewal may be denied. Such notice shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail at least five days prior to the hearing to be held thereon, and shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing. In all other respects, the same procedures and requirements shall govern the granting or denial of the renewal license as set forth in sections 6-45, 6-46 and 6-48. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-51. - Sales regulated; illegal acts. 
(a)  Licensees operating under a class A and/or class C license shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. Sunday to 12:30 p.m. Sunday and Sundays from 12:00 midnight until 6:00 a.m. Monday. 
(b)  Licensees operating under a class B license shall not engage in the sale of beer and wine between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays, between the hours of 12:00 midnight Saturday night to 12:30 p.m. Sunday and Sundays from 12:00 midnight until 6:00 a.m. Monday. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold to any person who is obviously already under the influence thereof, or of any drugs. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, bartered or given away to any minor, nor to any person who is mentally incompetent. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-52. - Inspection. 
All establishments operating under a license granted under this article shall be subject to inspection by the sheriff or other state or county authorities at any time, without prior notice, warrant or authority. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-53. - Revocation. 
Any license granted under this article may be revoked, after notice and opportunity for hearing, for: 
(1)  Violation or conviction of any state or federal law or regulation, other than minor traffic and other minor offenses having no relationship to the applicant's fitness to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Violation of any provision of this article or of any other state or county regulations. 
(3)  Furnishing false information in connection with any license application or renewal application. The applicant shall be given notice in writing, stating the grounds for such revocation, and the time and place of the hearing thereon. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least five days prior to the hearing, or shall be served in person on the licensee at least three days prior thereto. In all other respects, the same procedures and provisions set forth in sections 6-45, 6-46 and 6-48 shall govern such revocation proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-54. - Ineligibility. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected or full-time appointed employee of the county, or his spouse or minor children, to hold any license under this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-55. - Duty to commence business. 
All applications for licenses under this article must, within 180 days after the approval of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the application and license, and begin the sale of the product or products authorized by the license. Failure to open the establishment and begin the sale as referred to above within the 180-day period shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license, and no refund of license fee shall be made to the license holder. Extensions of time under this section shall be granted only by the county commission. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-56. - Ceasing operation. 
Any holder of a license under this article who shall begin the operation of the business and sale of the product and products as authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized in the license, shall, after the three-month period, automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-57. - Display. 
The county license required by this article shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view at the place of business of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-58. - Posting of prices. 
Licensees under this article shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, or on an exposed sign prominently placed, the price of all alcoholic beverages exposed or offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-59. - Applications; data, information requirement. 
All applicants for licenses under this article shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the county; and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall be grounds for dismissal of the application. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person involved in any transaction pertinent to the application requested by the county administrator. Failure to produce such evidence or person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the dismissal of the application. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-60. - Order of consideration of applications. 
All applications presented shall be noted as to the date and exact time of filing and such applications shall be presented, heard and considered by the board of commissioners in the order of their filing. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-61. - Regulations maintained on premises. 
It shall be the duty of the management of the premises licensed under this article to maintain a copy of this chapter on such premises, and to instruct each and every employee on the terms of such chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-62. - Regulations; certification. 
No person shall be approved for a license pursuant to this article or approved for employment by a licensee, unless such person shall have read this chapter in full text, and certify in writing the fact of such reading and the knowledge of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-63. - Employee's identification card. 
All employees of any establishment licensed pursuant to this article shall obtain an identification card as prescribed by the county sheriff's department, and must comply with all state and federal laws and regulations regarding alcoholic beverages. No employee shall be allowed to work for a licensee under this article without the identification card as prescribed by the sheriff's department, and no such identification card shall be issued to any person who has been convicted by any state or federal court of any felony or of any laws or regulations governing alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-64. - Building requirements. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold under any license granted pursuant to this article in any mobile home or other temporary structure, in any dilapidated structure, nor in any building or other structure not safe for human habitation. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Sec. 6-65. - Waiver. 
All notices and other procedural rights and provisions in this article provided may be waived, and shall be deemed to have been waived unless timely objection has been made thereto. No defect in any notice, statement of grounds, or of the proper mailing or service thereof shall be valid unless written objection pointing out the grounds thereof are filed with the office of the county commissioners in the courthouse at least two days prior to any scheduled hearing or action thereon, except where due to providential cause such objections could not be filed within that time, but in any event, such objections shall be filed at the earliest practicable time. 
(Ord. No. 14-02 , § 1, 12-9-14) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Zoological park, § 26-4.03.12. 
State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; fish, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-30 et seq.; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

Sec. 10-1. - Dangerous dog control board. 
(a)  There is created and established a dangerous dog control board to consist of three members appointed by the board of commissioners of the county. The purpose of the dangerous dog control board shall be to conduct the hearings provided for in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. 
(b)  No member of the dangerous dog control board shall participate in a hearing on any matter in which such member previously participated in the classification of the dog at issue. If a vacancy occurs during the term of any member by reason of death, resignation, or otherwise, the appointment of a successor by the board of commissioners shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of such member. 
(Mo. of 3-22-96; Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, 6-9-2009) 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-66 et seq. 
Sec. 10-2. - Dangerous dog control officer. 
The board of commissioners shall appoint a dangerous dog control officer, who shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. The dog control officer's compensation shall be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Mo. of 3-22-96; Ord. No. 09-01, § 2, 6-9-2009) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Land development code, ch. 26; roads and bridges, ch. 30. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY NUMBERING 

Sec. 14-31. - Numbers assigned. 
Every dwelling unit and places of business shall be assigned a number for the purposes of a designated address to which all dwelling units and places of business on all public and private roads shall be assigned by the property numbering project in accordance with the procedures adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 2-11-92, § I(A)) 
Sec. 14-32. - Property numbering project. 
(a)  The property numbering project, as designates of the board of commissioners, shall assign numbers to all dwelling units and places of business and shall keep a record of all numbers or addresses assigned under this article. 
(b)  The property numbering project is a temporary committee by authority of the board of commissioners to initiate and maintain this system until a permanent agency be named by the authority. 
(Ord. of 2-11-92, § I(B)) 
Sec. 14-33. - Assignment of numbers. 
(a)  All properties, lots and parcels of land occupied by dwelling units or places of business within the unincorporated limits of the county shall be identified by reference to the uniform numbering system adopted in this article. All existing numbered buildings on lots or parcels not in conformity with this system shall be changed within six months from the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives so as to conform with this system. 
(b)  Every principal business and dwelling unit shall bear the number assigned to it by the property numbering project; and where more than one business or dwelling unit occupies a single structure, each unit shall bear, in addition to the basic number assigned to the structure, the supplementary numerals and/or letters assigned to it. 
(c)  Numbers and/or letters indicating the official property number shall be posted at the entrance in such a manner as to provide an unobstructed sighting from the street or road in which the building is located. Numbers and/or letters indicating a designated address shall be posted with numbers and/or letters with a height of not less than two inches and no more than eight inches. Because of the rural characteristics of lots and parcels of land, where dwelling units or places of business exist, the assigned number(s) should be displayed in the following manner: 
(1)  On a plate perpendicular to the street or road and parallel to the driveway with numbers on both sides as to be viewed from either direction; or 
(2)  The assigned number may be displayed on a shingle-type base perpendicular to the street or road and parallel to the driveway. The post for the assigned number, whether plate or shingle, shall be a minimum of one foot from the ground and no more than a height of three feet. 
(d)  So as to maintain uniformity in the system, all numbers must be posted on the street at the entranceway of the designated building. The posted number shall not occupy a place on the right-of-way of the road as to interfere with the scheduled maintenance of the road. It shall be the duty of the property owner or the occupant to affix the number. It shall also be the duty of the property owner or occupant to remove all other numbers that might be mistaken for or confused with the number assigned. 
(e)  Upon receipt of notification of a new number, the property owner or occupant, within 60 days, shall affix the assigned number in the aforementioned manner. 
(f)  No person shall adopt, assign, display or cite any number other than that assigned as provided in this section for the purpose of property identification or for the purpose of designating location of property. 
(Ord. of 2-11-92, § II) 
Sec. 14-34. - New structures. 
(a)  No certificate of occupation or permit shall be issued to any subdivisional plat until the owner has procured from the board of commissioners or its designee an official number for the proposed development site. Final approval for any building erected on this site will be withheld until numbers have been assigned to every dwelling unit or places of business in accordance with requirements of this article. Numbers will be assigned to each proposed lot or tract upon the erection of a dwelling unit or place of business. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the owner, builder, contractor or developer has procured from the board of commissioners or its designee the official number of the premises. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy will be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the requirement of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-11-92, § III) 
Sec. 14-35. - The system. 
(a)  United States Highway 25 (US 25), Georgia Highway 56 (Ga. 56), Georgia Highway 24 (Hwy. 24) are used as primary reference roads. All roads intersecting these roads will be measured from the primary reference roads as the beginning point. 
(b)  Georgia Highway 80 (Ga. 80) is not used as a primary road; however all roads intersecting Ga. 80 will be measured from Ga. 80 as the starting point. All secondary paved county roads will be used as the starting point for all intersecting roads. 
(c)  Numbers are to be assigned to or reserved for each 20 feet of distance. 
(d)  Odd numbers are to be assigned to property on the south and west sides of the street (left sides) and even numbers assigned to property on the east and north sides of the streets (right sides). 
(Ord. of 2-11-92, § IV) 
Sec. 14-36. - Penalty. 
Violators of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 2-11-92, § V) 
Chapter 16 - HEALTH CODES 
ARTICLE I. - TOURIST COURTS AND ACCOMMODATIONS 

Sec. 16-1. - Tourist courts and tourist accommodations. 
The operation and maintenance of tourist courts and tourist accommodations shall be according to the rules and regulations of the Department of Human Resources, Chapter 290-5-18 Tourist Accommodations, as adopted by the Georgia Department of Human Resources (filed March 5, 1996), and such rules and regulations as they may be hereafter amended by said department of human resources, said rules and regulations being hereby incorporated into, and made a part of the Code of Ordinances of Burke County, subject to the enforcement provisions herein. The term "tourist accommodation" means a tourist court as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 as any facility consisting of two or more rooms or dwelling units providing lodging and other accommodations tourists and travelers and includes tourist courts, tourist cottages, tourist homes, trailer parts, trailer courts, motels, motor hotels, hotels, and any similar place by whatever name called and any food, beverage, laundry, recreational or other facilities or establishments operated in conjunction therewith. This definition includes any facility consisting of two or more rooms or dwelling units either joined together or separate on a common piece of property, furnished for pay, and further includes campgrounds, recreational vehicle parks, and bed and breakfast inns. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 16-2. - Enforcement. 
The Burke County Board of Health or its authorized agent shall be authorized to enforce this article and to enter upon and inspect the premises of any tourist court or tourist accommodation establishment, as defined herein. 
Each and every tourist court or tourist accommodation establishment subject to inspection under the provisions of this article shall be required to pay to the Burke County Board of Health an annual inspection fee as determined by the board of health and approved by the county commission, due within 30 days of receipt of notification from the board of health. Establishments failing to pay said fee shall be considered in violation of the provisions of this article. 
The Burke County Board of Health or its authorized agent shall be authorized to issue citations for violations of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 16-3. - Violations. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 05-03, 4-12-2005) 
Secs. 16-4—16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD SERVICES AND ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 16-21. - Operation and maintenance of food service establishments. 
The operation and maintenance of food service establishments shall be according to the rules and regulations of the Department of Human Resources Public Health, Chapter 290-5-14 Food Service, as adopted by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, said rules and regulations being hereby incorporated into, and made a part of the Code of Ordinances of Burke County, subject to the enforcement provisions herein. A "food service establishment" as defined by the said rules and regulations is any establishment for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term includes: restaurants; coffee shops; cafeterias; short. order cafes; luncheonettes; taverns; lunchrooms; places which manufacture, wholesale, or retail sandwiches or salads; soda fountains; institutions, both public and private; food carts; itinerant restaurants; industrial cafeterias; catering establishments; food vending machines and vehicles and operations connected therewith; and similar facilities by whatever name called. The term "food service establishment" shall not mean a "food sales establishment," as defined in O.C.G.A. § 26-2-21, which does not provide seating or facilities for consumption of food on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 16-22. - Enforcement. 
The Burke County Board of Health or its authorized agent shall be authorized to enforce this article and to enter upon and inspect the premises of any food service establishment as provided in O.C.G.A. § 2-5-31. 
Each and every food service establishment subject to inspection under the provisions of this article shall be required to pay to the Burke County Board of Health an annual inspection fee as determined by the board of health and approved by the county commission, due within 30 days of receipt of notification from the board of health. Establishments failing to pay said fee shall be considered in violation of the provisions of this article. 
The Burke County Board of Health or its authorized agent shall be authorized to issue citations for violations of the provisions of this article or of O.C.G.A. § 13-2-26. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 16-23. - Violations. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, 4-12-2005) 
Secs. 16-24—16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TATTOO STUDIOS, TATTOO ARTISTS AND BODY ART BUSINESSES 

Sec. 16-31. - Operation and maintenance of tattoo studio, tattoo artists and body art business. 
The operation and maintenance of tattoo studios, tattoo artists, and body art business shall be according to the rules and regulations of the Burke County Board of Health said rules and regulations being hereby incorporated into, and made a part of the Code of Ordinances of Burke County, subject to the enforcement provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 16-32. - Enforcement. 
The Burke County Board of Health or its authorized agent shall be authorized to enforce this article and to enter upon and inspect the premises of any tattoo studios, tattoo artists, and body art business as provided in the rules and regulations set out by the Burke County Board of Health. 
Each and every tattoo studios, tattoo artists, and body art business subject to inspection under the provisions of this ordinance shall be required to pay to the Burke County Board of Health an annual inspection fee as determined by the board of health and approved by the county commission, due within 30 days of receipt of notification from the board of health. Establishments failing to pay said fee shall be considered in violation of the provisions of this article. 
The Burke County Board of Health or its authorized agent shall be authorized to issue citations for violations of the provisions of this article or the rules and regulations set out by the Burke County Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 16-33. - Violations. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, 4-12-2005) 
Secs. 16-34—16-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND RECREATIONAL WATER PARKS 

Sec. 16-41. - Operation and maintenance of food service establishments. 
The operation and maintenance of swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks shall be according to the rules and regulations of the Burke County Board of Health said rules and regulations being hereby incorporated into, and made a part of the Code of Ordinances of Burke County, subject to the enforcement provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 16-42. - Enforcement. 
The Burke County Board of Health or its authorized agent shall be authorized to enforce this article and to enter upon and inspect the premises of any swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks as provided in the rules and regulations set out by the Burke County Board of Health. 
Each and every swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks subject to inspection under the provisions of this article shall be required to pay to the Burke County Board of Health an annual inspection fee as determined by the board of health and approved by the county commission, due within 30 days of receipt of notification from the board of health. Establishments failing to pay said fee shall be considered in violation of the provisions of this article. 
The Burke County Board of Health or its authorized agent shall be authorized to issue citations for violations of the provisions of this article or the rules and regulations set out by The Burke County Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, 4-12-2005) 
Sec. 16-43. - Violations. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, 4-12-2005) 
Chapter 18 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19); Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military force or other state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Res. of 3-13-84, § I) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-2. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency that may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairman of the county commission may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any private property for the protection of the public. 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county; to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Res. of 3-13-84, § IV) 
Sec. 18-3. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the cities, towns and county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. 
(Res. of 3-13-84, § V) 
Sec. 18-4. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Res. of 3-13-84, § VI) 
Secs. 18-5—18-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT OFFICE 

Sec. 18-36. - Office of the county emergency management director. 
There is hereby established the Burke County Emergency Management Office. The county commissioners shall nominate, for appointment by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist county and city officials in organizing county and city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments and agencies, the county plan for emergency functions set forth in section 18-1. Such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the board of commissioners for approval, and thence to the state emergency management director for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the emergency management office and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g. financial, daily activity, etc. 
(6)  To procure with the authority of governing officials a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operations center staff during periods of a declared emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Res. of 3-13-84, § II) 
Sec. 18-37. - County emergency management organization. 
(a)  The county emergency management organization shall be established around existing city and county departments and agencies, and the emergency functions listed in section 18-1 are assigned as follows: 

 
(b)  Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing the plan for their assigned emergency function. Such plans will be submitted through the emergency management director to the county commission. 
(Res. of 3-13-84, § III) 
Secs. 18-38, 18-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOSITION OF CURFEWS DURING TIMES OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER 

Sec. 18-40. - Institution of curfew 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the county. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 18-41. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Curfew. A "curfew" is a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this article from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, "exempt individuals" include those individuals engaged in the provision designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to article IV of this chapter, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 18-42. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated Burke County during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 18-43. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, 12-11-2012) 
Secs. 18-44—18-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIRING REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES DURING A LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 18-70. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of Burke County, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 18-71. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Building contractor. As used in this article the word or term "building contractor" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this article if: 
(1)  He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2)  He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of the improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principle office. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 18-72. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of Burke County during a state of emergency or locally declared emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 18-73. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this article of $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 18-74. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this article to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this article. Violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 18-75. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this article is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 18-76. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 18-77. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this article is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this article or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 18-78. - Expiration. 
This article and any certification issued pursuant to it shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency or declared local emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, 12-11-2012) 
Chapter 23 - OUTDOOR WATERING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 23-1. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable county ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 23-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this chapter. 
(b)  The county sheriff shall be the enforcement authority for this chapter. The county administrator may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this chapter may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 1, 11-9-2010) 
Chapter 26 - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-01 , § 1, adopted Sept. 11, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 26, §§ 26-1, 26-2, 26-36—26-38, 26-71—26-76, 26-111—26-118, 26-142—26-148, 26-171—26-181, 26-201—26-204, 26-236—26-240, 26-261—26-267, 26-291—26-300, 26-331—26-341, 26-376, 26-401—26-406, 26-431—26-454, 26-471—26-475, and enacted a new Ch. 26 as set out herein. The former Ch. 26 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 9-12-95, arts. I—IX; Amend. of 2-13-1996; Amend. of 4-9-1996; Res. of 5-14-1996; Amend of 6-11-1996; Amend. of 9-10-1996; Amend. of 1-13-1998; Amend of 7-14-1998; Amend. of 6-13-2000; Amend of 4-11-2001; Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 04-04, § 1, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. 07-01, §§ 1, 2, 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 10-9-2007; Ord. No. 09-02, §§ 1, 2, 6-9-2009; Ord. No. 09-03, §§ 1, 2, 6-9-2009; Ord. No. 10-02, § 1, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 10-03, § 1, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 10-06, § 1, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 15-02 , § 1, 8-11-2015. 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-6(10); any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-6(11); authorities, boards and commissions, ch. 2, art. III; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; roads and bridges, ch. 30; traffic and vehicles, ch. 42. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

26-1.01.00 - TITLE. 
Chapter 26 of the Burke County Code of Ordinances shall be known as and entitled the "Burke County Land Development Code" and may be referred to generally as the "LDC" or the "Development Code." 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.02.00 - AUTHORITY. 
The LDC is enacted based on the authority vested in Burke County by the Georgia Constitution of 1983 (Article IX, Section 2, Paragraph 4) and the amendments thereto; and, the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-66). 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.03.00 - SEPARABILITY. 
Should any section or provision of the LDC be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Development Code as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.04.00 - APPLICABILITY. 
26-1.04.01 - Generally. 
(a)  The LDC shall apply only to the unincorporated areas of Burke County, Georgia, as now or hereafter established. 
(b)  No buildings, structures, or land shall be used or occupied; and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of the LDC. 
(c)  A change of use shall conform to the standards, criteria, requirements, and procedures of the LDC. 
(d)  Agricultural activities subject to best management practices for agricultural businesses shall be regulated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture and USDA, and enforcement shall be the responsibility of said agencies. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.04.02 - Exemptions and exceptions. 
The following general conditions or circumstances are exempt from the provisions and requirements of the LDC: 
(a)  Buildings or structures that are legally under construction on the effective date of the LDC; 
(b)  Buildings or structures for which a building permit has been issued as of the effective date of the LDC, provided that construction commences prior to the expiration of the building permit, and continues until completed; 
(c)  Development pursuant to an approved development plan or subdivision plat approved prior to the effective date of the LDC, provided that development commences not later than one year after the effective date of the LDC; or 
(d)  The proposed use of property lawfully approved as of the effective date of the LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.04.03 - Effective date. 
This Development Code shall take effect and be in full force from and after the date of its adoption by the Burke County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.05.00 - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
(a)  The Burke County Comprehensive Plan (Plan) is the official development policy and implementation guide for the county to coordinate and direct physical and economic development, related public investment, and, to provide reasonable regulations for the development of private property in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare. The LDC is intended to implement all provisions of the Plan for the development and use of land. 
(b)  The purpose of these regulations is to: 
(1)  Lessen congestion in the streets; 
(2)  Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; 
(3)  Promote health and the general welfare; 
(4)  Provide adequate light and air; 
(5)  Prevent the overcrowding of land; 
(6)  Avoid undue concentration of population; 
(7)  Prevent urban sprawl; 
(8)  Assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services; 
(9)  Assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian; 
(10)  Assure the provision of space for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; 
(11)  Promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; 
(12)  Protect against blight and depreciation; 
(13)  Secure economy in governmental expenditures; 
(14)  Conserve the value of buildings; 
(15)  Encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and structures; 
(16)  Promote economically sustainable development; 
(17)  Protect agriculture; and 
(18)  Assure that land is developed in conformity with the Burke County Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.06.00 - ADMINISTRATION OF THE DEVELOPMENT CODE. 
26-1.06.01 - Department of planning, permits and inspections; director. 
(a)  There is created the department of planning, permits and inspections and the office of building official, the director of the department. The building official shall be employed by the board of commissioners and shall report directly to the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Duties of the building official. 
(1)  The building official is authorized and directed to implement the terms, conditions and operations of this LDC and to undertake such activities as may be necessary to fulfill the duties and responsibilities imposed by this LDC on the department of planning, permits and inspections. 
(2)  The building official shall annually prepare and submit to the board of commissioners a proposed budget for the operation of the department of planning, permits and inspections, including the operation of the planning commission. In addition, the building official shall prepare and submit to the planning commission and the board of commissioners an annual report of the operations and activities of the department of planning, permits and inspections. 
(3)  The building official shall serve as secretary of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.07.00 - DOCUMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. 
26-1.07.01 - Official zoning map of Burke County. 
The official zoning map of Burke County, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.07.02 - Burke County Functional Classification System Map. 
The Official Burke County Functional Classification System Map as now or hereafter amended, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.07.03 - Building and construction codes. 
(a)  There are hereby adopted, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or structures in the unincorporated area of the county, including permits, the following state minimum standard codes, all and future amendments and future additions to those codes to the same extent and effect as if set forth verbatim in this article: 
(1)  Mandatory codes: 
a.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code (International Building Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
b.  Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code (International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings with Georgia State Amendments). 
c.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code (International Fire Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
d.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code (International Plumbing Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
e.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code (International Mechanical Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
f.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code (International Fuel Gas Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
g.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code (National Electrical Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
h.  Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code (International Energy Conservation Code with Georgia State Supplements and Amendments). 
i.  Life Safety Code (NFPA 101). 
(2)  Permissive codes: 
a.  International Property Maintenance Code. 
b.  International Existing Building Code. 
(b)  All land disturbing activities shall be conducted in accordance with the Georgia Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975. Contact Environmental Protection Division, East Central District in Augusta by phone at (706) 792-7744. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.07.04 - Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control. 
The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (latest edition), published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of the LDC. The manual may be viewed at http://www.gaepd.org/documents/esc_manual.html (webpage maintained by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources). 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.07.05 - Areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in its current effective flood insurance study (FIS), with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of the LDC. The current effective FIS may be viewed at http://www.fema.gov/hazard/map/index.shtm (webpage maintained by the Federal Emergency Management Agency). 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.07.06 - Manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
The Georgia Department of Human Resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the LDC. The manual may be viewed at the Burke County Health Department, 114 Dogwood Drive, Waynesboro, Georgia (706) 554-3456 or at http://health.state.ga.us/programs/envservices/onsitemanual.asp (webpage maintained by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, Division of Public Health). 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.07.07 - Standard specifications for road and bridge construction. 
The Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest edition), published by the Georgia Department of Transportation, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.07.08 - American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Standards. 
A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets (latest edition), published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.08.00 - RULES OF INTERPRETATION. 
26-1.08.01 - Generally. 
(a)  Specific provisions of the LDC shall be followed in lieu of general provisions that may be in conflict with the specific provision. 
(b)  In the interpretation and application of the LDC all standards, provisions, and requirements shall be liberally construed in favor of the objectives and purposes of the county and shall not be construed to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(c)  Where provisions of the LDC conflict with other regulations, the more stringent restrictions shall be applied, unless otherwise stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.08.02 - Responsibility for interpretations. 
(a)  In the event that any question arises concerning the application of regulations, standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of the LDC, the building official shall be responsible for interpretation. In the interpretation of the LDC, the building official shall be guided by the Burke County Comprehensive Plan and applicable state or federal law. The building official may also refer to the county attorney or to the board of commissioners for their determination. 
(b)  Responsibility for interpretation by the building official as set forth in this section shall be limited to standards, regulations, and requirements of the LDC, and shall not be construed to include interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in the LDC. Interpretation shall not be construed to override the responsibilities assigned by the board of commissioners to the planning commission or any commission, board, or official named in other sections or articles of the LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.08.03 - Zoning district boundary interpretations. 
Interpretations regarding boundaries of zoning districts described in article II shall be made in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Boundaries shown as approximately following any street shall be construed as following the centerline of the street. 
(b)  Boundaries shown as approximately following any platted lot line or other property line shall be construed as following such line. 
(c)  Boundaries shown as approximately following GMD lines, section lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
(d)  Boundaries shown as approximately following the shoreline of a river, stream, lake or other water body shall be construed as following such shoreline. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.08.04 - Rules of construction. 
(a)  References to the "county" and to the board of commissioners and any public officials or appointed bodies of the county not otherwise named by political jurisdiction or defined in this LDC shall always mean Burke County, Georgia, and its governing body, appointed or employed officials, and appointed bodies as named. 
(b)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(c)  Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(d)  The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter. 
(e)  The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, company, corporation, or association as well as individuals. 
(f)  The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
(g)  "Or" may be read "and," may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
(h)  The term "written" or "in writing" shall include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
(i)  The term "day" means a calendar day. 
(j)  The term "month" means a calendar month. 
(k)  The word "week" shall mean seven days. 
(l)  The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.08.05 - Computation of time. 
When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first or last day shall not be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the person having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as provided for in O.C.G.A., § 1-4-1, the person having the privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty; however, when the following day is a Saturday or Sunday, the person shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.09.00 - ACRONYMS AND DEFINITIONS. 
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. The following terms are defined for purposes of the LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.09.01 - Acronyms. 
A-1 — General agricultural district 
ADT — Average daily trips 
ANSI — American National Institute 
BFE — Base flood elevation 
BMP — Best management practices 
CABO — Council of American Building Officials 
CLOMA — Conditional letter of map amendment 
CLOMR — Conditional letter of map revision 
C-C — Crossroads commercial district 
C-G — General commercial district 
DBH — Diameter at breast height 
DNR — Georgia Department of Natural Resources 
DRI — Development of regional impact 
EIA — Electronic Industries Alliance 
EPD — Georgia Environmental Protection Division 
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration 
FCC — Federal Communications Commission 
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency 
FHBM — Flood hazard boundary map 
FIRM — Flood insurance rate map 
FIS — Flood insurance study 
GDOT — Georgia Department of Transportation 
I-1 — Light industrial district 
I-2 — General industrial district 
I-3 — Special use industrial district 
LDC — Land Development Code 
LIA — Local issuing authority 
LOMR — Letter of map revision 
LSC — Life Safety Code 
MRPA — Metropolitan River Protection Act 
NFPA — National Fire Protection Association 
NGVD — National Geodetic Vertical Datum 
NOI — Notice of intent 
NTU — Nephelometric turbidity units 
OCGA — Official Code of Georgia Annotated 
O-I — Office institutional district 
PCS — Personal communications services 
R-1 — Low density residential district 
R-2 — Medium density residential district 
R-3 — High density residential district 
R-4 — Manufactured home park district 
RV — Recreational vehicle 
SMR — Specialized mobile radio 
SWCD — Soil and Water Conservation District 
TIA — Telecommunication Industry Association 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-1.09.02 - Definitions. 
Access corridor. A strip of land which has been designated to connect a tract of land to a public or private road. An access corridor may be fee simple title or an easement. 
Access drive. A private road or way giving access from a public road to land abutting the right-of-way thereof; a vehicular entrance to or exit from such abutting property to a public road. 
Accessory. A use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure, and which is located on the same lot as the principal use or structure. 
Addition. Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of an existing building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Adult entertainment establishments. Adult entertainment establishments shall be defined as the following terms, with the exception that where "adult entertainment establishments" or "adult entertainment uses" or similar terms are defined elsewhere in the Burke County Code of Ordinances (as may be found in a locally adopted "adult entertainment ordinance"), the definitions not contained in this LDC shall apply: 
Adult bookstore. An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent or more of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment. A business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store. An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter, anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale of display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau; introduction services. Any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Erotic dance establishment. A nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis or specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Agriculture, commercial. The raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products. Excludes animal feeding and animal containment facilities for poultry, swine, livestock, and dairy production. 
Agriculture, intensive commercial. Animal feeding operations and animal containment facilities for poultry, swine, livestock, and dairy production. 
Airport. A tract of land maintained for the landing and takeoff of aircraft, including facilities for the shelter, parking, supply and repair of aircraft. 
Private airport. An airport having restricted access based upon prior arrangements made with the airport sponsor. An example of a private use airport is a residential airstrip that is collectively owned, operated and utilized by adjacent residents (also known as a "residential fly-in" subdivision). A private airport may also be used for emergency purposes by aircraft used for life-saving or fire protection purposes. 
Alley. See "road." 
Animal care facilities. An establishment that provides animal and pet care services, including boarding, grooming, sitting, training, and veterinary services. 
Animal containment/animal feeding operation. An agricultural facility (other than an aquatic animal production facility) where animals are stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period, and the animal confinement areas do not sustain crops, vegetative, forage growth, or post-harvest residues in the normal growing season. Structures used for the storage of animal waste from animals in the operation also are part of the animal feeding operation. Two or more animal containment facilities for livestock or poultry production under common ownership shall be considered to be a single operation if they adjoin each other or if they share a common system for the disposal/management of wastes. 
Antenna. Communication equipment that transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communication services. 
Appeal. A formal review of an administrative decision regarding provisions of the LDC. 
Approach surface. The approach surface is longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extends outward and upward from the end of the runway. The approach surface extends 5,000 feet from the end of the runway at an approach slope of 20 feet horizontally for each one foot vertically (20:1). The inner edge of the approach surface (beginning at each end of the runway) is 250 wide, and expands uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a distance of 5,000 feet from the end of the runway. 
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard. The land within the flood plain that is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in the flood damage prevention section in article III of this LDC. 
Assisted-living services. Services that are provided by board-and-care establishments, such as adult foster care homes and adult care group homes (personal care homes) in accordance with the Rules of Georgia Department of Community Health, Healthcare Facility Regulation Chapter 111-8-62. Services include daily activity assistance, such as dressing, grooming, and bathing for ambulatory adults. Homes cited herein are categorized as follows: 
Congregate personal care home. A home for adults which offers care to 16 or more persons. 
Family personal care home. A home for adults in a residence, non- institutional in character, which offers care to no more than six persons. 
Group personal care home. A home for adults in a residence, or compatible building type that is non-institutional in character, which offers care to no more than 15 persons. 
Back slope. The slope (gradient) of a drainage ditch from the bottom of the ditch to or toward the closest right-of-way line of a road. 
Base flood. See "flood or flooding." 
Basement. That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Bed and breakfast inn (B&B). A private home with one or more bedrooms that are rented for overnight lodging, and where the operator lives on the premises, and where meals may be provided subject to applicable Burke County codes, Board of Health regulations, and Rules of the Department of Human Resources, Chapter 290-5-18. 
Block. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets, public lands, rights-of-way, watercourses or other well-defined and fixed boundaries. 
Board of appeals. Burke County Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Board of commissioners. Board of Commissioners of Burke County, Georgia. 
Board of health. Burke County Board of Health. 
Buffer. Land area (natural vegetation or man-made construction) that is intended to provide a visual and dimensional separation between dissimilar land uses and/or to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other conditions. 
Buffer, state waters. An area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
Accessory building. A detached, subordinate structure designed for a use which is clearly incidental to, customarily associated with, and related to the principal structure or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. 
Building addition. See "addition." 
Building frontage. The linear feet of the exterior wall of a building that faces any road or street that provides a means of direct ingress and egress to the lot. 
Building façade. The exterior surface or face of a building. The front facade is the building wall, which contains the primary entry of the building. The side facade means the exterior walls other than the main or front view. 
Building height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
Building line. A line fixed at a certain distance from the front and sides of a lot beyond which the building may not project. 
Building story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and including basements used for the principal use. 
Elevated building. A nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Principal building. A building in which is conducted the primary use permissible on the lot. 
Building official. The person appointed, employed or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the county building official. Includes the term "building inspector." 
Campground, commercial. A plot of ground on which two or more campsites are located, established, or maintained for temporary occupancy by camping units for recreation or vacation purposes and which are rented out for such purposes. A commercial campground charges fees for camping units to occupy campsites, as contrasted to recreational campgrounds. 
Campground, recreational. A plot of ground on which two or more campsites are located, established, or maintained for temporary occupancy by camping units for recreation or vacation purposes. A recreational campground does not charge fees for camping units to occupy campsites, as contrasted to commercial campgrounds. 
Camping unit. Any tent, trailer, cabin, lean-to, recreational vehicle or similar structure established or maintained and operated in a campground as temporary living quarters for recreational or vacation purposes. 
Cemetery. A place dedicated to and used, or intended to be used, for permanent interment of human remains. A cemetery may contain land or earth interments; mausoleum, a vault, crypt interments; a columbarium or other structure or place used or intended to be used for the inurnment of cremated human remains; or any combination of one or more of such structures or places. 
Centerline. The succession of midpoints between the identifiable limits of any improvements within the right-of-way of a road. 
Certificate of occupancy. A document allowing the use or occupancy of a building and certifying the building, structure, land and/or use conforms to the requirements of the LDC. 
Child day care. Establishments that are licensed or commissioned by the Georgia Department of Human Resources to care for infants and preschool children for less than 24 hours of day without transfer of legal custody. Some offer pre-kindergarten education programs or provide care services for older children. Child day care facilities are classified as follows: 
Child day care center. Any place operated as day care for 19 or more children. 
Family day care home. A private residence operated as day care for up to six children. 
Group day care home. Any place operated as day care for not less than seven or more than 18 children. 
Clerk of the superior court. The Clerk of the Superior Court of Burke County, Georgia. 
Club or lodge, private. See "private club." 
Commercial. Any use or activity involving the sale of goods or services carried out for profit. 
Commercial slaughterhouse. An establishment for the killing, storage, dressing, manufacture, preparation, or processing of any animal, fowl or by-product thereof for human consumption. Includes the term "abattoir." 
Comprehensive plan. The Burke County Comprehensive Plan, approved by the board of commissioners, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto as adopted by the board of commissioners. 
Condominium. A building containing individually owned dwelling units and related, jointly owned common areas as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Conical surface. The conical surface extends upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet horizontally for every one foot vertically (20:1) for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. Height limitations for the surface range from 150 feet above the airport reference elevation at the inner edge of the conical surface to 350 feet at the outer edge of the conical surface. 
Construction. The erection of a new building or structure; the alteration of an existing building or structure in connection with is repair or renovation; an addition to an existing building or structure. 
Existing construction. For the purpose of the flood damage prevention section of article III in this LDC, any structure for which the start of construction commenced before September 18, 1989. 
New construction. For the purpose of the flood damage prevention section of article III in this LDC, any structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after September 18, 1989 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
Start of construction. For the purpose the flood damage prevention section of article III in this LDC, the date a development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Conveyance. Property that is deeded from one entity to another for the purpose of constructing one single-family dwelling in accordance with the requirements of this LDC. 
Conventional built dwelling. A dwelling unit constructed from building materials such as lumber, brick, or stone delivered to the site, where the building is intended to be situated. A conventional built may be construed to mean a modular home or industrialized housing. A conventional built dwelling shall not be construed to mean a manufactured home or mobile home. 
County administrator. The person appointed, employed or otherwise designated as the county's chief administrative employee by the board of commissioners; the Burke County Administrator. 
County board of health. The Board of Health of Burke County, Georgia. 
County commission. The Burke County Board of Commissioners. 
County health officer. The person appointed, employed or otherwise designated as the county sanitarian by the Burke County Board of Health. 
County road superintendent. The person appointed, employed or otherwise designated by the board of commissioners as the county road superintendent. Includes the term "public works director." 
County vehicular service road. See "road." 
Critical facility. Any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Cross drain. A device, usually constructed of reinforced concrete or consisting of concrete or corrugated aluminum pipe, whose function is to transfer or drain surface water from one side of a roadway to the other, and located beneath the surface of the roadway. 
Cross drain, size opening. The interior vertical dimension, usually the diameter, of a cross drain. 
Cul-de-sac. See "road". 
Curb cut. The providing of vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Customary home occupation. See "home occupation." 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below the original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Dead-end road. See "road." 
Decentralized wastewater management system. A privately installed, operated and maintained wastewater system that is designed and built to collect, treat and disperse wastewater on a development site and that acts as an alternative to traditional septic systems or public sewerage facilities where permitted in the LDC. Includes the terms "package plant" and "community sewerage disposal system." 
Department. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Density. The number of dwelling units per acre of land, with the exception that the term "density" as used in article VI of this LDC is used as a measurement related to road construction. 
Developer. Any person, corporation or duly authorized agent responsible for any undertaking that requires development approval. 
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Drainage structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Dwelling or dwelling unit. A building or portion thereof which is designed or used for non-transient residential purposes, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment containing independent cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities, and which is physically separated from any other dwelling units or uses which may be in the same structure. Dwelling units shall not be defined to include portable storage buildings, office trailers, or classrooms. 
Accessory dwelling. A unit established within the principal building or in a separate structure, and on the same lot as the principal structure. 
Caretaker dwelling. A freestanding accessory dwelling occupied by an employee of the property owner for the purpose of property maintenance, security or nighttime property management. 
Duplex or two-family dwelling. A building containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families living independent of each other. 
Multi-family dwelling. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for more than two adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a party wall or party floor ceiling connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the building. Includes the terms "apartments", "apartment building", and "condominium." 
Single-family detached dwelling. A detached building used and either designed or constructed for one dwelling unit. 
Tenant dwelling. A residential structure located on a farm, said structure being owned by the farm owner/operator and occupied by a non-transient farm worker who is employed by the owner/operator of the farm. At least one of the occupants must be an employee of the farm operation or their presence must be necessary and essential for the orderly operation of the farm. 
Townhouse. One of a series of attached dwelling units on separate lots which are separated from each other by party wall partitions extending at least from the lowest floor level to the roof. Includes the term "townhome." 
Easement. A grant of one or more property rights by a property owner to the general public, a public utility, a governmental unit, or a private individual or corporation for the use of a portion of the owner's land for a specific purpose, or use as a means of access to other property. Easements shall be designated "public" or "private" depending upon the nature of the usage. 
Drainage easement. An agreement allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A plan for the control of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution resulting from a land-disturbing activity. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. For the purpose the flood damage prevention section of article III in this LDC, a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 18, 1989. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Extensive business use. The use of land and structures for trade and services which are of low or moderate employment intensity, deal in large or bulky goods and equipment requiring considerable indoor or outdoor space or large and specialized equipment for display, handling, storage or service, and generate significant truck traffic, including: 
(1)  Sales and storage of lumber, metal and wood fencing, ornamental grill work, and building, electrical, heating, plumbing, welding and similar contractors and industrial supplies (including sale of sand and gravel but excluding sales of asphalt and concrete from batch plant or transit-mix plant); sales and tank storage of bulk fuel or motor oil, gasoline, heating, and illuminating gas, and the like (but not the refining or processing thereof), and sales and storage of coal; cold storage services; sale and service of physician/surgeons, barber/beauty and restaurant/hotel food service supplies and equipment; catering services, amusement and vending machines sales and service; uniform supply service; laundry plant (without individual patron service desk); manufacture, sale and service of electric and neon signs and advertising structures; and monument sales (but not manufacture); 
(2)  New and used motor vehicle (of three-quarter ton or less rated capacity) and small nonvehicular engines and equipment sales, rental and such services as repair, reconditioning, painting, body and fender work, upholstering and seat covering, and tire retreading and recapping; motor vehicle (of whatever size), manufactured home, travel and other trailer, marine craft, and small aircraft, and small aircraft sales and rental (but not servicing as above) and exterminating, fumigating, septic tank pumping, furnace cleaning, well drilling and like services; 
(3)  Sales and rental and maintenance (not involving heavy metal working) for motor vehicles of greater than three-quarter ton rated capacity and for large transportation, communications, utilities, industrial, commercial, agricultural, or contractors equipment; 
(4)  Sale, storage or sorting (but not disassembly or processing) of junk, waste, discarded or salvaged equipment, machinery, vehicles, or other similar materials. 
Family. One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit on a non-transient basis, where all members are related by blood, marriage, adoption, or foster care, provided that a related family may also have up to two additional unrelated individuals living with them. The term "family" shall also include a group of no more than four unrelated persons occupying a single dwelling unit on a non-transient basis. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group, or persons occupying a boarding house, rooming house, or hotel, as herein defined. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Final stabilization. See "stabilization." 
Finished grade. See "grade." 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation. The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Flood hazard boundary map. An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map. An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study. The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Frontage. The distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. In the case of corner lots or through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage. 
Front slope. The slope (gradient) of a drainage ditch from the shoulder of a roadway to the bottom of the ditch. 
Funeral home. The use of land or structures for the preparation of the dead for burial or cremation, for the viewing of the body, and for conducting observances before burial or cremation. 
Gasoline station. An establishment (with or without a convenience store) with gasoline pumps means the use of land and structures for services that primarily involve the retail sale of gasoline and related vehicular fuel and additives, oil and related lubricants and additives, and minor accessories, batteries, packaged supplies, tires, tubes and the like and minor services such as lubrication, engine adjustments, minor parts adjustments, repair, replacement, polishing, tire and tube balancing, repair and replacement; washing, waxing, and the like for individual passenger vehicles and other vehicles of three-quarter ton or less rated capacity, but excluding: steam cleaning, spray painting, engine overhaul, overnight vehicular storage, commercial parking, wrecker operation, and vehicular repairs where such repair includes metal bumping, grinding or hammering or other noisy operations, or removing the head of engines. 
General industry. See "industrial." 
Governing authority. The governing authority of Burke County, which is the Burke County Board of Commissioners. 
Grade, finished. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grade, highest adjacent. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Ground anchor. Any device at the manufactured house stand designed to secure a manufactured house to the ground. 
Guest house. Accessory dwelling unit for use by a bona find nonpaying guest or relative of the occupants of the premises, situated within a detached or semi-detached site-built structure located on the same premises with the principal residence. 
Height. The vertical distance of any structure measured from the bottom of the base of the structure at ground level to the highest point of such structure. The following definitions shall be used to define "height" of wireless telecommunication towers and wind turbines, respectively: 
Height (when referring to a wireless telecommunication tower or structure). The distance measured from the pre-existing grade level to the highest point on the tower or structure, even if said highest point is an antenna or lightening protection device. 
Height (when referring to a wind turbine). The distance measured from grade at the center of the tower to the highest point of the turbine rotor or tip of the turbine blade when it reaches its highest elevation. 
Historic structure. See "structure." 
Home occupation. An occupation, profession or trade customarily conducted by an occupant in a dwelling unit as a secondary use entirely within a principal dwelling, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. Includes the term "customary home occupation." 
Horizontal surface. The horizontal surface is a horizontal plane located 150 feet above the established airport elevation and encompasses an area from the transitional surface to the conical surface. The perimeter is constructed by generating arcs of 5,000 feet in length from the center of each end of the runway surface and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
Hotel. See "tourist accommodations." 
Impervious surface. A manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples include buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools and patios. 
Individual septic tank. A general term referring to a means of sewage disposal, other than a public or community system, serving buildings or structures designed or used for human occupancy, congregation or employment. 
Indoor activity use. The use of land structures for predominately indoor activities of a cultural, educational or recreational nature including auditoriums, exhibit halls, gymnasiums, theaters (except drive-in outdoor types), billiard parlors, bowling alleys, penny arcades, skating rinks or other recreation centers. 
Industrialized housing. A factory fabricated dwelling or commercial unit built in one or more sections designed to fit together on a permanent foundation but which usually does not originally have wheels for movement and which is constructed in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act and which bears the seal of approval issued by the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Includes the term "modular home." The term "industrialized housing" shall not be construed to mean "manufactured home" or "mobile home." 
Industry. Any use of land or structures involving the manufacturing and/or processing of any material. Includes the term "industrial." 
Industry, extractive. The use of land and structures for the preparation, distribution and processing of dust-producing mineral products such as gypsum, lime, abrasives, cement, fertilizer, plaster, crushed stone, monuments, sand, gravel and soil. 
Industry, general. The use of land and structures for manufacturing involving indoor and outdoor industrial operations characterized by some emissions, but are not inherently offensive, dangerous or hazardous to abutting property or operations or to the general public, including: (a) brick, tile or terracotta manufacture; (b) furniture, feed, flour or other mill; (c) manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of bakery goods, beverages, candy, dairy products, feed, flour, and food products; (d) laundry plant (steam or wet wash); (e) barging, freight, or trucking yard or terminal; (f) manufacture of nongaseous or nontoxic or nonnoxious chemicals; (g) manufacture of concrete products (but not manufacture of cement); (h) fabrication plant, foundry, machine shop, or metal working plant for light nonferrous metals (not involving the use of machines for stamping, pressing, or punching weighing in excess of five tons); (i) blacksmith shop; (j) vocational or trade schools in which the above activities are taught or performed. 
Industry, light. The use of land and structures for manufacturing limited to predominately indoor industrial activities involving only moderate quantities and sizes of production materials and finished products and involving those operations only that generate no significant particulate or gaseous emissions that could create harmful or unpleasant effects outside the immediate area of activity, including operations such as assembly, binding, bottling, ceramic firing, compounding, engraving, fabricating, freezing, optical goods, grinding, packaging, printing, physical processing, research, storage or testing, but not involving large mills or machines for grinding, stamping, punching or pressing metals or planing or sawing of lumber or kilns fired by other than gas or electricity from previously manufactured components or previously prepared materials, and the like. 
Inoperable vehicle. Any automobile, vehicle, trailer or any kind or type or contrivance, or a party thereof, the condition of which is one or more of the following: (a) wrecked; (b) dismantled; (c) partially dismantled; (d) inoperative; (e) abandoned; (f) discarded; (g) scrapped; or (h) does not have a valid license plate and current registration attached thereto. 
Intersecting angle. The acute angle, measured in degrees, formed by the intersection of the centerlines of two roads. 
Jog, road. See "road." 
Jurisdictional control. The primary responsibility for regulatory control by a unit of government. 
Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in the state minimum standards for soil erosion, pollution, and sediment control. 
Landfill. Any disposal facility where any amount of waste (of any variety) is disposed of except permit by rule for inert material. 
Larger common plan of development. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. 
Local issuing authority. The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Lot. A measured parcel or tract of land having fixed boundaries and designated on a plat or survey. 
Lot by default. A lot which was once whole but divided into parts through the acquisition of public property or construction of a public road. Each piece of the once whole lot shall henceforth be considered a separate and independent lot. The lots shall be governed by the nonconforming lots of record section of this LDC. 
Lot, corner. A lot having frontage on two or more public streets at their intersection. 
Lot depth. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, double frontage or through lot. A lot other than a corner lot, that has frontage upon two or more streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
Lot, flag. A lot having only its driveway fronting on a public street, with the result that only the width of the driveway is the frontage of the lot. 
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot. 
Lot line (property line). The property boundary, abutting a right-of-way line, or any line defining the exact location of a lot. 
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision plat recorded in compliance with the LDC in the office of the clerk of superior court after the adoption of the LDC. Also, a lot which was created either by a legally recorded metes and bounds description or a legally recorded subdivision plat before the adoption of the LDC. 
Lot width. The distance between side lot lines measured at the building line, parallel to the street right-of-way line. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this LDC. 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. The term "manufactured home" shall not be construed to mean "mobile home" or "modular home." 
Manufactured home park. A contiguous parcel of land, which has been developed into individual lots for the installation of manufactured, industrialized or modular homes. Said lots may either be leased or for sale. Includes the term "manufactured housing development or subdivision." 
Mean sea level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Mining. The use of land and structures for the excavation of minerals, rock, dimension stone, gravel, topsoil or fill dirt for purposes of removal from the site on which extracted (not including the preparation of a site for a nonextractive use). 
Mobile home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. The term "mobile home" shall not be construed to mean "manufactured home" or "modular home." 
Modular home. A factory fabricated dwelling or commercial unit built in one or more sections designed to fit together on a permanent foundation but which usually does not originally have wheels for movement and which is constructed in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act and which bears the seal of approval issued by the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Includes the term "industrialized housing." The term "modular home" shall not be construed to mean "manufactured home" or "mobile home." 
Motel. See "tourist accommodations." 
National geodetic vertical datum. As corrected in 1988, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
New construction. See "construction." 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after April 12, 1989. 
Nonconforming use or nonconformity. Any lawful use, whether of a building or other structure or of a tract of land, that does not conform to the regulations of this LDC, either on the effective date of this LDC or as a result of any subsequent amendment thereto. 
Nonresidential land service road. See "road." 
Operator. The party or parties that have: (a) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (b) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a storm water pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the storm water pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outdoor activity use. The use of land and structures for passive or active outdoor activities characterized by neither inherently hazardous types nor significantly high levels of emissions, including: golf and country club courses, golf driving range, playground, playfield, swimming, golf, tennis courts, archery course, miniature golf, trampoline or other novelty area, arboretum, botanical garden, ornamental park, historical area, monument or sculpture. 
Outdoor amusement use. The use of land and structures for outdoor activities characterized by significant levels of traffic hazards or emissions, including amusement park, amphitheater, ballpark, carnival, stadium, fairgrounds, drive-in theater, auto, go-cart or similar racetrack or drag, dog or similar competition course, rifle or other gun firing range. 
Outfall. The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Outside or outdoor storage. The keeping of any inventory, goods, junk, materials, merchandise, or commercial vehicles (includes raw, semi-finished and finished materials) in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
Overlay district. A defined geographic area that applies supplementary regulations to land previously classified as belonging to a specific zoning district or land use category. An overlay district can share the same boundaries with existing zoning districts or can contain only parts of one or more such districts. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Parcel. A piece of land formally described and recorded with block and lot numbers, by metes and bounds, by ownership, or in such manner as to specifically identify the dimensions and/or the boundaries. 
Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this LDC. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Personal care home. See "assisted-living services." 
Planning commission. The Burke County Planning Commission. 
Plat. A map, plan or layout, of a county, city, town, lot, section, subdivision or development indicating the location and boundaries of properties prepared by a licensed surveyor or engineer. Includes the term "sketch plat." 
Plat, final. The plat of the subdivision, meeting the requirements of these regulations, for recording in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
Potable water. Water suitable for drinking purposes. 
Pre-owned manufactured home. Any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling. 
Principal use. The primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
Private airport. See "airport." 
Private club. A bona fide membership club affiliated with a nationally chartered organization which has at least 25 local regular dues-paying members and/or qualifies as a tax-exempt, nonprofit organization under the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Public. Any land or building owned, used or maintained by a federal, state, county or municipal government or their agencies, accessible to, supported or shared by all members of the community. 
Public road. See "road." 
Public sanitary sewerage. A sanitary system for the collection and treatment of waterborne wastes, and is operated by a local unit of government or approved for operation by the local government. 
Public works director. See "county road superintendent." 
Qualified surveyor. A person licensed by the state to perform the duties of a land surveyor. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, which is: (1) built on a single chassis; (2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Recycling center. A facility with recycling areas where solid waste is separated or pretreated. 
Registered engineer. A person licensed by the state to perform the duties of an engineer. 
Religious facility. Church, synagogue, temple, mosque or other facility that is designed for worship, ceremonies, and rituals pertaining to a particular system of beliefs. 
Residential. Any building, structure or unit thereof intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but not including a tourist accommodation as defined in O.C.G.A. Chapter 31-28 or an institution. 
Residential land service road. See "road." 
Restaurant, custom service. An establishment where food and drink are prepared to individual order, ordered and served at the table, and consumed primarily within the principal building or in established outdoor dining areas, as contrasted to a fast food restaurant. 
Restaurant, fast food. See "restaurant, limited service." 
Restaurant, limited service. Any establishment, building or structure where food or drink are served for consumption, either on or off the premises, by order from or service to persons either over an interior counter, outside the structure or from an outdoor service window or automobile service window, or by delivery. This definition shall not include otherwise allowed restaurants where outdoor table service is provided to customers in established outdoor dining areas or where drive-through or take-out service is provided incidental to a custom service restaurant. 
Retail business. A business consisting primarily of buying merchandise or articles in gross and selling to general consumers in small quantities or broken lots or parcels and not in bulk and not for resale. 
Rezoning action. To change the zoning classification of a parcel of land. A proposed rezoning action requires review by the planning commission and review and approval by the board of commissioners. 
Right-of-way. An area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of passage has been recorded or otherwise established for the use as a public street, road, thoroughfare, crosswalk, pipeway, drainage canal and/or other similar uses and designated by means of right-of-way lines. 
Right-of-way line. The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
Road. A right-of-way which provides vehicular access to abutting property. Includes the term "street." 
Alley. A road which affords only a secondary means of access to the back or side of abutting property, and is not intended for general traffic. 
Collector road. A road which is intended to collect traffic from local streets and direct it safely to minor or major arterial streets. A collector may also provide direct access to adjacent properties. 
County vehicular service road. A public road or right-of-way therefor not under the jurisdictional control of the state and is considered to be significant to intracounty vehicular travel. 
Cul-de-sac. A road with only one outlet, closed and terminated with a permanent vehicular turnaround. 
Dead-end. A road having only one end open for access to another street, and other end being abruptly terminated with no turnaround. 
Local road. A street which is intended to serve a limited area for local circulation and whose primary function is to provide direct access to adjoining properties. 
Major arterial road. A road which is intended to provide swift and safe movement of traffic through the county. Includes the term "principal arterial." 
Minor arterial street. A road which is intended to provide easy and convenient traffic movement within the county. 
Nonresidential land service road. A public road or right-of-way therefor not under the jurisdictional control of the state, nor intended for such control, and is not considered to be significant to intracounty vehicular travel, and provides or is intended to provide access to land in use or intended for use primarily for commercial and industrial purposes, or accommodates or is intended to accommodate frequent vehicular traffic to land areas whose use or intended use is primarily for such purposes. 
Private road. A road, or any designated right-of-way or easement therefor, or vehicular access routes from public rights-of-way to private property, not under the jurisdictional control of the county or the state, nor intended or acceptable for such control, and is not owned and maintained or intended to be owned and maintained by the county as a public road. 
Public road. A road or road right-of-way owned or maintained by a unit of government or an authorized agency thereof. 
Residential land service road. A public road or right-of-way therefor not under the jurisdictional control of the state, nor intended for such control, and is not considered to be significant to intracounty vehicular travel, and which provided or is intended to provide vehicular access to land in use or intended for use primarily for residential purposes. 
Road jog. The physical condition created when the centerline of a road, or two roads having approximately the same horizontal alignment, intersects the centerline of another road at more than one location. 
Shoulder. That part of a road that extends from either edge of the travel or wearing surface to a drainage ditch. 
State route. A public road or right-of-way therefor under the jurisdictional control of the state or is intended or acceptable of such control, and is not owned and maintained or intended to be owned and maintained by the county as a public road. 
Stub street. A dead-end street at adjoining property lines intended for future extension to serve the development of adjoining areas. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Rooming and boarding. Temporary accommodations that serve a specific group or membership, such as a dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, or workers' camp and that may offer housekeeping, meals, and laundry services. 
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Setback. The minimum required distance between a street right-of-way or the property boundary lines of a lot and the front, rear, or side lines of a building located on that lot. 
Front setback. See "yard, front." 
Rear setback. See "yard, rear." 
Side setback. See "yard, side." 
Shoulder. See "road." 
Sign. Any object, device, display, structure, or design that is used or intended to be used to attract the attention of or to convey information to the public, and that is placed in such a way, whether out of doors or inside or near a window, as to be in the view of the general public from the exterior of any building on the property. 
Billboard. A type of pole sign with a sign face exceeding 288 square feet. 
Billboard, interstate. A billboard within 660 feet of nearest edge of the right-of-way of Interstate 1-75 and is visible to persons in vehicles traveling in the through lanes of Interstate 75. 
Billboard, non-interstate. A billboard on a parcel having frontage on a state route that is a part of the primary highway system operated by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Billboard sign. A type of freestanding sign with an area more than 120 feet and not larger than 672 square feet. 
Freestanding sign. A permanent sign which is attached to or part of a completely self-supporting structure, other than a building. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure, whether portable or stationary. 
Site plan. The development plan for one or more lots or parcels on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot(s) or parcel(s) including all of the requirements set forth in the LDC. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Briar Creek Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Solar collection system. An onsite accessory panel, multiple panels, or other solar energy device that is roof-mounted or ground-mounted, the primary purpose of which is to provide the collection, inversion, storage, and distribution of solar energy for on-site electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating for the structure(s) on the property and is not to be used as a commercially operating solar energy farm. Includes the term "solar array." 
Solar energy equipment. Any device associated with a solar energy system, such as an outdoor electrical unit/control box, that transfers the energy from the solar energy system to the intended on-site structure. 
Solar energy farm. Property used in solar energy development; more specifically, land utilized in the construction and installation of an energy conversion system, including appurtenances, that converts solar energy to a usable form of energy to transfer to the public electric grid in order to sell electricity to a public utility entity. Also known as "solar farm." 
Solid waste management facility. Any facility for the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment or disposal of solid wastes. 
Special industry. The use of land and structures for manufacturing activity involving industrial operations that, by their nature, are offensive or noxious, and generally incompatible with residential or other nonspecial industry use of property. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Start of construction. See "construction." 
State general permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State route. See "road." 
State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Stormwater management. The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, stream bank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. For the purpose of the flood damage prevention section of article III in this LDC, a "structure" shall also include a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is: (1) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (2) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (3) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (4) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (a) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or (b) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Subdivider. A person who subdivides or causes land to be subdivided. 
Subdivision. Any division or redivision of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, parcels, or building sites; or other division or redivision for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, legacy or building development. 
Major subdivision. A subdivision of land which results in the creation of six or more lots. 
Minor subdivision. A subdivision of land which results in the creation of five or less lots and does not result in the creation of any public or private street. 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building should be: (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions. Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Surety bond. An agreement in which one person accepts legal liability for another's performance of a contract or obligation. 
Timber. Softwood or hardwood trees harvested for commercial purposes. 
Timber operations. Buying, cutting, harvesting, loading and/or hauling timber. 
Timber operator. Any person engaged in timber operations. 
Tourist accommodations. Means a tourist court as defined in O.C.G.A. Chapter 31-28 as any facility consisting of two or more rooms or dwelling units providing lodging and other accommodations for tourists and travelers and includes tourist courts, tourist cottages, tourist homes, motels, motor hotels, hotels, and any similar place by whatever name called and any food, beverage, laundry, recreational or other facilities or establishments operated in conjunction therewith, and as such shall be regulated in accordance with Chapter 290-5-18 of the Rules of the Department of Human Resources. This definition includes any facility consisting of two or more rooms or dwelling units either joined together or separate on a common piece of property, furnished for pay. For the purpose of this LDC, this definition shall not include campgrounds, recreational vehicle parks, bed and bed and breakfast inns, trailer parks, and trailer courts. 
Transitional surface. The transitional surface extends outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and extends at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each one foot vertically (7:1) from the sides of the runway and approach surfaces. The transitional surfaces extend to the point at which they intercept the horizontal surface at a height of 150 feet above the established airport elevation. 
Travel trailer/recreational vehicle. A vehicular-type portable structure, whether self-propelled or pulled by a power unit, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation uses, which is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a "camper" or "travel trailer" or "recreational vehicle." 
Trout streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Truck stop. The use of land and structures for the rental and servicing of the en route sales of fuel, lubricants, minor accessories, and the like primarily to vehicles of greater than three-quarter ton rated capacity, but not sales of such vehicles. 
Use. The purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land is designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; the activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or intended to be carried on in a building or other structure or on a tract of land. 
Utility. Any community service available to the public by means of an overhead or underground distribution or collection system such as electricity, telephone, water, gas, cable television and sewerage disposal. 
Public water and sewer system. Refers to public water distribution and wastewater collection systems, and all component parts, equipment, and structures necessary to provide such services. 
Private water and sewage system. A system owned and operated by an individual or a community corporation serving two or more premises and approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of the LDC where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with (a) permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or (b) temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or (c) sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Warehouse. An establishment that operates warehouse and storage facilities for general merchandise, refrigerated goods, and other warehouse products. These establishments provide the facilities to store goods but do not sell the goods they handle. They may also provide a range of services related to the distribution of goods, such as labeling, breaking bulk, inventory control and management, light assembly, order entry and fulfillment, packaging, pick and pack, price marking and ticketing, and transportation arrangement. 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Water supply, central. A water supply system, including pumps and distribution lines and other facilities appurtenant thereto, serving or designed to serve more than two buildings or structures used or designed to be used for human occupancy. 
Wearing surface. That portion of a road designed and improved for the purpose of conveying vehicles. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Wholesale business. A business primarily engaged in the selling of goods or articles in gross to retailers or jobbers for resale and not to the ultimate consumer. 
Wind energy facility. An electric generating facility, whose main purpose is to supply electricity, consisting of one or more wind turbines and other accessory structures and buildings, including substations, meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant structures and facilities. Definitions related to wind energy facilities include the following: 
Applicant. The person or entity filing an application for a permit to install a wind turbine under this chapter. 
Environmental assessment. A detailed examination of the applicant's proposal and its potential local environmental context with an emphasis on avoiding, minimizing, and mitigating adverse impacts. 
Facility operator. The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the wind energy facility. 
Facility owner. The entity or entities having equity interest in the wind energy facility, including their respective successors and assigns. 
Non-participating landowner. Any landowner not under an agreement with the facility owner or operator. 
Occupied building. A residence, school, hospital, church, public library or other buildings used for public gathering that is occupied or in use when the building permit application is submitted. 
Participating landowner. A landowner under lease or other property agreements with the facility owner or operator pertaining to the wind energy facility. 
Shadow flicker. The visible flicker effect when rotating turbine blades cast shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing the repeating pattern of light and shadow. 
Wind energy facility, Class I system. A single system designed to supplement other electricity sources as an accessory use to existing buildings or facilities, wherein the power generated is used primarily for on-site consumption. An example of a Class I system is a small wind energy conversion system which is defined as a single wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a total rated capacity of 20 kW or less. 
Wind energy facility, Class II system. A single system designed to supplement other electricity sources as an accessory use to existing buildings or facilities, wherein the power generated is used primarily for on-site consumption. A Class II system is a small wind energy conversion system consisting of a single wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a total rated capacity of more than 20 kW but no greater than 100 kW. 
Wind energy facility, Class III system. A wind energy conversion system consisting of one or more wind turbine(s), a tower(s), and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a total rated capacity of more than 100 kW but not greater than two MW. 
Wind energy facility, Class IV system. A wind energy conversion system consisting of one or more than one wind turbine(s), a tower(s), and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a total rated capacity of more than two MW. 
Wind power. The conversion of wind energy into electricity. 
Wind turbine. A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into electricity. 
Wind turbine height. The distance measured from grade at the center of the tower to the highest point of the turbine rotor or tip of the turbine blade when it reaches its highest elevation. 
Wireless telecommunication facility. The set of equipment and network components, exclusive of the underlying wireless support structure, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and accessory equipment, used to provide wireless data and wireless telecommunication services. Also known as "wireless facility." Definitions related to wireless telecommunication facilities include the following: 
Accessory equipment. Any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a wireless facility or wireless support structure and includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets, and storage sheds, shelters, or similar structures. 
Accessory facility or structure. An accessory facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with wireless telecommunications facilities, and located on the same property or lot as the wireless telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets. 
Antenna. Communications equipment that transmit, receives, or transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communication services. 
Application. A formal request submitted to the local governing authority to construct, collate collocate, or modify a wireless support structure or a wireless facility. 
Camouflage (or stealth or stealth technology). Disguising a wireless support structure and facility so as to make it less visually obtrusive and not recognizable to the average person as a wireless telecommunications facility. 
Collocate or collocation. The placement or installation of new wireless facilities on previously approved and constructed wireless support structures, including monopoles and towers, both self-supporting and guyed, in a manner that negates the need to construct a new freestanding wireless support structure. Such term includes the placement of accessory equipment within an existing equipment compound. 
Complete application. An application containing all documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in or required by the local governing authority's regulations, ordinances, and forms pertaining to the location, construction, collocation, modification, or operation of wireless facilities. 
Equipment compound. An area surrounding or adjacent to the base of a wireless support structure within which accessory equipment is located. 
Modification or modify. The improvement, upgrade, expansion, or replacement of existing wireless facilities on an existing wireless support structure or within an existing equipment compound, provided such improvement, upgrade, expansion, or replacement does not increase the height of the wireless support structure or increase the dimensions of the equipment compound. 
Utility. Any person, corporation, municipality, county, or other entity, or department thereof or entity related or subordinate thereto, providing retail or wholesale electric, data, cable, or telecommunications services. 
Wireless support structure. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole, tower, either guyed or self-supporting, or suitable existing or alternative structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Such term shall not include any telephone or electrical utility pole or any tower used for the distribution or transmission of electrical service. Includes the term "wireless telecommunication tower." 
Yard. A required open space on the same lot with a principal building open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except for vegetation and permitted encroachments and accessory buildings. 
Yard, corner. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the building and the street right-of-way and extending from front yard setback to the rear yard setback. 
Yard, front. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the minimum front building line setback. Where a corner lot exists, the front yard shall be determined by that portion of the lot with the shortest road frontage. 
Yard, rear. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the building and sideline of the lot and extending from the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the sidelines of the lot. 
Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the building and the sideline of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zoning decision. The decision made by the board of commissioners to approve or deny a proposed rezoning action. 
Zoning district. The use classification of parcels of land as generally defined under the LDC. 
Zoological park. The use of land and structures for the keeping for purposes of exhibition of any native or exotic animal species, as approved and licensed by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND LAND USES 

26-2.01.00 - GENERALLY. 
The use of buildings, structures, and land in accordance with the Burke County Comprehensive Plan shall comply with the use requirements for zoning districts set forth in this article II. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-2.02.00 - ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF ZONING DISTRICTS. 
26-2.02.01 - Burke County Zoning Map. 
(a)  Zoning districts for Burke County are hereby established as shown on the "Official Zoning Map of Burke County, Georgia." 
(b)  The Official Zoning Map of Burke County, Georgia shall be identified by the signature of the chair of the board of commissioners, attested by the county administrator, and shall include the date of adoption. 
(c)  The Official Zoning Map of Burke County, Georgia may be amended according to the procedures set forth in article IX of the LDC. 
(d)  The Official Zoning Map of Burke County shall be retained in the Burke County Planning Commission Office. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-2.02.02 - Rural zoning districts. 
Single-family detached dwellings, including manufactured homes and specified accessory structures and uses, are allowed in rural zoning districts established herein this section. Minimum lot area requirements are shown in Table 2-A. The following rural zoning district is established: 
(a)  A-1, general agricultural district. This district is intended to provide for agricultural activities, including those related to crops, livestock and timber and other compatible uses. The intent of this district is to protect prime farmlands from the effects of suburban residential development, promote viable agricultural usage, and maintain the general rural character. 
Table 2-A Lot Area Requirements, Rural Zoning Districts 

 
* ;hg;Unusual topographical or soil conditions may necessitate larger minimum requirements for properties utilizing septic systems. Installation of septic systems is subject to the approval of the Burke County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-2.02.03 - Residential zoning districts. 
Conventional built dwellings shall be required in residential zoning districts, with the exception that only manufactured homes shall be allowed in the R-4 district. Minimum lot area requirements are shown in Table 2-B. The following residential zoning districts are established: 
(a)  R-1, Low density residential. This district is intended to provide for single-family detached dwellings on individual lots at a low density of development. 
(b)  R-2, Medium density residential. This district is intended to provide for single-family detached dwellings on individual lots at a moderate density of development. 
(c)  R-3, High density residential. This district is intended to provide for multi-family residential dwellings at a moderate to high density of development. Permissible uses are duplexes, townhomes, and apartments and condominiums. 
(d)  R-4, Manufactured home park. This district is intended to provide for housing developments consisting of detached manufactured homes within a planned residential community, with the exception that single-lot manufactured home development is permissible subject to the provisions of section 26-4.03.22 of this LDC. 
Table 2-B Lot Area Requirements, Residential Zoning Districts 

 
* ;hg;Unusual topographical or soil conditions may necessitate larger minimum requirements for properties utilizing septic systems. Installation of septic systems is subject to the approval of the Burke County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-2.02.04 - Commercial, office, and institutional zoning districts. 
The following commercial, office, and institutional zoning districts are established: 
(a)  O-I, Office institutional. This district is intended to allow development of business and professional activities, medical and dental facilities, and the development and maintenance of publicly owned lands and structures, parks and recreation areas, public schools, and buildings used principally for government functions. Limited retail uses normally associated with office or institutional uses, accessory structures, and essential public services are also permissible. 
(b)  C-C, Crossroads commercial. This district is intended to provide locations for limited retail and service uses to satisfy the common and frequent needs of residents of nearby residential and agricultural areas. It is the intent of the district to locate businesses at major road intersections to discourage strip commercial development. 
(c)  C-G, General commercial. This district is intended to provide locations for a wide variety of retail and service uses to satisfy the common and frequent needs of residents in large sections of the county. It is the intent of the district to concentrate businesses at major road intersections to discourage strip commercial development. 
Table 2-C Lot Area Requirements, Commercial, Office and Institutional Zoning Districts 

 
* ;hg;Unusual topographical or soil conditions may necessitate larger minimum requirements for properties utilizing septic systems. Installation of septic systems is subject to the approval of the Burke County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-2.02.05 - Industrial zoning districts. 
The following industrial zoning districts are established: 
(a)  I-1, Light industrial. This district provides for light industrial uses which do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, or dust and do not produce, store, or handle hazardous wastes. Permissible uses include activities involved in warehousing, assembly, storage, and commercial services. 
(b)  I-2, General industrial. This district provides for the manufacturing, assembling, storage, distribution, and sales activities that are generally high intensity. For those industries which may have negative impacts or nuisance factors associated with their use, supplemental standards shall apply within the district. I-2 districts shall be located on arterial streets or on major collector streets having ready access to arterial streets. 
(c)  I-3, Special use industrial. This district provides for energy producing uses located at Plant Vogtle. The district includes the nuclear power plant, supporting infrastructure, and associated uses. 
Table 2-D Lot Area Requirements, Industrial Zoning Districts 

 
* ;hg;Unusual topographical or soil conditions may necessitate larger minimum requirements for properties utilizing septic systems. Installation of septic systems is subject to the approval of the Burke County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-2.02.06 - Zoning districts and future development map relationship. 
Nine character areas are reflected on the future development map for unincorporated Burke County, and each are implemented by individual zoning districts, as indicated in Table 2-E. The character areas listed below are further described in the Burke County Comprehensive Plan. 
Table 2-E Zoning Districts that Support Character Areas 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-2.03.00 - LAND USES PERMITTED IN EACH ZONING DISTRICT. 
26-2.03.01 - Land use table. 
(a)  Generally. Table 2-F describes those uses that are permissible in each base zoning district. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which they are located. The zoning districts for Burke County are shown on the "Official Zoning Map of Burke County, Georgia." 
(b)  How to read the land use table. 
(1)  Within the following table the letter "P" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district. 
(2)  The letter "S" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district, and the site design standards specified for the use. Site design standards for specific uses are contained in section 26-4.03.00. 
(3)  A blank cell indicates the land use is prohibited. 
(4)  Any land use that is not identified in Table 2-F is prohibited unless it is found to be substantially similar to an identified use in said table by the building official or designee. 
(5)  A determination that a use qualifies as a similar and compatible use shall be made upon the building official's finding that: 
a.  The characteristics of, and activities associated with the requested use is similar to one or more of the listed uses, and will not involve a greater intensity than the uses listed in the zoning district; 
b.  The requested use will be consistent with the purpose of the applicable zoning district; 
c.  The requested use will be compatible with the other uses allowed in the zoning district; 
d.  The requested use will be consistent with the comprehensive plan and any applicable specific plan; 
e.  The definition of a requested use is comparable to that of a use identified in Table 2-F; and 
f.  The requested use is not allowable in another zoning district. 
(c)  The administrative interpretation shall be subject to appeal, as set forth in article IX. 
Table 2-F Land Use Table 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-2.03.02 - Accessory use table. 
(a)  Generally. Table 2-G describes those accessory uses that are permissible in each base zoning district. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which they are located. The zoning districts for Burke County are shown on the "Official Zoning Map of Burke County, Georgia." 
(b)  How to read the accessory use table. 
(1)  Within the following table the letter "P" indicates that the accessory land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district and the standards of article V of this LDC. 
(2)  The letter "S" indicates that the accessory land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district, and the site design standards specified for the use. Site design standards for specific uses are contained in section 26-4.03.00. 
(3)  A blank cell indicates the land use is prohibited. 
(4)  Any land use that is not identified in Table 2-G is prohibited unless it is found to be substantially similar to an identified use in said table by the building official or designee. 
a.  A requested use shall be considered substantially similar when the characteristics of the requested use are equivalent in type, intensity, degree, or impact when compared to a use named in Table 2-G. 
b.  The administrative interpretation shall be subject to appeal, as set forth in article IX. 
Table 2-G Table of Accessory Uses 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
ARTICLE III. - PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND RESOURCES 

26-3.01.00 - GENERALLY. 
The provisions set forth in article III are intended to protect the natural features and natural resources within Burke County, and to implement policies in the Burke County Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.00 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. 
26-3.02.01 - Statutory authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Burke County Board of Commissioners of Burke County, Georgia, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.02 - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Burke County, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.03 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this section 26-3.02.00 to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(a)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(b)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(c)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(d)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(e)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.04 - Objectives. 
The objectives of section 26-3.02.00 are to: 
(a)  Protect human life and health; 
(b)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(c)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(d)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(e)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(f)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(g)  Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.05 - Lands to which section applies. 
This section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the county. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.06 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated December 17, 2010 with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this section. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Burke County are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at: Burke County Planning, Permits and Inspections Office. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.07 - Development permit required. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this section prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.08 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.09 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.10 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be: 
(a)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(b)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(c)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.11 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
(a)  The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. 
(b)  Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. 
(c)  This section does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(d)  This section shall not create liability on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.12 - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. 
(c)  Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.13 - Designation of floodplain coordinator. 
The flood plain administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.14 - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the flood plain administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(a)  Application stage. 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
(3)  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria in section 26-3.02.18(b) below; 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
(b)  Construction stage. 
(1)  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the flood plain administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory flood elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. 
(2)  The permit holder shall provide the flood plain administrator sealed supplemental construction documents including, but not limited to foundation and structure anchoring details prepared by a licensed professional engineer and/or registered architect. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. 
(3)  When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(4)  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
(5)  The flood plain administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. 
(6)  Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. 
(7)  Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.15 - Duties and responsibilities of floodplain coordinator. 
The duties of the flood plain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this section have been satisfied. 
(b)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(c)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 26-3.02.15, then the flood plain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of the LDC. 
(d)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(e)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 26-3.02.15(b). 
(f)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the flood plain administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 26-3.02.15 and section 26-3.03.18. 
(g)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(h)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
(i)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. 
(j)  Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(k)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the flood plain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section. 
(l)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the flood plain administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.16 - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(a)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(b)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(c)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(d)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(e)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(f)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(g)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(h)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(i)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this section, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.17 - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(a)  New residential construction and substantial improvements. 
(1)  Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any residential structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (c) of section 26-3.02.17. 
(2)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other services facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(b)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 26-3.01.16(g). 
(c)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(1)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
(2)  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this section, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
(3)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(d)  Standards . Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles where base flood elevation data are available. 
(1)  All manufactured homes placed, and/or substantially improved: 
a.  On individual lots or parcels; 
b.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
c.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
d.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade; 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(3)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
c.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements of section 26-3.02.18(a) including the anchoring and elevation requirements of section 26-3.02.18(d)(2)c, above. 
(e)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-3.02.06 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
(2)  Only if subsection (e)(1) above is satisfied, then any new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.18 - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without elevated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-3.02.06 where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply. 
(a)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(b)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with section 26-3.02.17. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.19 - Standards for streams without established base flood elevation and/or floodways (A-Zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-3.02.06, where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(a)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 26-3.02.06, then the flood plain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this section. ONLY if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (b) and (c) shall apply: 
(b)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(c)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-3.02.17(c). 
(d)  The flood plain administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.20 - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-3.02.06 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-3.02.18(c), "elevated buildings." 
(b)  The flood plain administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(c)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 26-3.02.15(a)(3) and section 26-3.02.15(b). 
(d)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.21 - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.22 - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.02.23 - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  The planning commission as established by the board of commissioners shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this section. 
(b)  The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the flood plain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this section. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Burke County, Georgia, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this section. 
(h)  The conditions for the granting of variances shall be as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the structure. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The flood plain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to FEMA upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this section, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-3.03.00 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL. 
See State of Georgia minimum standards. Contact Local Issuing Authority for more information (Brier Creek Soil and Water Conservation District). 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
ARTICLE IV. - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 

26-4.01.00 - GENERALLY. 
26-4.01.01 - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of article IV is to provide design standards applicable to all development activity within the county. Article IV also provides design standards applicable in specific situations, such as development within overlay districts or development of specific uses that require additional standards to address potential impacts. 
(b)  This Code section is intended to: 
(1)  Protect property owners and citizens of the county from adverse environmental and economic impact, from adverse health conditions, and from noxious, toxic or other substances or uses that could affect adjoining property owners or those in close proximity. 
(2)  Permit uses of land that will not have an adverse economic or environmental impact on adjoining property or property within close proximity thereto. 
(3)  Protect and preserve public health, safety, convenience, order and the general welfare of the people of the county. These standards and uses are adopted to allow uses of property consistent with these propositions and to allow users to perform particular functions compatible with adjoining property and property in close proximity thereto without adversely affecting same. 
(c)  Application of this Code section. 
(1)  Unless modified by grant of hardship variance, these standards shall apply, in addition to the standards of this LDC, and are hereby declared to be the minimum requirements for designated uses of land and structures within the county. 
(2)  No variance from these standards will be permitted unless authorized by the planning commission as provided for in article VIII of this LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.02.00 - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BASE ZONING DISTRICTS. 
26-4.02.01 - Design standards for lots. 
(a)  Only one principal detached single-family residential building and its allowable accessory buildings shall hereafter be erected on any one lot, parcel, or tract of land in any rural zoning district or single-family residential zoning district. 
(b)  No more than one single-family residence may be served by a septic tank. 
(c)  Except as specifically provided in the LDC, no lot existing at the time of adoption of the LDC shall be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a lot or tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimensional or area requirements of this section. 
(d)  Where the owner of a lot of record at the time of the adoption of the LDC, or their successor in title thereto, does not own sufficient land to enable him or her to conform to the lot dimensional or area requirements of the LDC, shall be allowed to build upon said lot in accordance with all other regulations of the applicable zoning district and with the approval of the board of health when such lots utilize a septic tank waste water system. 
(e)  Land which is required, dedicated, and accepted for public use is exempt from the requirement of section 26-4.01.01(c). 
(f)  Lot width shall be measured at the building line, parallel to the street right-of-way line. 
(g)  Impervious surface standards are expressed as the maximum percent of land coverage for each zoning district. The impervious surface ratio is calculated by dividing the total of all impervious surfaces on the lot by the lot area. Impervious surfaces include all buildings, structures, paving and water bodies. 
(h)  All lots shall front upon a dedicated public road or a private road meeting the requirements of this LDC, with the exception that an access corridor may be used in accordance with section 26-6.02.06(a) of this LDC. 
(i)  Side lot lines shall, as much as practical, be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines and cul-de-sacs. 
(j)  All lots shall conform to the provisions of the LDC. 
(k)  Where individual septic tanks or other such on-site disposal facilities are to be used as a means of sewage disposal, the county health officer may require increases in the minimum lot size as necessary to conform to rules and recommendations of the state department of public health. In no case, however, shall the lot size be reduced to less than the required minimum as established in this section. Where extreme health hazards are indicated by site characteristics, the county health officer may disapprove the intended use of the lot or require special types of sewage disposal to be constructed as a prerequisite to a lot's being used. 
(l)  Cul-de-sac lots or eyebrows shall have a minimum width of lot frontage of 25 feet along the street right-of-way line and a minimum lot width of 75 feet. 
(m)  Access on all double frontage lots in residential subdivisions shall be restricted to the lesser used street or the street with the lowest hierarchy in the street classification system. 
(n)  Commercial uses on corner lots which have frontage on interior residential subdivision streets shall have access only from the higher level street. 
(o)  The owner of lots zoned commercial, office, and institutional shall grant an access easement to each adjoining property that is zoned such for the purpose of improving connectivity between compatible uses. Access design shall be prepared by a design professional for review and approval by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures of this LDC. 
(p)  Lots that are conveyed from one family member to another shall adhere to the standards of section 26-4.04.04 specific provisions for family ties land division. 
(q)  Standards for lot area, width, and impervious surface coverage are set forth in Table 4-A. 
Table 4-A Standards for Lot Area, Width and Impervious Surface 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.02.02 - Dimensional standards for building height and location. 
(a)  Measures of setbacks. 
(1)  Front setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the public right-of-way to the wall of the building or structure. 
(2)  Side and rear setbacks shall be measured from the property line to the wall of the building or structure. 
(b)  Encroachments into required setbacks. 
(1)  Building features, such as steps, fire escapes, cornices, eaves, gutters, sills and chimneys may project not more than three feet beyond a required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways which are used or may be used for access of service and/or emergency vehicles. An unenclosed front or side porch, portico or stoop in a residential zoning district shall be allowed not more than three feet beyond the required front yard setback. 
(2)  In the case of automobile service stations and similar uses which serve the motoring public, canopies shall be allowed over a driveway or walkway within the front yard not to extend from the principal building to a point any closer than 15 feet from the street right-of-way line. Such canopies shall provide a minimum 12 feet vertical clearance. 
(c)  Lots with multiple frontage. Buildings constructed on lots abutting the right-of-way of more than one street or road, regardless of whether said street or road is public or private, shall comply with the front yard setback requirements of the district on each frontage and all remaining property lines shall be considered side yards for setback purposes. 
(d)  Group projects. A group project two or more commercial, industrial, educational, medical, religious, or civic buildings to be constructed on a plot of land two acres, or more, such plot not to be subdivided) may be constructed provided: 
(1)  Such uses are limited to those permitted within the district in which the project is located; 
(2)  The overall density of land use is no higher, and the standard of open space is no lower than that permitted in the district in which the project is located; 
(3)  The distance of every building from the nearest property line shall meet the front yard setback and side yard requirements of the district in which the project is located; 
(4)  The building heights do not exceed the height limits permitted in the district in which the project is located. 
(e)  Maintenance of setbacks. 
(1)  No open space or yard established through standards for setbacks shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except as allowed herein the LDC. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and planted buffer strips shall not be construed to be an encroachment of yards. 
(2)  No part of any required yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space shall be considered to be part of a required yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space for any other building or structure or use. 
(f)  Exemptions. 
(1)  The setback requirements of this LDC for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average existing building setback line on lots located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot, within the same block and zoning district, and fronting on the same side of the street as such lot, is less than the minimum setback required. In such cases, the setback on such lots may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, and in no case less than ten feet from the street right-of-way. 
(2)  With the exception of height limitations identified in subsection (g) below, the height limitations of this article shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flag poles, radio towers, television towers, masts, aerials, silos, granaries, windmills, barns, and other structures concurrent to the operation of a commercial agricultural use, and similar structures. 
(g)  Height limitations surrounding public or private airports. 
(1)  All structures are subject to the air space control height and use restrictions surrounding airports, whether public or private. 
(2)  All airports public and private airports registered with the FAA shall maintain safe and appropriate takeoff and landing pathways, and shall not be encroached upon due to the height or placement of any structure. 
(3)  Any proposed structure shall not be permitted to penetrate any airspace surfaces, as defined in this section, on or near a public or private airport. 
(4)  Special attention shall be given to the following airspace areas surrounding public or private airports: 
a.  Approach surface. The approach surface is longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extends outward and upward from the end of the runway. The approach surface extends 5,000 feet from the end of the runway at an approach slope of 20 feet horizontally for each one foot vertically (20:1). The inner edge of the approach surface (beginning at each end of the runway) is 250 wide, and expands uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a distance of 5,000 feet from the end of the runway. 
b.  Transitional surface. The transitional surface extends outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and extends at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each one foot vertically (7:1) from the sides of the runway and approach surfaces. The transitional surfaces extend to the point at which they intercept the horizontal surface at a height of 150 feet above the established airport elevation. 
c.  Horizontal surface. The horizontal surface is a horizontal plane located 150 feet above the established airport elevation and encompasses an area from the transitional surface to the conical surface. The perimeter is constructed by generating arcs of 5,000 feet in length from the center of each end of the runway surface and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
d.  Conical surface. The conical surface extends upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet horizontally for every one foot vertically (20:1) for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. Height limitations for the surface range from 150 feet above the airport reference elevation at the inner edge of the conical surface to 350 feet at the outer edge of the conical surface. 
(h)  Building setback and height standards are provided in Table 4-B. 
Table 4-B Building Setback and Height Standards 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.02.03 - Installation of manufactured homes. 
(a)  All manufactured housing shall be erected, tied down, underpinned and have utilities connected thereto in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the office of the state fire marshal, as amended or modified from time to time. A permit for a manufactured home will be issued only if the home meets the minimum standards, as set forth in section 26-4.02.03(b) and approved by the following method: 
(1)  Manufactured homes located within Burke County. 
a.  Shall be inspected by the building inspector and found to meet the minimum standards in section 26-4.03.04(b). The building inspector will create a report of deficiencies prior to permitting. Major deficiencies of these standards may be required by the building official to be repaired prior to the relocation of the home. After the initial inspection, applicants requesting a permit for a manufactured home must provide the building inspector the following: 
i.  Signed affidavit of condition. 
ii.  Signed land owner permission letter. 
iii.  Verification of current Burke County tax registration. 
iv.  Current year's receipt of paid taxes (both land and home if applicable). 
v.  Valid relocation certificate. 
vi.  Written certification of on-site sewage disposal by county health inspector. 
vii.  Guarantee of condition bond in the amount of $1,000.00 (bond may be in the form of cash, cashier's check, or money order. Personal checks will not be accepted). Bonds are refundable upon final inspection and issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
b.  If the manufactured home does not meet these standards according to the building inspector, power will not be approved until the standards have been met. The "guarantee of condition" bond will be forfeited if these standards are not met within 90 days issuance of the permit. A re-inspection fee will be required for any subsequent inspection. 
(2)  Manufactured homes located outside of Burke County. 
a.  A collection of photographs may be submitted to the building official in-lieu of inspection. The building official may require any and/or all deficiencies of the standards (noted below) to be repaired prior to the relocation of the home. After the building official has deemed the house acceptable to be relocated into Burke County, applicants requesting a permit for a manufactured home must provide the building inspector the following: 
i.  Signed affidavit of condition. 
ii.  Signed land owner permission letter. 
iii.  Verification of current Burke County tax registration. 
iv.  Current year's receipt of paid taxes (both land and home if applicable). 
v.  Valid relocation certificate. 
vi.  Written certification of on-site sewage disposal by county health inspector. 
vii.  Guarantee of condition bond in the amount of $1,000.00 (bond may be in the form of cash, cashier's check, or money order. Personal checks will not be accepted). Bonds are refundable upon final inspection and issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
b.  If the manufactured home does not meet these standards according to the building inspector, power will not be approved until the standards have been met. The "guarantee of condition" bond will be forfeited if these standards are not met within 90 days issuance of the permit. A re-inspection fee will be required for any subsequent inspection. 
(b)  Manufactured home minimum standards: 
(1)  Exterior. All components of the exterior, including siding, windows and exterior doors of the manufactured home shall be aesthetically uniform in appearance and free of any condition that may hinder operation as originally intended or might admit moisture. 
(2)  Roof. The roof of the manufactured home shall be in sound condition with no obvious defects. 
(3)  Interior. The flooring, interior wall and ceiling shall be in sound condition and appearance. 
(4)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable escape window. 
(5)  Ventilation. Bathrooms and kitchens without a window must have an operable ventilation device. 
(6)  Smoke detectors. Each manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen area. The smoke detectors must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Smoke detectors older than ten years must be replaced. 
(7)  Sanitary facilities. Each manufactured home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom in the manufactured home shall contain a lavatory and water closet; at least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked when properly connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(8)  Electrical. The distribution panels of each manufactured home shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connections shall be checked for tightness. The electrical panels shall be accessible. All electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures shall be properly and securely installed. All GFCI devices and over current protection devices older than ten years shall be replaced. 
(9)  Hot water supply. Each manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(10)  Heating source. Each manufactured home shall have a safe central heating system in working condition. Un-vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(11)  Skirting. Installation of skirting shall be required. Installation shall be in accordance with the building inspector. Acceptable materials may include masonry, stone, metal or other materials manufactured for the purpose of skirting. Vinyl is prohibited. 
(12)  HUD Certification. The home must meet HUD Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards. 
(13)  Vapor barrier. All manufactured homes shall have a minimum six mil. Polyethylene vapor barrier applied directly to 90 percent minimum of exposed earth beneath the home. 
(14)  Address. The 911 physical address must be posted at the service road and on the home if there is more than one structure on the property. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.00 - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES. 
26-4.03.01 - Intensive agricultural uses. 
(a)  Intensive agricultural uses, which include but are not limited to dairy farms, hog farms, farrowing houses, poultry houses (both broilers and layers), livestock feedlots or holding lots are permissible in the A-1 zoning district subject to the standards of the zoning district and the site design standards set forth in this section. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to intensive agricultural operation such as waste lagoons, basins or pits, stackhouses, barns, sheds, and storage structures directly related to the agricultural use are permissible in the A-1 zoning district subject to the standards of the zoning district and the site design standards set forth in this section. 
(c)  Site design standards for intensive agricultural uses are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.02 - Livestock sales pavilions. 
(a)  Livestock sales pavilions are permissible in the A-1 zoning district subject to the standards of the zoning district and the site design standards set forth in this section. 
(b)  Site design standards for livestock sales pavilions are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.03 - Commercial slaughterhouses. 
(a)  Commercial slaughterhouses are permissible in the A-1 zoning district subject to the standards of the zoning district and the site design standards set forth in this section. 
(b)  Site design standards for commercial slaughterhouses are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.04 - Wholesale and retail sales of agricultural products. 
(a)  Wholesale and retail sales of agricultural products on property where the products were grown or produced are permissible in the A-1 district subject to the standards of the zoning district and the site design standards set forth in this section. 
(b)  Site design standards for structures used for the wholesale and retail sale of agricultural products are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.05 - Animal containment (with non-intensive agricultural uses). 
(a)  Animal containment of farm animals, including horses, for the purpose of non-intensive agricultural uses is permissible in the A-1 zoning district subject to the standards of the zoning district and the site design standards set forth in this section. 
(b)  Site design standards for animal containment are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.06 - Riding stables. 
(a)  Commercial or private riding stables and academies are permissible in the A-1 zoning districts subject to the standards of the zoning district and the site design standards set forth in this section. 
(b)  Site design standards for commercial or private riding stables and academies are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.07 - Animal care facilities. 
(a)  Animal care facilities, defined as animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, kennels or other animal boarding facilities, are permissible in the C-G and L-I zoning districts subject to the standards of the district. 
(b)  Animal care facilities are permissible in the A-1 and C-C zoning districts subject to the standards for the districts and the site design standards of this section. 
(c)  Site design standards for animal care facilities are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.08 - Commercial campgrounds. 
(a)  Commercial campgrounds, as defined in this LDC, are permissible in the A-1 zoning district subject to the standards of the zoning district, the rules of the department of human resources Chapter 290-5-18, Tourist Accommodations, the site design standards set forth in this section, and the plan submittal process described in this LDC. 
(b)  The submittal plan pack shall include: Site layout meeting specifications of table 26-4.03.08(e), prepared by a design professional, written certification from EPD accepting the well system design, written certification from the county health officer accepting the septic sewage system design, and the appropriate fee as set forth in the fee schedule. 
(c)  Plans shall be reviewed for compliance with this LDC by the building official, with the exception that proposals for 15 or more campsites shall also be submitted to the planning commission for review and consideration of approval in accordance with the procedures in section 26-9.02.03 of this LDC. 
(d)  All construction activities must be comply with state licensing regulations. 
(e)  Site design standards for commercial campgrounds are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.09 - Recreational campgrounds. 
(a)  Recreational campgrounds, as defined in this LDC, are permissible in the A-1 zoning district, subject to the standards of the district, the site design standards set forth in this section, and the plan submittal requirements described in article IX. 
(b)  Recreational campgrounds shall not operate as a commercial business. 
(c)  Site design standards for recreational campgrounds are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.10 - Outdoor activity uses (excluding outdoor amusement uses). 
(a)  Outdoor activity uses include but are not limited to tracks for go-carts and paintball facilities, as well as less intensive uses including but not limited to golf and country club courses, golf driving ranges, playgrounds, playfields, swimming pools, tennis courts, archery courses, miniature golf, and trampoline or other novelty areas. 
(b)  Outdoor activity uses are permissible in the I-1 and I-2 zoning district subject to the standards of the district. 
(c)  Outdoor activity uses are permissible in the A-1, C-C and C-G zoning districts subject to the standards of the district and the site design standards set forth in this section. 
(d)  Site design standards for outdoor activity uses are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.11 - Outdoor amusement uses. 
(a)  Outdoor amusement uses, including but not limited to motorsport racetracks or strips, amusement parks, or rifle or other gun firing range, are permissible in the A-1, I-I, and I-2 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district, the site design standards set forth in this section, and the plan review process in article IX. 
(b)  Site design standards for outdoor amusement uses are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.12 - Zoological parks. 
(a)  Zoological parks are permissible in the A-1 zoning district subject to the standards of the district and the site design standards set forth in this section. 
(b)  Site design standards for zoological parks are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.13 - Private schools (excluding facilities for pre-kindergarten age). 
(a)  Private primary, elementary, junior high (middle) or senior high schools, and private colleges and universities are permissible in the O-I, C-C, and C-G zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district. 
(b)  Private primary, elementary, junior high (middle) or senior high schools, and private colleges and universities are permissible in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the site design standards of this section. 
(c)  Site design standards for private schools, excluding facilities for pre-Kindergarten age, are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.14 - Family personal care homes and group care homes. 
(a)  Family personal care homes, as defined in state law, providing care for no more than six persons, are permissible in the A-1, R-1, R-2, O-I, C-C, and C-G zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the site design standards set forth in this section. 
(b)  Group personal care homes, as defined in state law, providing care for no more than 15 persons, are permissible in the A-1, O-I, C-C, and C-G zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the site design standards of this section. 
(c)  Personal care homes may not be operated in manufactured home, unless evaluated by a registered architect, brought into current code compliance. 
(d)  Site design standards for group personal care homes and family personal care homes are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.15 - Hospitals and congregate care homes. 
(a)  Hospitals and congregate care homes, including assisted living and independent living facilities, are permissible in the O-I, C-C and C-G zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the site design standards of this section. 
(b)  The following are site design standards for hospitals and nursing homes: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.16 - Private airport. 
(a)  Private airports are permissible in the A-1 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the design standards of this section. 
(b)  Site design standards for private airports are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.17 - Funeral homes. 
(a)  Funeral homes are permissible in the C-G and I-1 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the design standards of this section. 
(b)  Site design standards for funeral homes are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.18 - Cemeteries, mausoleums, and memorial gardens. 
(a)  Cemeteries are permissible in the A-1, R-1, O-1, C-C, C-G, and I-1 zoning districts, and any zoning district when an accessory use to a church or other place of worship, subject to the standards of the district and the site design standards of this section. 
(b)  Any person or persons establishing a cemetery, or mausoleum or combination thereof, for the purpose of selling any grave space, lot or crypt shall do so in accordance with the Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000. 
(c)  Any person or persons establishing a private cemetery or mausoleum, or family burial plot shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  The cemetery, mausoleum or burial plot shall be platted, approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court. 
(2)  All new grave sites in newly created private cemeteries shall be marked with a grave marker. 
(3)  The cemetery, mausoleum or burial plot shall be named and posted on the recorded property. 
(d)  Site design standards for cemeteries are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.19 - Junkyard and recycling centers. 
(a)  Junkyards are permissible in the I-1 and I-2 districts subject to the standards of the district and the site design standards of this section. 
(b)  Site design standards for junkyards are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.20 - Industrial uses with nuisance features. 
(a)  Industrial uses associated with nuisance features, such as odor, noise, vibration, or the use or storage of hazardous materials, in addition to extractive industrial uses and mining, are permissible in the I-2 zoning district, subject to the standards of the district and the site design standards of this section. 
(b)  Site design standards for industrial uses associated with nuisance features are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.21 - Manufactured home park. 
(a)  Manufactured home parks are permissible in the R-4 zoning district, subject to the standards of the district and the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Land subdivided and subsequently sold for the purpose of siting manufactured homes is not considered a manufactured home park by this section. Such subdivision of land is subject to the provisions of section 26-4.04.00. 
(c)  This section does not apply to manufactured home parks in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives except that all manufactured homes placed or replaced in grandfathered manufactured home parks after the effective date shall comply with all applicable provisions with the exception of the spacing and setback requirements. 
(d)  In the event of expansion, enlargement or establishment of additional lots in grandfathered manufactured home parks, all of the terms and conditions of this article shall apply to the additional lots thereby created. 
(e)  Individual lots within a manufactured home park shall have a minimum lot size of one-half acre each. The individual lots shall be exclusive of space required for access roads and the water supply system. 
(f)  Interior roadways shall be paved and constructed in accordance with the requirements of article VI of this LDC except for the following: 
(1)  Wearing surface width shall be 24 feet. 
(2)  Shoulder width shall be five feet. 
(3)  Total right-of-way to be determined by accommodating the storm drainage system with criteria for 25-year flood (minimum of 80 feet). 
(4)  Required property for interior roadways will be exclusive of the area required to provide one-half acres for each manufactured home. 
(g)  Manufactured homes shall be installed in accordance with section 26-4.02.04. 
(h)  Each manufactured home or site designed to accommodate a manufactured home shall have an individual connection to a central water supply system. 
(i)  Written certification must be obtained from the county health officer that the proposed location can satisfactorily accommodate the central water system and the on-site sewage disposal. 
(j)  Each manufactured home within a park shall be provided with an individual electric power connection. 
(k)  Manufactured homes on lots adjoining public roads shall conform to the building setback requirements of section 26-4.02.02 Table 4-B building setback and height standards. No manufactured home shall be closer to side or rear property lines than 15 feet and no closer to an adjoining manufactured home or portion thereof than 30 feet. 
(l)  Persons desiring to establish a manufactured home park shall submit plans for review by the building official as follows: 
(1)  The prospective manufactured home park owner should consult with the building official and the county health office to obtain advice and assistance prior to preparation of a development plan. 
(2)  The owner should provide: 
a.  A property plat. 
b.  Sketches of the proposed layout. 
c.  Soil analysis report. 
(3)  Submittal should include: 
a.  Two copies of a plat (drawn to scale at no less than one inch = 100 feet) drawn in enough detail to show conformance to subsections [(e) through (k)] above. 
b.  A check payable to the order of the board of commissioners in appropriate amount based on a review fee of $5.00 per each lot in the proposed manufactured home lot. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.22 - Manufactured homes. 
(a)  Manufactured homes are permissible in the A-1 zoning district subject to the standards of the district and section 26-4.02.03. 
(b)  Manufactured housing developments are permissible in the R-4 zoning district subject to the standards of the district and section 26-4.02.22. 
(c)  Manufactured homes, not including manufactured home parks, are permissible in the R-4 zoning district subject to building setback and height standards of the district, the standards of section 26-4.02.03, and the supplemental standards of this section. 
(d)  The site design standards for manufactured homes, not including manufactured housing developments, are as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.23 - Solid waste management facilities. 
Solid waste management facilities are permissible in the I-2 zoning district subject to the standards of the district and the Burke County Code of Ordinances, part II, chapter 34, article III solid waste management facilities. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.24 - Timber operations. 
Timber operations are permissible in the A-1 zoning district subject to the standards of the district and the Burke County Code of Ordinances, part II, chapter 30, article II timber operations. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.25 - Adult entertainment establishments. 
Adult entertainment establishments are permissible in the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts subject to the standards of the district and applicable requirements of the Burke County Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.26 - Solar energy farm. 
(a)  Minimum lot size. A solar farm installation shall require a minimum of five acres in the A-1 District. 
(b)  Maximum height. The design of the solar farm shall adhere to existing structural height requirements in the underlying zoning district. If the solar farm requires roof mounting on buildings on the property, the roof mounted installation may not exceed the maximum principal building height or accessory building height specified for the building type in the underlying zoning district. 
(c)  Setback requirements. Solar panels and related equipment shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines, with the exception that the width may be reduced to 50 feet if a dense vegetative buffer is provided as a visual screen between the use and adjacent properties in accordance with section 26-4.05.02. Equipment shall be screened from view from adjacent property and fenced to restrict unauthorized access. Screening shall consist of a minimum eight-foot opaque fence around the perimeter of the property with the addition of shrubbery, trees or an earthen berm as may be required to comply with glare requirements. 
(d)  Landscaping and buffers must be routinely maintained. 
(e)  Solar panels shall not be placed in the vicinity of any airport in a manner that would interfere with airport flight patterns. Acknowledgement from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) may be necessary. 
(f)  All power transmission lines from a ground mounted solar farm shall be located underground after connection from the solar panel combiners to the interconnection point. 
(g)  A solar collection system shall not be used to display signage, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags, banners or similar materials, with the exception that the manufacturers' or installers' identification and appropriate warning signage shall be posted at the site in a clearly visible manner. 
(h)  The design of the solar electric system shall conform to applicable industry standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute. The applicant for a building permit and land use permit shall submit certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment manufacturers from Underwriters Laboratories (UL), IEEE, Solar Rating and Certification Corporation (SRCC), ETL, or other similar certifying organizations. 
(i)  Reflection angles for solar collectors shall be oriented such that they do not direct glare toward residential users on adjacent properties 
(j)  Solar energy system components shall be designed with an antireflective coating. Verification shall be provided that verifies that the components of the solar energy system have this quality. 
(k)  The solar farm shall be constructed to and comply with applicable local and state building codes. 
(l)  The following requirements shall be met for building/development permit applications: 
(1)  A descriptive plot plan including setbacks, solar panel sizes, locations of property lines, building footprints, vegetative buffer design and road rights-of-way. 
(2)  Any other relevant studies, reports, certificates and approvals as may be reasonably requested by the building official. 
(3)  A stormwater management study shall be provided to ensure compliance with local BMPs, if applicable. 
(4)  A solar farm connected to the utility grid shall provide a "proof of concept letter" from the local utility company acknowledging the solar farm will be interconnected to the utility grid in order to sell electricity to the public utility entity. 
(5)  Documentation of land ownership and/or legal authority to construct on the property. 
(6)  Signed contract and/or affidavit ensuring perpetual maintenance of vegetative buffer and landscaping during operation of the solar farm. 
(7)  The following requirements shall be met for decommissioning: 
(8)  Solar energy farms which have not been in active and continuous service for a period of one year shall be removed at the owner's and/or operator's expense. 
(9)  The site shall be restored, at the owner's and/or operator's expense, to a natural condition within six months of the removal of equipment and/or within 18 months of discontinuance of use. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.03.27 - Wind energy facilities. 
(a)  The installation and design of the wind energy facility shall conform to applicable industry standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(b)  All electrical and mechanical components of the wind energy facility shall conform to relevant and applicable local, state and national codes, including but limited to: the Building Code, as amended by Burke County, the National Electrical Code, and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. 
(c)  The visual appearance of wind energy facilities shall at a minimum: 
(1)  Maintain a galvanized finish and be a non-obtrusive color such as white, off-white or gray; 
(2)  Not be artificially lighted, except to the extent required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority that regulates air safety; or otherwise regulates lighting, 
(3)  Not display advertising (including flags, streamers or decorative items), except for identification of the turbine manufacturer, facility owner and operator. 
(d)  Minimum setback requirements: 

 
(1)  Setbacks are measured from the center of the wind turbine base to the property line, public road, or nearest point on the foundation of an occupied building. Setbacks are calculated by multiplying the required setback number by the wind turbine height. (i.e., setback (1.1) = 1.1 x ht. of turbine). For example a 100 foot turbine should be at least 110 feet away from any public road line or to the edge of a building structure on the property or adjacent property. 
(2)  If a wind energy facility is sited on multiple properties, the lot size is the sum of all participating landowners. 
(3)  These setbacks are designed to reduce noise and shadow flicker impacts to any previously existing occupied buildings on adjacent properties. 
(e)  Noise and shadow flicker. 
(1)  Audible sound from a wind energy facility shall not exceed 55 dBA at any time, as measured at the property line of a non-participating landowner. The level, however, may be exceeded during short-term events such as utility outages and/or severe windstorms. 
(2)  Shadow flicker at any occupied building on a non-participating landowner's property caused by a wind turbine facility located within 2,500 feet of the occupied building existing at the time of initial operation of the facility shall not exceed 30 hours per year. 
(f)  Height. 
(1)  So long as the total extended height meets sound and setback requirements, there shall be no specific height limitation, except as imposed by Federal Aviation Administration regulations. 
(2)  See also standards in article IV of the LDC pertaining to height limitations surrounding public or private airports. 
(g)  Permit requirements. 
(1)  A wind energy facility, or addition of a wind turbine to an existing wind energy facility, shall not be constructed unless a building permit has been issued to the facility owner or operator approving construction of the facility under this section. Permit application of the expansion shall be based on the total rated capacity, including existing facility but excluding like-kind replacements of equipment. 
(2)  Any physical modification to an existing and permitted wind energy facility that alters the size, type or number of wind turbines or other equipment shall require a permit modification under this section. 
(3)  All wind turbines shall be built in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. 
(4)  The permit application shall contain the following: 
a.  A narrative describing the proposed wind energy facility, including an overview of the project; 
b.  The proposed total rated capacity of the wind energy facility; 
c.  The proposed number, representative types and height or range of heights of wind turbines to be constructed; including their generating capacity, dimensions and respective manufacturers, and a description of ancillary facilities; 
d.  Identification and location of the properties on which the proposed wind energy facility will be located; 
e.  A site plan showing the planned location of all wind turbines, property lines, setback lines, access roads and turnout locations, substation(s), electrical cabling from the wind energy facility to the substation(s), ancillary equipment, building(s), transmission and distribution lines. The site plan must also include the location of all structures and properties, demonstrating compliance of the setbacks; 
f.  A narrative describing how the proposed project will address compliance with the noise and shadow flicker requirements of these standards for the life of the project. The narrative should include a statement that the wind energy facility will be maintained according to the facility manufacturer's recommendations if such recommendations exist. 
g.  Certification by the property owner of compliance with applicable local, state and federal regulations, such as the Endangered Species Act (ESA), Migratory Bird Treaty Act, United States Corps of Engineers (USCOE), FAA and FCC regulations. Evidence of compliance or non-applicability shall be submitted with the application. 
h.  An environmental assessment for Class III and Class IV wind energy facilities will be provided to the county in order to show that the proposed project meets any relevant federal, state and local requirements, including but not limited to those identified under subsection g. above. 
(5)  The applicant shall have a third party, qualified professional conduct an analysis to identify and assess any potential impacts on the environment including wetlands, surface water and floodplain resources, wildlife and endangered species, historic or cultural sites, and adjacent agricultural uses such as rotating crops. The applicant shall take appropriate measures to minimize, eliminate or mitigate adverse impacts identified in the analysis. The assessment shall include correspondence with applicable agencies that documents consultation, applicable findings, and proposed mitigation measures. Such documentation shall include, but not be limited to, correspondence with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) regarding the potential presence of species of concern and associated Best Management Practices (BMPs) for site construction and operation, if applicable. 
(6)  Other relevant information as may be reasonably requested by Burke County to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section, such as a topographical survey. 
(7)  Decommissioning plans that describe the anticipated life of the wind power project, the estimated decommissioning costs in current dollars, the method for ensuring that funds will be available for decommissioning and restoration of site property, and the anticipated manner in which the wind power project will be decommissioned and the site restored. 
(h)  Decommissioning. 
(1)  The wind energy facility owner, operator and/or participating landowner shall have three months to complete decommissioning of the facility if no electricity is generated for a continuous period of 12 months. 
(2)  Decommissioning shall include removal of wind turbines, buildings, cabling, electrical components, roads, and any other associated facilities. If other uses are proposed for the decommissioned turbines, the wind facility owner, operator or participating landowner must obtain an amended permit. 
(3)  Disturbed earth shall be graded and re-seeded and subject to erosion and sedimentation control state and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.04.00 - CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. 
26-4.04.01 - Generally. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any division or redivision of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, parcels, building sites, or other divisions or redivisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, legacy, or building development; except the following is exempt from the platting requirements of this article: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of previously platted and recorded lots, parcels or building sites or portions thereof where the total number of lots, parcels or building sites is not increased and where the resultant lots, parcels or building sites are equal to the standards prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.04.02 - Subdivisions of five lots or less. 
(a)  The building official may review and approve or disapprove subdivisions containing five or less tracts provided that no new roads are created and that the divisions meet of requirements of this LDC. 
(b)  The planning commission shall review and approve or disapprove all subdivision plats of six or more tracts or any subdivisions creating new roads. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.04.03 - Subdivisions with private roads. 
(a)  The subdivision of land creating lots abutting on private roads shall be permitted provided that: 
(1)  The private roads and the rights-of-way therefore are constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of section 26-6.02.07(o), and fee simple title to the rights-of-way for the roads are vested in a nonprofit state corporation of which all owners of lots having a right to use the roads are required by covenants running with the land to be members (hereinafter referred to as the "owners association"). The owners association shall, by covenants running with the land recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court, have the obligation to maintain the private roads and rights-of-way therefore in a good, safe and well-kept condition, and shall be required to levy annual assessments on lots in the subdivision to pay the cost thereof and to establish and maintain reserves for future significant repair, rebuilding, repaving and maintenance of those roads not required on an annual basis, which assessments if unpaid when due become and continue to be a lien on the lot against which they were levied until they are paid. 
(2)  A subdivision of land creating lots fronting on private roads shall require approval of a preliminary plat and a final plat as set forth in this article for subdivisions using public roads, which shall be filed with the building official for processing by him and consideration by the planning commission. At the time of the filing of the plat for preliminary approval, the owner of the land shall also file all legal instruments, including but not limited to grants of easements, declarations of covenants and articles of incorporation and bylaws of the owners association to be reviewed by the planning commission to determine if all of the requirements of subsection (1) have been met. At the time of requesting final plat approval, a copy of the signed documents with all exhibits attached, along with a certificate of incorporation for the owners association from the secretary of state must be furnished to the planning commission for review. 
(3)  An appropriate permanent sign identifying the roads in the subdivision as private roads must be erected by the developer and maintained in good condition by the owners association or the developer at all locations where the private roads intersect with a public road. 
(4)  Subdivisions developed with the use of private roads must, except as specifically provided otherwise in this article, comply with all other requirements of this article dealing with or relating to the subdivision of land and the construction of improvements thereon. 
(5)  Each deed conveying a lot or lots in a subdivision with private roads shall contain a recitation in the deed that the property being conveyed is not served by a public road or public access. 
(6)  Private road subdivisions shall file in recordable form, in the office of the clerk of the superior court, covenants running with the land in perpetuity providing that the roads within such subdivision shall not be dedicated or deeded to the county unless they are improved to meet the public road requirements of this article and are accepted by the board of commissioners. 
(7)  No plat of a subdivision of land utilizing private roads for ingress and egress to the lots contained in the subdivision shall be approved unless it is in full compliance with the requirements of this article or unless a variance from any such requirement is granted. 
(8)  A minimum lot size of three and one-half acres shall be required for subdivisions with private roads. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.04.04 - Specific provisions for family ties land division. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to land divisions in the A-1 zoning district. 
(b)  Exemptions from platting requirements. 
(1)  Lots created as a result of the family ties land division are exempt from the subdivision standards set forth in section 26-4.04.00 and the platting requirements set forth in article IX, provided that the lots are conveyed to a grandparent, parent, stepparent, adopted parent, sibling, child, stepchild, adopted child, or grandchild of the owner of the parcel to be divided (parent parcel). 
(2)  Applications to create lots under the family ties land division process shall be processed by the building official as set forth in article IX. 
(c)  Design standards for lots to be conveyed. 
(1)  All lots created under the family ties land division process shall comply with all design standards for the zoning district in which the lots are located, except as specifically provided in this section. 
(2)  The minimum lot area is two acres. 
(3)  All lots created under the family ties land division process shall meet one of the following requirements for access: 
a.  Have a minimum of 50 feet of frontage on a paved public right-of-way and meet the lot width requirements set forth in section 26-4.02.01(q) Table 4-A standards for lot area, width and impervious surface; or 
b.  Provide one access driveway as follows: 
i.  The access driveway easement shall be a minimum of 30 feet wide and shall be recorded as an all-purpose easement. 
ii.  The access easement may serve a total of two family ties lots. 
iii.  There may be only one access easement every 250 lineal feet of public road frontage. 
iv.  The remainder of the parent parcel, after creation of lots under the family ties land division process, shall meet the minimum site design requirements of the zoning district in which the parent parcel is located. 
(d)  Limitations on number of conveyances. 
(1)  The parent parcel may be divided to create up to five lots for conveyance to family members as described in section 26-4.04.04(b). 
(2)  All lots created under the family ties land division process shall have a recorded survey prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.05.00 - BUFFER STANDARDS. 
26-4.05.01 - Generally. 
(a)  Buffers are intended to separate incompatible land uses and zoning districts from each other and are intended to eliminate or minimize potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, signs, and unsightly buildings or parking areas. 
(b)  Buffers shall be required between uncomplimentary uses in accordance with the provisions of LDC. 
(c)  Buffer planting requirements shall be guaranteed for the lifetime of the development. Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be performed to maintain the health of the plant materials, to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to ensure that the buffer serves the purpose for which it is intended. 
(d)  Required buffers shall not contain any parking, structures, buildings or portion thereof. 
(e)  Required buffers and proposed methods of complying with this Code section shall be submitted to the building official as part of the subdivision plat process. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.05.02 - Buffer location, measurement and design. 
(a)  Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending to the lot or parcel boundary line. 
(b)  Buffers shall not occupy any portion of an existing, dedicated, or reserved public or private street, or right-of-way. 
(c)  Buffer width is normally measured from the property line; however, design variations are allowed. Average width shall be measured at the two end points of the buffer and two additional points which are each approximately one-third of the total linear distance from the end point. 
(d)  Buffers shall be located on private property between the property line and any required fence or wall. 
(e)  Buffers shall be maintained as green open space, consisting of sod or ground cover, along with required plantings and access drives only. However, vegetation and/or topography or other conditions existing at the site that contribute to or create an effective barrier may be used to meet buffer requirements. 
(f)  Buffer landscaping and/or structural buffers (opaque fences, walls and/or earthen berms) shall be installed if existing vegetation or topography cannot provide an opaque visual height of eight feet on a continuous, year-round basis. Landscaping shall consist of a minimum eight shade trees (two-inch minimum caliper at the time of planting) and 25 shrubs per 100 linear feet. Shrubs shall be at least 18 inches in height at the time of installation. Structural buffers shall be located no closer to the property line than two feet, shall be made of rot-resistant material or protected from deterioration with waterproofing materials, shall present a finished and decorative appearance to the abutting property, and shall be no less than eight feet in height. 
(g)  Buffer landscaping shall be designed to avoid or minimize plantings within drainage, utility, or other easements. 
(h)  Buffer landscaping shall be designed taking into consideration the site's soils conditions, topography, and natural resources. Native vegetation shall be used for landscaping and buffering unless the applicant demonstrates that the use of non-native, drought-resistant plants would best serve the site. 
(i)  Buffer landscaping shall be established and maintained by the owner of the proposed development site. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.05.03 - Buffer area standards. 
Table 4-C Buffer Area Standards 

 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-4.06.00 - ALTERNATIVE SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. (RESERVED) 
ARTICLE V. - ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USE STANDARDS 

26-5.01.00 - GENERALLY. 
The provisions of article V apply to accessory uses, accessory structures, and temporary uses. Home occupations are considered accessory uses to residential development. Standards for home occupations are set forth in section 26-5.02.00. Standards pertaining to accessory structures are set forth in section 26-5.03.00. Standards for temporary structures and uses are set for in section 26-5.04.00. Standards for signs, which may be either accessory structures, or the principal use on a parcel, are provided in section 26-5.05.00. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.02.00 - HOME OCCUPATIONS. 
26-5.02.01 - Generally. 
(a)  A home occupation is permissible in a lawfully established dwelling unit in any zoning district where residential uses are permissible. 
(b)  The following and similar uses shall be considered home occupations: 
(1)  Office for professionals, such as attorneys, drafters, realtors, insurance agents, engineers, architects, and other consultants; 
(2)  Instruction or teaching, such as, but not limited to, academic tutoring, performing arts, fine arts, or culinary arts provided that no more than two students are instructed at any one time; 
(3)  Administrative or clerical support services, such as transcription, court reporters, stenographers, notary public, or addressing services; 
(4)  Personal services, such as beauty or barber shop, nail technician, dress-making or tailoring, provided that the service is limited to one station; 
(5)  Pet grooming; 
(6)  Day care for six or fewer children; 
(7)  Licensed medical practitioner (excluding veterinarians); 
(8)  Manufacturers' representative; and 
(9)  Studios for artists, photographers, or artisans. 
(c)  An interpretation that a use not listed in section 26-5.02.01(b) is similar shall be based on the tasks and activities normally associated with the proposed use and the similarity of those tasks and activities with the tasks and activities normally associated with a listed use. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.02.02 - Standards for customary home occupations. 
Customary home occupations shall meet the following standards: 
(a)  The occupation, profession or trade is carried on wholly within the principal building. 
(b)  No merchandise or articles are displayed in such a way as to be visible from outside the dwelling. 
(c)  There is no alteration of the residential character of the building or premises. 
(d)  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. 
(e)  Any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard. 
(f)  No sign shall be erected that exceeds six square feet, is illuminated, or is closer than five feet to any road right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.03.00 - ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. 
26-5.03.01 - Generally. 
(a)  It is the intent of this section to regulate the installation, configuration, and use of accessory structures on property in residential zoning districts with the exception of provisions for property in non-residential zoning districts that are identified herein. Regulation is necessary in order to ensure that accessory structures are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and are consistent with the character and intent of the zoning district in which the accessory structures are located. 
(b)  Permissible accessory uses and structures are identified in in article II of this LDC. 
(c)  Accessory structures shall be on the same lot and subordinate to the principal use or structure. 
(d)  Accessory use of open land shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  The accessory use of open land shall include recreation, water access, and similar activities, whether or not such activities are provided for compensation. 
(2)  The accessory use of open land shall be prohibited except where a principal structure has been located on the parcel. 
(e)  All accessory structures shall comply with the standards set forth below: 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided, accessory structures shall be located only in a rear yard of the lot on which the principal building is located; 
(2)  Accessory structures shall not be located on or within any recorded or required easement; 
(3)  Accessory structures shall be included in all calculations for impervious surface ratio standards and for stormwater management standards; 
(4)  Accessory structures, other than fences, shall not be located within any required buffer or landscaping area, parking lot, protected resource area, or stormwater management area; 
(5)  Accessory structures located in any residential zoning district shall not be used for any type of commercial operation, except as provided in section 26-5.03.02; 
(6)  Accessory structures shall not be used as a dwelling unit, except as provided in section 26-5.03.02 which sets forth standards for accessory dwellings; and 
(7)  Accessory structures shall comply with the following setbacks: 
a.  In all residential zoning districts accessory structures shall be a minimum of 15 feet from all property lines which do not abut a street right-of-way and shall observe the front yard setback requirements of the district along all property lines which do abut a street right-of-way, with the exception that a detached garage or carport may be allowed in a side yard and shall be required to comply with the principal building setback requirements of the district; 
b.  In all non-residential zoning districts, accessory structures shall meet the setback requirements for a principal building. 
(f)  An accessory building may be permitted on a separately platted lot provided that the following standards are met: 
(1)  The lot on which the accessory building is proposed shall abut the lot on which the principal building is located; 
(2)  The lot on which the accessory building is proposed and the lot on which the principal building is located shall have the same ownership; 
(3)  The lot on which the accessory building is located shall comply with the standards for lots within the zoning district as set forth in section 26-4.02.01; 
(4)  The accessory building shall be located in compliance with the setback standards for the zoning district, as set forth in section 26-4.02.02; and 
(5)  The accessory building shall otherwise comply with all standards set forth in section 26-5.03.01. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.03.02 - Accessory dwellings. 
(a)  Accessory dwellings include, but are not limited to, basement apartments, garage apartments, caretaker, tenant or other employee quarters, guesthouses, and other accessory dwellings. 
(b)  Accessory dwellings shall not include tents, boats, manufactured storage buildings and mobile structures including RV's and travel trailers, with the exception that RV's and travel trailers may be allowed for occupancy in a campground or travel trailer park as permitted in the LDC. 
(c)  Accessory dwellings contained within a principal dwelling shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  There shall be no more than one accessory dwelling in a principal dwelling unit; 
(2)  The accessory dwelling shall be accessible from the interior of the principal building; 
(3)  The accessory dwelling shall have no more than one bedroom; 
(4)  The accessory dwelling shall not exceed 50 percent of the habitable floor area of the principal dwelling or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less; 
(5)  One additional off-street parking space shall be provided to serve the accessory dwelling; and 
(6)  The accessory dwelling shall comply with all building and health code standards. 
(d)  Freestanding accessory dwellings shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  There shall be no more than one accessory dwelling unit per lot on any residentially zoned property. The dwelling shall be occupied only by family members, guests, or individuals employed full-time by the family residing in the principal building for the purposes of elderly or child care; 
(2)  There shall be no more than one accessory dwelling unit per lot on any industrially zoned property. The dwelling ("caretaker dwelling") shall be occupied only by individuals employed for the purpose of providing on-site security for the business and grounds; 
(3)  There shall be no more than five accessory dwelling units per lot on any agriculturally zoned property. The dwelling(s) ("tenant dwelling") shall be occupied only by individuals employed full-time for the agricultural production of the property; 
(4)  The accessory dwelling unit may be located in a second floor over a detached garage or may be a separate structure; 
(5)  The accessory dwelling unit on any residentially zoned property shall have no more than two bedrooms; 
(6)  The accessory dwelling shall be located only within the rear yard; 
(7)  The lot shall comply with the minimum lot area standards set forth in the standards for lot area, width and impervious surface table in article IV; 
(8)  One additional off-street parking space shall be provided to serve the accessory dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.03.03 - Uses accessory to religious facilities. 
Uses and activities other than the principal use of worship, which is a form of religious practice together with its creed and ritual, shall be considered accessory uses and shall be clearly ancillary to the primary use. Such uses and activities shall be limited to: 
(a)  Religious instruction (such as "Sunday School," Bible school, or similar instruction or study typically associated with the religion); 
(b)  Offices to support the establishment; 
(c)  Child or adult day care, subject to state regulations and licensing requirements; 
(d)  Private academic school, including nursery school or preschool, subject to the standards of section 26-4.03.14(c); 
(e)  A fellowship hall, with or without a kitchen, (which may be known as a community center, activity hall, or life center); 
(f)  Recreation facilities; 
(g)  Individual meeting spaces; 
(h)  A parsonage; and 
(i)  Outdoor play or activity areas, which shall be no closer than 50 feet from any property that is zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.03.04 - Outside storage. 
Outside storage used in connection with agricultural, commercial or industrial activities shall comply with the following requirements, with the exception that outside storage in the A-1 zoning district is exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) below: 
(a)  Outside storage in the C-G, I-1, or I-2 zoning districts must be located in a side or rear yard and screened from all rights-of-way and residential districts that abut a permitted outside storage area. 
(1)  Stored materials in the C-G, I-1, or I-2 zoning district shall be screened by a fence, hedge, durable masonry wall, or stand of trees of sufficient opacity to provide a visual blind designed to be compatible with the character of adjoining properties. Said fence or wall shall be a minimum of five feet. Hedges, trees, or comparable natural plantings shall be of a rapid growth evergreen species and be a minimum height of three feet at time of planting. 
(2)  Stored materials C-G, I-1, or I-2 zoning district shall not exceed the height of the fence enclosing the outside storage area. 
(b)  Stored materials shall not be stored within any required buffer area, stormwater management area, or easement. 
(c)  No vehicle, trailer, industrialized building (modular), mobile home, or manufactured home shall be used as storage buildings. This requirement shall apply to all vehicles and trailers, including commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles, panel vans, tractor trailer rigs, and railroad box cars, modular classrooms, with the exception that tractor trailer rigs and trailers may be used for temporary storage on properties zoned A-1, I-1 or I-2 where there are businesses operating on the same property. 
(d)  The outdoor storage of more than two inoperable vehicles at a filling station or convenience store with gasoline pumps shall be prohibited unless said vehicles are stored wholly within the building. 
(e)  The outdoor storage or parking of more than two inoperable vehicles at filling stations, truck stops, or any other business or industrial use is declared to be a junkyard. 
(f)  No more than two inoperable vehicles may be parked, stored, or maintained on any property which is residentially zoned. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.03.05 - Dumpsters. 
Dumpsters (not owned by the county ) shall comply with the following requirements, with the exception that properties in the A-1 and A-2 zoning districts shall be exempt: 
(a)  Dumpsters shall be screened with a solid masonry wall or opaque fence. The fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height. 
(b)  A gate shall be provided for access. 
(c)  Dumpsters shall be located on a paved surface of sufficient size to accommodate the dumpster. 
(d)  Dumpsters for food service establishments shall provide a drain and a grease trap. 
(e)  Dumpsters shall be located to the rear of the principal building. A location in the side of the principal building shall be permissible only where rear yard locations cannot provide adequate access for pick-up. 
(f)  Dumpsters shall not be located within any required buffer area, stormwater management area or easement. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.03.06 - Solar collection system. 
Solar collection systems shall be considered an accessory use in all Zoning Districts in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Freestanding solar panels shall only be permitted in the rear and side yard in commercial and industrial zoning districts, and in the rear yard only of agricultural and residential zoning districts. 
(b)  Freestanding solar panels located on the ground or attached to a framework located on the ground shall not exceed 20 feet in height above the ground. 
(c)  Freestanding solar panels shall meet the setback requirements of the districts in which they are located, or be set back 20 feet, whichever is greater. 
(d)  The total coverage of a lot by freestanding solar panels cannot exceed the greater of 50 percent lot coverage or the maximum allowable coverage for the district in which they are located. 
(e)  Roof-mounted solar panels installed on a building or structure with a sloped roof shall not project vertically more than the height requirements for the district in which they are located. The panels shall not be located within three feet of any peak, eave, or valley of the roof to maintain pathways of accessibility. Combined height of the solar energy system and structure to which it is mounted may not exceed the maximum building height allowed in that zoning district for the type of structure to which it is attached. 
(f)  Owners of solar collection systems located on the roof shall provide, as part of the building permit application, evidence of structural certification if the slope of the panel differs from the roof pitch. All panels on commercial roofs shall provide this information regardless of slopes, as well as any residential roof with greater than 50 percent coverage. 
(g)  The manufacturers' or installers' identification and appropriate warning signage shall be posted on or near the panels in a clearly visible manner. 
(h)  No solar energy system shall be installed until evidence has been presented to the building official that the electric utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator or alternative power producing equipment. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(i)  For any solar collection system installed for use by someone other than the owner of the property, an affidavit or evidence of agreement between the property owner and system owner or operator must be provided to the county to confirm the facility owner or operator has permission of the property owner to install and utilize the solar collection system. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.03.07 - Wind energy facility. 
(a)  Class I wind energy facilities, as defined in this LDC, are allowed as an accessory use in all zoning districts in accordance with the requirements set forth in article IV of this LDC. 
(b)  Class II wind energy facilities, as defined in this LDC, are allowed as an accessory use in the A-1, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts in accordance with the requirements set forth in article IV. 
(c)  Class III and Class IV wind energy facilities, as defined in this LDC, are allowed as an accessory use in the A-1 zoning district in accordance with the requirements set forth in article IV. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.04.00 - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES. 
26-5.04.01 - Temporary structures and uses during construction. 
A temporary building or use in connection with a construction project shall be permitted during the construction period. The following standards shall be met by temporary uses established during construction: 
(a)  A building permit shall be required. 
(b)  Temporary offices may be located on a construction site to be used for administrative functions during construction, sales functions or sales offices allowing for the sale, resale, or marketing of dwellings, structures, or property within the development in which it is located, or adjacent developments under the same control. 
(c)  The proposed construction building shall meet tie-down requirements for mobile structures, and have a contract for sewage pump-out if approved by the Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. Construction buildings, equipment, machinery, and materials shall be removed within 30 days of completion of the construction site for which they are permitted. 
(d)  On-site outdoor storage of equipment and construction materials shall be allowed during the period of construction. 
(e)  Portable toilet facilities shall be provided. 
(f)  Construction and demolition debris dumpsters are allowable and are not required to be screened. 
(g)  On-site temporary use of structures and equipment for the building of roads, public utilities, and government projects shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, adopted September 11, 2018, set out two sections numbered as § 26-5.05.01. To maintain sequential numbering within this chapter, this section has been renumbered as 26-5.04.01, at the discretion of the editor. 
26-5.05.00 - SIGNS. 
26-5.05.01 - Purpose and applicability. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through a comprehensive system of reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral, and nondiscriminatory sign standards and requirements. 
(b)  No sign shall be placed or maintained on any property, building or other structure within the county except in conformity with this LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.05.02 - Use and placement of signs. 
(a)  No sign shall be erected or maintained whereby reason of its position, working, illumination, size, shape or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure or interfere with the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device. 
(b)  No sign shall be located within any road right-of-way. 
(c)  Flashing or intermittently illuminated signs shall be located not closer than 200 feet to any residential dwelling or closer than 50 feet of the right-of-way line of any public road. All such signs must be approved by the building official, must not conflict with any traffic control device, nor interfere with vehicular traffic. 
(d)  No freestanding sign, excluding billboards, shall be erected to exceed 30 feet above the ground level. 
(e)  The bottom coping of a freestanding sign shall be at least three feet above the ground or roadway level. 
(f)  Freestanding signs, with the exception of billboards, may be installed within the required front yard setbacks. No portion of the sign shall overhang any public right-of-way. 
(g)  In addition to all other requirements of this section, the following standards shall apply to billboards: 
(1)  Billboards shall be erected or placed in conformity with the side, front and rear building setback requirements of the zoning district in which the sign is proposed to be located. In addition, the billboard must be set back a distance that is no less than the measurement of the height of the billboard including to the right-of-way. 
(2)  The maximum size of the sign face shall be 14 feet by 48 feet. 
(3)  The minimum height of the billboard to the bottom edge of the sign face shall by 24 feet and the maximum height of the billboard to the top edge of the sign face shall be 50 feet. 
(4)  There shall be a minimum of 5,000 feet spacing between billboards on the same side of the road. 
(5)  In the case of a conflict between the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Act (if applicable) and the county's regulations, the billboard must comply with the most restrictive requirements with respect to each and every item of regulation. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.05.03 - Permits and inspections. 
(a)  Required permits. 
(1)  Billboards. 
a.  Placement of a billboard shall require a sign permit from the department of planning, permits and inspection. 
b.  Applications for a billboard must include sealed construction plans and a site plan showing the proposed sign location and all right-of-way and property lines indicated on the plan. 
(2)  Other signs. 
a.  Signs greater than 48 square feet in size shall require a sign permit. 
b.  Any sign, regardless of size, that requires an electrical permit shall also require a sign permit. 
c.  Signs that are 48 square feet or less and that do not require an electrical permit shall not require a sign permit; however, such signs must comply with the setback and placement requirements of this section and the zoning district in which the sign is proposed to be located. 
(b)  Inspections. 
(1)  All signs for which a permit is required by this section are subject to inspection by the building official. 
(2)  For freestanding signs and billboards, a footing inspection is required before any concrete is poured. 
(3)  For any sign using illumination, an electrical inspection is required. 
(c)  Issuance of permit if application in order. 
(1)  It shall be the responsibility of the building official, upon receipt of a completed application for a sign permit and any required fees, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and, if the proposed structure is in compliance with the requirements of this section and all other applicable provisions of this LDC to issue a sign permit evidencing the applicant's compliance therewith, within 30 working days from date of filing for a sign permit for a permanent sign. 
(2)  Sign permits shall be issued in the name of the property owner upon which the sign is to be located. 
(3)  Issuance of the permit shall in no way prevent the building official from later declaring said sign to be nonconforming if the permit is obtained based on false information submitted by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.05.04 - Sign and structure maintenance. 
(a)  The sign and sign structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, with proper anchorage capable of supporting the imposed loads, so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(b)  When a sign or sign structure is found to be in need of maintenance, the building official shall issue a notice of violation to the property owner, which shall describe the maintenance issue, and provide a reasonable amount of time to repair the violation. 
(c)  If, after receiving the notice of violation, the property owner fails to remedy the maintenance issue within the time provided, it shall be a violation of this LDC, subject to citation. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-5.06.00 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS. 
26-5.06.01 - Wireless telecommunication towers. 
(a)  Placement limitations. The tract of land on which a wireless telecommunications tower or antenna is proposed to placed shall be sufficient in size to have a lineal dimension from the base of the tower or antennas, or any structure on which the tower or antennae are located, to all property lines equal to or greater than the height of the tower or antenna. 
(b)  Height limitations surrounding public or private airports. 
(1)  All wireless telecommunications facilities and towers are subject to the air space control height and use restrictions surrounding airports, whether public or private. 
(2)  All public and private airports registered with the FAA shall maintain safe and appropriate takeoff and landing pathways, and shall not be encroached upon due to the height or placement of any wireless telecommunication facility. 
(3)  Any proposed communications tower or antennae shall not be permitted to penetrate any airspace surface, as defined in this Code, of a public or private airport. Airport surfaces are listed as follows: 
a.  Approach surface. 
b.  Transitional surface. 
c.  Horizontal surface. 
d.  Conical surface. 
(c)  Application requirements. The applicant for any wireless telecommunications facility or tower must file with the building official on an application accompanied by the following documents, if applicable. If any of these materials represents proprietary information, the applicant must so designate those materials. Proprietary information will not be disclosed. 
(1)  Specifications. One copy of typical specifications for proposed structures and antenna, including description of design characteristics and material. 
(2)  Site plan. A site plan drawn to scale showing property boundaries, existing structures, tower location, tower height, guy wires and anchors, and existing land uses and structures on adjacent property. 
(3)  Antenna capacity/wind load. A report from a structural engineer registered in Georgia showing the tower antenna capacity by type and number, and a certification that the tower is designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA 222 (latest revision) standards. 
(4)  Antenna owners. Identification of the owners of all antenna and equipment to be located at the site as of the date of the application. 
(5)  Owner authorization. Written authorization from the site owner for the applications. 
(6)  FCC license. Copy of valid FCC license for the proposed activity, or proof that the applicant is the winning bidder for an FCC license at auction and that the final issuance of the FCC license purchased at auction is pending. 
(7)  Safety codes. Applicant must show that all applicable health, nuisance, fire and safety codes are met. 
(8)  Airport location. Applicant must show that the proposed facility is not located in any airspace surface as defined in this section. 
(d)  Action on application. 
(1)  An application for a proposed collocation or modification to an existing wireless facility or tower (a "modification" is defined as a proposal to: increase the overall height or width of the wireless support structure to which the wireless facilities are to be attached; increase the dimensions of the equipment compound initially approved by Burke County; or, exceed the applicable weight limits for the wireless support structure, as demonstrated by a letter from a structural engineer licensed to practice in this state) shall be reviewed by the building official within the following timeframe: 
a.  Within 90 calendar days of the date an application for modification or collocation of wireless facilities is filed with the building official, unless another date is specified in a written agreement between the building official and the applicant, the building official shall: 
i.  Make his or her final decision to approve or disapprove the application; and 
ii.  Advise the applicant in writing of his or her final decision. 
b.  Within 30 calendar days of the date an application for modification or collocation is filed with the county, the building official shall determine if it is a complete application and, if he or she determines the application is not a complete application, notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete such application. 
c.  To the extent additional information is required to complete the application, the time required by the applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward the 90 calendar day review period set forth in subsection (1) of this Code section. 
(2)  Application for a new wireless telecommunications tower. A proposed new wireless telecommunications tower shall be reviewed by the zoning official within the following timeframe: 
a.  Within 150 calendar days of the date an application for a new wireless support structure is filed with the building official, unless another date is specified in a written agreement between the building official and the applicant, the building official shall: 
i.  Make his or her final decision to approve or disapprove the application; and 
ii.  Advise the applicant in writing of his or her final decision. 
b.  Within 30 calendar days of the date an application for a new wireless support structure is filed with the county, the building official shall determine if it is a complete application and, if he or she determines the application is not a complete application, notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete such application. 
c.  To the extent additional information is required to complete the application, the time required by the applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward the calendar day review period set forth in subsection (2) of this Code section. 
(3)  Written decision. Any decision by the building official to deny a request to place, construct, or modify personal wireless service facilities or towers shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence, contained in a written record, or reasons therefor reduced to writing. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
ARTICLE VI. - INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS 

26-6.01.00 - GENERALLY. 
The purpose of article VI is to establish standards and requirements for the provision of infrastructure by all development. This article contains requirements for the transportation system, set forth in section 26-6.02.00. Board of health requirements are provided in section 26-6.03.00, and potable water and sanitary sewer requirements are included in section 26-6.04.00. Draining and stormwater management requirement are set forth in section 26-6.05.00. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-6.02.00 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ROADS. 
26-6.02.01 - Generally. 
(a)  The standards given in this section shall apply to the design and construction of all new or extended public and private roads within the county. 
(b)  The design, plans and specifications of all roads to be, or intended to be, dedicated to the county shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed by the state and shall meet the minimum requirements of the applicable portions of the then current edition of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-6.02.02 - Road classifications. 
Roads within the county are classified according to their inherent and relative function: 
(a)  Residential land service road means a public road or right-of-way therefor not under the jurisdictional control of the state, nor intended for such control, and is not considered to be significant to intracounty vehicular travel, and which provided or is intended to provide vehicular access to land in use or intended for use primarily for residential purposes. 
(b)  Nonresidential land service road means a public road or right-of-way therefor not under the jurisdictional control of the state, nor intended for such control, and is not considered to be significant to intracounty vehicular travel, and provides or is intended to provide access to land in use or intended for use primarily for commercial and industrial purposes, or accommodates or is intended to accommodate frequent vehicular traffic to land areas whose use or intended use is primarily for such purposes. 
(c)  County vehicular service road means a public road or right-of-way therefor not under the jurisdictional control of the state and is considered to be significant to intracounty vehicular travel. 
(d)  State route means a public road or right-of-way therefor under the jurisdictional control of the state or is intended or acceptable of such control, and is not owned and maintained or intended to be owned and maintained by the county as a public road. 
(e)  Private road means a road, or any designated right-of-way or easement therefor, or vehicular access routes from public rights-of-way to private property, not under the jurisdictional control of the county or the state, nor intended or acceptable for such control, and is not owned and maintained or intended to be owned and maintained by the county as a public road. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-6.02.03 - Acceptance of roads. 
(a)  The planning commission shall have the authority to review and recommend to the board of commissioners approval or disapproval of the location and character of all new roads, rights-of-way, and drainage facilities to be constructed in new subdivisions and intended for public ownership and maintenance and to recommend acceptance or rejection of such facilities, roads and rights-of-way for public ownership and maintenance. 
(b)  No deed for land designated as or containing the right-of-way of any new or proposed public road or extension thereto shall be filed or recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court until approval has been recommended by the planning commission and the board of commissioners has agreed to accept same into the public road system. The clerk of the superior court shall not file or record a property deed for land designated as or containing such a right-of-way that has not been approved and accepted by the county. 
(c)  No person shall represent, for the purpose of transferring by lease, sale or bequest, or by agreement or negotiation for such transfer, that a road or right-of-way is a public road or right-of-way until the road or right-of-way shall have been classified, approved and accepted as a public road or right-of-way by the county and property deeds to that effect have been properly and lawfully recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court. 
(d)  Prior to any road being accepted for ownership and maintenance by Burke County, the criteria of section 26-6.02.07(n) shall be met. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-6.02.04 - Installation of underground public utility lines. 
(a)  The following minimum specifications shall govern the installation of underground public utility lines on county road rights-of-way. They are the minimum specifications for installation of underground utilities including lines for electricity, water, natural gas, telephone, cable television, and street lights on county road rights-of-way: 
(1)  All of the above shall be located a minimum of two feet from the edge of the pavement and shall be located a minimum of two feet below the existing grade. 
(2)  Public utility lines shall be located underground along all new roads, and, at the discretion of the public works director, on all existing roads when serving new construction, excluding single-lot residential development. 
(3)  Where practical, paved roads shall be bored rather than cut for the location of utilities. 
(4)  The cutting of all paved county roads shall be cleared through the road superintendent prior to the cut being made except in the case of extreme emergency. 
(5)  Any paved road which is cut to a width of more than 12 inches shall be filled with a compacted base material to within eight inches of the riding surface and with concrete to within two inches of the riding surface. The remaining two inches shall be filled with asphaltic concrete to allow for a smooth riding surface. 
(6)  Any paved road which is cut to a width of 12 inches or less shall be filled with a compacted base material to within two inches of the riding surface. The remaining two inches shall be filled with asphaltic concrete to allow for a smooth riding surface. 
(7)  Any dirt road which is cut shall be filled with a compacted base material. 
(b)  Private roads. (Reserved) 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-6.02.05 - Right-of-way (ROW) protection. 
(a)  County road system. 
(1)  All new or extended roads shall be designed and constructed to complement the existing or planned systems of county roads. To this end, the county shall have the authority to approve the location, width and alignment of all new roads or rights-of-way therefore as may be proposed or offered for public ownership, development and/or maintenance. 
(2)  The county may also require the reservation or dedication of right-of-way within lands proposed for subdivision development, as provided for in this section, as the county deems necessary to extend, widen or otherwise improve an existing public road or right-of-way therefor, or to provide for the future extension of a new public road to serve properties abutting or adjacent to the land to be subdivided. 
(b)  Fencing. Fencing shall not be located in the right-of-way or on a property line. See also article IV for locational requirements for zoning buffers in relation to right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-6.02.06 - Access. 
(a)  Lot access and ingress or egress easements. 
(1)  Access to each lot resulting from a subdivision is provided by frontage on a public road or a private road meeting the requirements of this article, or by fee simple title. 
(2)  An access corridor easement ("access corridor") may be used in lieu of requirements listed in subsection (1) above. Access corridors must meet the following conditions: 
a.  The designated access corridor must be a minimum of 80 feet in width, with the exceptions that property zoned R-1 may have a minimum width of 30 feet if the subject lot cannot be further subdivided, and any landlocked parcels in existence at the date of adoption of this LDC shall be allowed a minimum access corridor width of 20 feet. 
b.  The designated access corridor must be located a minimum of 500 feet from any other access corridor, measured from the center of one corridor to the center of the other. 
c.  Any access corridor may only be utilized for ingress and/or egress for up to two principal residential dwellings upon meeting the conditions of subsection (2)a. above. 
d.  The designated access corridor must be shown and included on the plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court. 
e.  Prior to further division of land or the issuance of any building permit for the construction of additional residences on lots which access a public or private road by access corridor, a road conforming to the requirements of this LDC must be constructed through the access corridor and service all further divisions or development. 
f.  Lots with less than 500 feet of frontage shall be allowed one access corridor, provided that the minimum 500 feet distance between adjacent corridors is maintained. 
g.  All lots with a designated access corridor must meet the requirements of article IV of this LDC. 
(b)  Street access control. In order to promote the safety of the motorists and pedestrians and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Vehicular access from properties to public roads shall not exceed 30 feet in width. 
(2)  Not more than two points of vehicular access (ingress/egress) from any lot to an abutting public road shall be permitted for each 400 feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof; however, lots with less than 100 feet of frontage shall have not more than one point of access to each abutting public road. 
(3)  No point of access shall be allowed within 35 feet of the right-of-way line of any public road intersection, measured from the closest point of the access drive. 
(4)  No access drive shall be located closer than 30 feet to another such access drive on the same lot. 
(5)  No access to a state or federal route shall be permitted without the prior approval of the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-6.02.07 - Road design requirements. 
(a)  Width of roads and rights-of-way. The minimum width of new or extended public road rights-of-way, wearing surfaces, and shoulders shall be as follows in Table 6-A: 
Table 6-A Road and ROW Width Requirements 

 
(b)  Vertical alignment of roads. In no case shall roadway grades exceed ten percent nor be less than one-half percent. The board of commissioners may reduce the maximum gradient for nonresidential land service roads. 
(c)  Horizontal alignment of roads. 
(1)  The radius of road curvature shall be not less than 90 feet, except the board of commissioners may increase this minimum radius for nonresidential land service roads. Curve radii shall be measured from the road centerline. 
(2)  A tangent of at least 200 feet shall be provided between reverse curves. 
(d)  Intersections. 
(1)  All roads shall intersect at right angles unless prevented by unusual site characteristics. In such cases, the board of commissioners may approve a lesser intersecting angle or require the relocation of the intersection. 
(2)  Road jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted. 
(3)  Islands at intersections shall meet sight distance requirements established by AASHTO and shall be subject to individual approval by the board of commissioners. Anything extending more than three feet above the top of the curb within the right-of-way of the intersecting streets shall require approval by the county road superintendent. 
(e)  Utility easement. (Reserved) 
(f)  Visibility. 
(1)  In order to provide a clear view of intersecting rights-of-way and/or private driveways, there shall be a triangular area of clear visibility formed by the two intersecting rights-of-way, driveways, or combination thereof. 
(2)  The horizontal dimensions of sight areas are defined as triangular areas formed by the intersecting right-of-way lines and a straight line joining the right-of-way lines 20 feet from the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines. 
(3)  The vertical dimensions of sight areas are defined as that vertical space between the heights of three feet and 12 feet in elevation above the nearest edge of the street pavement of a paved street or above the nearest edge of the riding surface of an unpaved street. 
(g)  Preparation of right-of-way. 
(1)  The full width of all rights-of-way shall be shaped to approximate required grades, alignment and other specifications such that base and wearing surfaces can be constructed, improved or extended in a manner that will not damage abutting property. Abutting property shall be suitably sloped to the right-of-way line. Due regard shall be shown for desirable trees and other vegetative matter not impairing visibility. 
(2)  Before grading is started, the entire area of the right-of-way shall be cleared of all exposed stumps, logs, grass, weeds, roots, rubbish, loose boulders, and other debris or otherwise objectionable material protruding through the ground surface. 
(3)  All tree stumps, boulders and other obstructions shall be removed to a minimum depth of two feet below the finished surface of all slopes and the area of which base material is to be applied. Rock whenever encountered shall be scarified or removed to a depth of 12 inches below the subgrade. 
(4)  In all areas to be graded or filled, the subdivider shall stockpile the topsoil later to be spread over all disturbed areas that are not to be paved. 
(5)  All suitable material from roadways may be used in the construction of fills, approaches or at other places as needed. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clays, and similar materials, shall be removed from the development site. The fill shall be spread in layers not to exceed 12 inches loose and compacted by a sheepsfoot roller. The filling of utility trenches and other places not accessible to a roller shall be mechanically tamped. 
(h)  Embankments and erosion control. Immediately after grading and filling and respreading the topsoil, all shoulders and slopes within the right-of-way shall be stabilized to retard erosion and drainage facilities opened or temporary slope drains constructed to accommodate and direct acceptable surface water runoff. 
(i)  Ditches and drains. 
(1)  Each road and road right-of-way shall have a drainage system adequate to provide for the proper drainage of all surface water. 
(2)  Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit the full width of the required roadway, including shoulders and ditch slopes. Size and openings of all cross drains shall be as required by the county road superintendent. Cross drains shall be built on straight line and grade, and shall be laid on a firm base, but not on rock. Pipes shall be laid with spigot ends pointing in the direction of the water flow. Ends shall be properly fitted and matched to provide tight joints and a smooth, uniform invert. Drains shall be placed at sufficient depth below the road bed to avoid dangerous pressure of impact, and in no case shall the top of the drain pipe be less than one foot below the roadway base. 
(3)  Drainage ditches shall be constructed along both sides of the roadway. All ditches shall be two feet deep and have an invert of two feet. The front slope of the ditch shall have a horizontal-to-vertical slope ratio of not less than 3:1, and a back slope of not less than 2:1. All ditches shall be stabilized to retard erosion. 
(4)  Concrete side drains or equivalent with size openings of not less than 15 inches shall be installed to provide for surface water drainage under all driveways. Installation shall be as required for cross drains. 
(j)  Roadway base and shoulder. 
(1)  The minimum type of roadway base and shoulder material allowed shall be topsoil, sand-clay or chert, which shall have physical properties equivalent to that required for class B material gradation contained in the applicable state department of transportation specifications. 
(2)  Base material shall be spread in a manner such that right-of-way slopes and ditches will not be damaged, such that a smooth and uniform surface will be produced. 
(3)  Base material shall be applied consistent with the procedures set forth in the applicable state department of transportation specifications. 
(4)  For residential land service roads the roadway and shoulder base shall have a minimum compacted depth of six inches. For nonresidential land service roads the corresponding minimum compacted depth shall be eight inches. 
(k)  Prime coat. 
(1)  All finished base surfaces shall have a bituminous prime coat applied before surface treatment material is spread. The minimum acceptable prime coat material shall be cutback asphalt of a grade as required by the county road superintendent based on temperature and the texture of the base surface. 
(2)  The prime coat shall be applied at the rate of one-quarter gallon per square yard of base. Application of the prime coat shall be consistent with the applicable state department of transportation specifications. 
(l)  Surface treatment. 
(1)  After the prime coat has been properly cured, a permanent wearing surface shall be applied to the roadway base. 
(2)  For residential land service roads, the minimum acceptable wearing surface shall consist of a type I bituminous treatment using stone, size five, aggregate with a bituminous seal using stone, sizes seven and 89, aggregate. All materials and construction methods shall conform to the provisions of the applicable state department of transportation specifications. 
(3)  In lieu of this bituminous treatment, the wearing surface of residential land service roads may consist of hot mix asphaltic concrete, type E or F, including bituminous material, rolled and compressed to a thickness of not less than one and one-half inches. All materials and construction methods shall conform to the provisions of the applicable state department of transportation specifications. 
(4)  For all nonresidential land service roads, the minimum acceptable wearing surface shall consist of a type I bituminous surface treatment using stone, size six, aggregate with a seal of hot asphaltic concrete, type E, including bituminous material, rolled and compressed to a minimum thickness of one and one-half inches. All materials and construction methods shall conform to the applicable provisions of state department of transportation specifications. 
(m)  Control of work and inspections. 
(1)  The county road superintendent shall have the authority to control the construction of all residential and nonresidential land service roads. In exercising such authority, the county road superintendent shall decide all questions concerning the acceptability of materials and construction methods. 
(2)  The county road superintendent shall have the authority to inspect all construction work done and materials used to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Whenever the county road superintendent finds that materials and/or work performed are not in compliance with this article, he may require the removal or replacement, or otherwise require the correction of the nonconformity. 
(4)  The county road superintendent however may not waive or reduce the requirements of any provisions of this article. 
(n)  Guarantee in lieu of completed improvements. 
(1)  No new or extended residential or nonresidential land service road shall be approved and accepted by the county for public ownership and maintenance, and no subdivision plat containing such a road shall be given final approval until one of the following conditions shall have been met: 
a.  All roads, rights-of-way and drainage facilities are designed and constructed consistent with the provisions of this article and so approved by the county road superintendent. 
b.  The professional engineer who designed the roads and rights-of-way shall opine to the county that the improvements were constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor. 
(2)  The planning commission shall require a surety bond in an amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost of all required road, right-of-way and drainage facility improvements, such that in the event of default by the owner or developer, the required improvements may be made by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  In addition to the requirements of this section, the owner or developer shall remain liable to the county for any repairs or maintenance of such road and drainage facilities for a period of one year from date of acceptance by the county. 
(o)  Subdivisions with private roads. 
(1)  The roads in private road subdivisions shall be constructed with the following minimum design criteria: 
a.  A 80-foot right-of-way. 
b.  A minimum of 18 inches of mixed and compacted subbase to 95 percent modified proctor. 
c.  Four inches of graded aggregate compacted at 95 percent modified proctor. 
d.  Slope of road surface from the centerline shall be one-quarter inch per foot. 
e.  Open ditch sections shall be within the right-of-way of the road and designed with criteria for 25-year flood. 
(2)  A soil analysis report shall be submitted to the county. 
(3)  The design and construction of the roads shall be approved by the planning commission and the public works director. 
(p)  Cul-de-sacs. 
(1)  All permanent dead-end streets shall be constructed as cul-de-sacs with a turnaround provided at the closed end. 
(2)  Residential cul-de-sacs shall have a right-of-way radius of at least 60 feet, and pavement radius of at least 45 feet, as measured to the back of the curb or edge of pavement if not curbed. 
(3)  Nonresidential cul-de-sacs shall have a right-of-way radius of at least 75 feet, and a pavement radius of at least 60 feet, as measured to the back of the curb. 
(4)  If a street is planned to be terminated as a cul-de-sac the subdivider may not utilize a vacant lot to extend the street to an adjacent property without proper notification to affected property owners. Such a change in the construction plans shall be considered a variance and must be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. 
(5)  Streets that terminate in a cul-de-sac shall be a maximum of 1,200 feet in length. 
(6)  Cul-de-sacs may have central landscaped islands with a minimum pavement radius of 50 feet and a minimum 20 feet wide paved area in the radius. 
(q)  Development entrances. (Reserved) 
(r)  Temporary turn-arounds. (Reserved) 
(s)  Traffic control devices. (Reserved) 
(t)  Blocks. The county may require the reservation of an easement through a block to accommodate utilities or drainage facilities. 
(u)  Sidewalks. Where installed, sidewalks shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Sidewalk construction shall follow a logical design approved by the public works director. The design shall be in accordance with the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) specifications and with design and location standards required herein. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be a minimum width of five feet. 
(3)  Access ramps are to be placed at all drives, intersections, and all curb encroachments; all ramps and be constructed/installed incompliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(4)  Maintenance of sidewalks shall be the responsibility of the developer or property owner. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-6.02.08 - Parking standards and design. (Reserved) 
26-6.02.09 - Drive-through facilities and stacking lanes. (Reserved) 
26-6.03.00 - BOARD OF HEALTH REQUIREMENTS. 
26-6.03.01 - On-site sewage management systems. 
(a)  Where individual septic tanks or means other than connection to a public sanitary sewerage system are to be employed temporarily or permanently as a method of sewage disposal for one or more lots within a subdivision, evidence of the tentative approval of such methods by the county health officer shall be submitted with the subdivision plat. 
(b)  Acceptable evidence of such tentative approval shall be a written statement bearing the signature of the county health officer and specifying that the subdivider has consulted the county board of health as to the suitability of such methods within the subdivision and each lot therein and that the tentative approval of the board of health has been granted for the use of such methods or that the subdivider has been apprised of subdivision design modifications to be made to render proposed lots suitable for septic tank use. Such modifications shall be specifically stated in the health officer's certification statement. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-6.04.00 - SANITARY SEWER, POTABLE WATER, AND OTHER UTILITIES. 
26-6.04.01 - Sanitary sewer. 
(a)  The developer shall be responsible for installing adequate public sanitary sewer facilities when such sewerage lines are available for connection to serve all existing and proposed buildings in the subdivision. 
(b)  Any residential dwelling, commercial establishment or industrial establishment shall be connected to public sewer when sewerage lines are available within 200 feet for connection. Connection shall be at the cost of the property owner and in accordance with the policies and procedures of the applicable water and sewer utility provider. 
(c)  Where public sanitary sewer systems are not available, on-site sewage disposal systems (i.e., septic tank) shall be installed, subject to approval by the board of health and provided that the lots conform to all requirements of this LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-6.04.02 - Potable water. 
(a)  Domestic water supply shall be provided in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Community Health, Environmental Health Division. 
(b)  All public water facilities shall be installed subject to the policies and procedures of the applicable water and sewer utility provider. 
(c)  No building permit shall be issued by the building official without the approval of EPD for a proposed private well, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-6.04.03 - Fire protection. (Reserved) 
26-6.04.04 - Street lights. (Reserved) 
26-6.05.00 - DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. 
26-6.05.01 - Drainage. 
Drainage systems shall meet the requirements of section 26-6.02.07(h) of this LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-6.05.02 - Stormwater. 
All proposed stormwater management structures shall be designed and certified by an appropriate state approved professional, and shall be subject to the approval of the county. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS AND AGENCIES 

26-7.01.00 - GENERALLY. 
The boards and commissions described in article VII are established for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this LDC. The boards and commissions described in this article shall have the powers and duties described necessary to achieve the purpose of this LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-7.02.00 - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. 
26-7.02.01 - Duties and responsibilities specifically related to this LDC. 
The board of commissioners may amend, delete, supplement, or change by resolution the provisions of this LDC or the official zoning map, in accordance with the requirements of section 26-9.01.07 of this LDC. The official zoning map will be attached as appendix "A" to the ordinance from which this chapter derives. The Official Zoning Map of Burke County shall be maintained and retained in the planning commission office. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-7.03.00 - PLANNING COMMISSION. 
26-7.03.01 - Established. 
The Burke County Planning Commission, herein referred to as the planning commission, is hereby established to be organized and empowered as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-7.03.02 - Membership. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be residents of Burke County, Georgia. 
(b)  Each member of the board of commissioners shall nominate one member to the planning commission, who shall be residents of the district of residence of the appointing board of commissioner member. The board of commissioners shall vote upon the nominations and appoint the five members of the planning commission. 
(c)  The terms of the members shall be for four years. Said members shall be allowed to succeed themselves at the discretion of the board of commissioners. Each member shall serve until a successor has been appointed and taken office. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. 
(e)  Any member of the planning commission who does not attend three successive meetings without reasonable cause shall be deemed to have resigned from the commission, and the board of commissioners shall accept nominations pursuant to subsection (a) of this section and appoint a new member to serve the balance of the term of the resigned member. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-7.03.03 - Quorum. 
(a)  A quorum of the planning commission shall consist of three voting members. Any official decision of the planning commission provided herein shall require a quorum. Official action may be taken by the planning commission by a majority vote of those present. 
(b)  The chairman and vice-chairman shall be eligible to vote on all issues pending before the planning commission. 
(c)  Official action may not be taken by the PC unless a majority of the members are present. Official action may be taken by the PC by a majority vote of those present. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-7.03.04 - Officers. 
(a)  Chair. The planning commission shall elect its chair from among its members. The term of chair shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The chair shall be eligible to vote on all issues pending before the planning commission. 
(b)  Vice-chairman. The planning commission shall also elect a vice-chair from among its members. The term for the vice-chair shall be one year with eligibility of re-election. The vice-chair shall serve as chair in absence of the chair. The vice-chair shall be eligible to vote on all issues pending before the planning commission. 
(c)  Secretary. The building official shall serve as secretary of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-7.03.05 - Meetings, rules and procedures, and records. 
(a)  The planning commission shall make its own by-laws and rules of procedure. 
(b)  The planning commission shall keep accurate minutes and records of its activities. 
(c)  The planning commission shall set a regular monthly meeting time. 
(d)  All meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public and shall comply with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, et seq., and all records of the planning commission shall be public records. 
(e)  The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the board of commissioners. 
(f)  Notice of each meeting shall be given to each member of the planning commission at least 72 hours prior to any meeting. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-7.03.06 - Duties and responsibilities. 
The Burke County Planning Commission shall: 
(a)  Hear and make recommendations on applications for zoning changes and amendments to the text of this LDC. 
(b)  Review and approve or disapprove of subdivision plats in accordance with the requirements of this LDC. 
(c)  Review and approve or disapprove of site plans for specific proposed uses, as may be required in the site design standards for specific uses section of article IV of this LDC. 
(d)  Have responsibility for final decision on the following types of applications in accordance with section 26-7.04.00: 
(1)  Appeals of administrative decisions; and 
(2)  Variances. 
(e)  To carry out such other duties, responsibilities or activities as may be requested by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-7.03.07 - Indemnification and defense of members. 
(a)  All present and future members of the planning commission shall be defended by the county, by the counsel of its choice, against any civil action arising out of the performance of any member's duties as a member of the planning commission except that no such defense shall be furnished to any member charged with a criminal offense involving theft, embezzlement or other like crime with respect to the property or money of or in which the county has an interest. 
(b)  The county shall pay all of any judgment rendered against any member of the planning commission after defense of any civil action by the county except for a judgment rendered in any civil claim or judgment where the member of the planning commission acted in an intentionally reckless or harmful manner and beyond the scope of said member's authority in creating the cause of action for which the civil claim was instituted. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-7.04.00 - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. 
26-7.04.01 - Authority. 
The planning commission shall have the authority to hear and decide appeals and authorize variances in the terms of this LDC and in the decisions and orders of the building official in the administration of this LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-7.04.02 - Powers of the board of zoning appeals. 
(a)  Duties and power. The planning commission, acting as the board of zoning appeals, shall have the power and exercise of duty to hear and decide the following types of appeals and applications in accordance with section 26-9.03.00 of this LDC, and to such end shall have the necessary authority to ensure continuing compliance with its decision. 
(1)  Interpretation. To render an interpretation of this LDC and the manner of its application where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement or determination made by the building official in the administration of such provisions. 
(2)  Variance. To authorize upon an appeal in specific cases such variance from this LDC as will not be contrary to the interest of this article, nor detrimental to the public interest and welfare. Variances from the terms of this LDC may be granted on appeal by the planning commission if it finds that: 
a.  The literal enforcement of this LDC will create an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty in the development of the affected property, except mere loss in property value shall not justify a variance; there must be a deprivation of a reasonable, beneficial use of land. 
b.  The situation causing the hardship or difficulty is neither self-imposed nor generally affecting all or most properties within the general vicinity. 
c.  The relief sought will not injure the permitted use of adjacent conforming property. 
d.  The granting of the variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of this LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
ARTICLE VIII. - VARIATIONS 

26-8.01.00 - GENERALLY. 
The purpose of article VIII is to provide mechanisms for obtaining relief from the provisions of the LDC. Section 26-8.02.00 addresses relief through requirements regarding nonconforming development. Section 26-8.03.00 addresses relief through the grant of a variance in a particular situation due to the characteristics of the land to be developed based on the required site design standards. Section 26-8.04.00 addresses relief through the grant of an administrative waiver in specific situations. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-8.02.00 - NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES AND USES. 
26-8.02.01 - Generally. 
It is the intent of this article to avoid any unreasonable invasions of established private property rights; however, this article recognizes that the elimination of existing structures and uses that are not in conformity with the provisions of the LDC is as much a purpose of this article as is the prevention of new uses that would, if established, be contrary to the purpose and intent of this article. 
(a)  Within the zoning and overlay districts established by the LDC there may exist lots, structures, or uses of land which were lawfully established before the LDC was adopted but which do not comply with the requirements set forth in the LDC. 
(b)  It is the intent of section 26-8.02.00 to allow these nonconformities to continue until they are removed or discontinued. It is further the intent of this section that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses in the district where the nonconforming use is located. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-8.02.02 - Damage to structures. 
(a)  A non-conforming structure or a structure containing a non-conforming use that is damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, Act of God, or other cause (excluding neglect or dilapidation) to an extent of more than 60 percent of its fair market value at time of the damage or destruction shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of the LDC. 
(b)  A structure that is damaged to an extent less than 60 percent of the fair market value may be restored and occupied as before the damage, provided the following standards are met: The building official may require additional upgrades to electrical system of the structure if found not to be in compliance with current building regulations. 
(1)  Restoration shall be commenced within six calendar months from the date damages were incurred. 
(2)  If reconstruction is not commenced within six months, the reconstruction and use of the land or structure shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the LDC. 
(c)  Fair market value, where required, shall be determined by reference to current statutory provisions pertaining to the valuation of real property for ad valorem tax purposes. 
(d)  A nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use that is declared by the building official to be physically unsafe or unlawful due to neglect or dilapidation from a lack of repairs and maintenance shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-8.02.03 - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  Any lot of record for which a plat or legal description has been legally recorded in the Office of Clerk of Superior Court of Burke County at the time of adoption of the LDC and was in compliance with all county development regulations at the time of recording but which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements or lot area requirements for the district in which it is located may be used for any of the uses permitted within the district by the LDC, provided that: 
(1)  The minimum requirements of the district for front, side, and rear yard, open space, height, and floor area shall be complied with. 
(2)  The lot is approved by the board of health for the use of a private waste water system. 
(b)  No permit for the use of any lot which is substandard in terms of the provisions of the LDC shall be issued unless said lot was legally and properly recorded prior to the passage of the LDC. In all cases, construction on any substandard lot of record after the adoption of the LDC shall be required to meet all requirements of the district in which it is located. 
(c)  If two or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of this LDC and such lots individually are too small to meet the yard, width, and area requirements of the district in which they are located, such groups of lots may be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size and the lot or lots in one ownership shall be subject to the requirements of this LDC. A plat and deed depicting the combined lots shall be recorded with the clerk of court. An exception to this subsection (c) is as follows: any individual lot that does not meet the area requirements of the district in which it is located upon adoption of this LDC may be utilized if it meets the minimum lot size required by the department of health; however, all other requirements of the zoning district shall be met. 
(d)  No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot frontage or depth; front, side or rear yard; lot area; or other requirements of the LDC, are not maintained. This requirement shall not apply when a portion of a lot is required for public purposes. 
(e)  Allowed modification of setback requirements. When a building is proposed on a lot and when on either or both lots which adjoin such lot at the street right-of-way line there exists a principal building which does not conform to the setback requirements of the LDC, the required setback for such building shall be as follows: 
(1)  Where only one said adjoining lot contains a principal building with a nonconforming setback, the setback shall be the computed average of the normal setback requirement and the nonconforming setback, or 
(2)  Where both adjoining lots contain a principal building each with a nonconforming setback, the minimum setback shall be the computed average of the two nonconforming setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-8.02.04 - Nonconforming structures. 
A lawfully established structure that becomes nonconforming at the time of adoption of the LDC may continue subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Any existing use of a nonconforming structure may be changed to another use upon the finding by the building official that the proposed use: 
(1)  Is similar in its operation and effect on surrounding properties; 
(2)  Will not generate more automobile or truck traffic, create more noise, vibration, smoke, dust or fumes, is not a more intensive use of structures than the existing use, and is not in any way a greater nuisance to the adjoining properties than the existing; and 
(3)  Will not have a negative impact on the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  The nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged. 
(c)  The structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its degree of nonconformity. 
(d)  If a nonconforming structure is moved for any reason for any distance, it shall be brought into conformance with the site design standards of the zoning district to which it is moved. 
(e)  When any use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for a continuous period in excess of 12 months, any future use of the structure is permissible only when the structure has been brought into compliance with the provisions of the LDC. 
(f)  If a building or structure that is conforming as to use but nonconforming as to required building setbacks, performance standards, and applicable supplementary regulations, the building or structure may be enlarged or added to, provided that the addition or enlargement fully complies with all applicable requirements. 
(g)  On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming position of the structure provided the total floor area existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-8.02.05 - Nonconforming uses. 
A lawfully established use of structures or open land that becomes nonconforming at the time of adoption of the LDC may continue subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  A structure containing a nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except to change the use to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended to occupy any land outside the existing structure devoted to the use. Any nonconforming use of a structure may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of the LDC. 
(c)  A nonconforming use of a structure or open land which is superseded by a permitted use shall not thereafter be resumed. 
(d)  Discontinuance of use. 
(1)  After a nonconforming use shall have been discontinued for a period of one year, it shall not be reestablished or changed to any use except a conforming use. 
(2)  No nonconforming use may be discontinued for any period and changed to any other type of nonconforming use. 
(3)  Electrical service to a mobile home which does not meet HUD housing regulations may not be permitted or reconnected after an interruption of service for a period exceeding 12 months. 
(e)  A nonconforming use of open land shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  There shall be no expansion of the quantity of land devoted to the nonconforming use; 
(2)  There shall be no expansion of the activity on the land to occupy a greater amount of land within the nonconforming parcel; and 
(3)  No structure shall be established, installed, erected, or constructed so long as the nonconforming use exists. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-8.02.06 - Nuisances. 
(a)  Findings. It is found and declared that in the county there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business occupancy or use and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of this county; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures. 
(b)  Adoption of state law; designation of code enforcement officer. 
(1)  O.C.G.A. §§ 41-1-1 through 41-2-16 of that title known as "Nuisances" are hereby adopted as the public nuisance ordinance of the county. The O.C.G.A. sections shall be a part of this section as fully as if quoted verbatim herein. 
(2)  The board designee shall serve as the county public nuisance officer as contemplated by the above-referenced O.C.G.A. sections. Such public nuisance officer shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Complaints; investigation; notice of hearing. Whenever a written request is filed with the public nuisance officer (hereinafter referred to as "the officer") by a public authority, or by at least two residents of the unincorporated area of the county, charging that any dwelling, building or structure in such area is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use or whenever it appears to the officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use or is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, the officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building or structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the officer (or his designated agent) at a place within the county, fixed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the officer. 
(d)  Determination after hearing; issuance of order. If after notice and hearing pursuant to this section the officer determines that the dwelling, building or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use or is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building or structure as a human habitation; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure. 
(e)  Basis for requiring removal, demolition of nuisance structure. In no event shall the board of commissioners require the removal or demolition of any dwelling, building or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration or improvement thereof exceeds 60 percent of the value of such dwelling, building or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this section. 
(f)  Failure of owner to comply with order; duties of officer, placarding of structure. If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order issued under this section to vacate and close or demolish the nuisance dwelling, building or structure, the officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished; and the officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling or structure so closed a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(g)  Ordinance authorizing abatement action. If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be removed or demolished; provided, however, that the duties of the officer set forth in the LDC and in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b)(4) and (5) shall not be exercised until the board of commissioners has by ordinance ordered the officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 with respect to the particular property or properties which the officer has found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. 
(h)  Creation of lien; sale of property, use of funds. 
(1)  The amount of the cost of vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the officer pursuant to this section shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(2)  The lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of demolition by the county and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of the costs by the officer in the office of the clerk of the superior court for the county and in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners on a lien docket maintained by the clerks for such purposes. 
(3)  If the dwelling, building or structure is removed or demolished by the officer he shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. 
(i)  Enforcement of collection of amount due. The board of commissioners may enforce the collection of any amount due on a lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings or structures only in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the county, within 30 days after the perfection of the lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the county the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed. 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the county. 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien or any portion thereof be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (2) above, the county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings or structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon the property, all as provided by Article 3 (§ 48-4-40 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of O.C.G.A. Tit. 48. 
(j)  Physical conditions constituting nuisance. The officer may determine that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents of the county. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Unsafe; 
(6)  Structural defects; and 
(7)  Uncleanliness. 
(k)  Use of structure in connection with drug crimes deemed nuisance. The officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, unsafe and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(l)  Powers of officer. The officer shall have all powers of investigation, examination, appointment and delegation, etc., as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11. 
(m)  Enforcement. The county ordinance officer shall be authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with all provisions of this section in the unincorporated areas of the county, and on or in county-owned or operated facilities or property, in accordance with all applicable laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-8.03.00 - VARIANCES. 
26-8.03.01 - Variances from the LDC. 
The planning commission shall hear and decide all appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this LDC as specified in article IX, section 26-9.03.00. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-8.04.00 - ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVER. 
26-8.04.01 - Authority and limitations. 
The building official is authorized to reduce specific site design and development standards of the LDC where the intent of the LDC can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a waiver of standards. The authority to grant a waiver shall be limited to the following: 
(a)  A reduction in the minimum front, side, or rear yard setbacks for a single lot, provided the following standards are met: 
(1)  The reduction is necessary in order to implement landscaping, buffer, and tree protection standards of the LDC; and 
(2)  The reduction is limited to a maximum of 20 percent of the minimum standard. 
(b)  A reduction in the parking requirement, provided the following standards are met: 
(1)  The reduction is necessary in order to implement landscaping, buffer, and tree protection standards of the LDC; and 
(2)  The reduction is limited to either one space or ten percent of the parking requirement, whichever is more; and 
(3)  The reduction does not limit the availability or location of required handicapped parking. 
(c)  A reduction in landscaping or buffer requirements, provided the following standards are met: 
(1)  The reduction is necessary due to particular physical conditions of the property, such as the shape of the lot, topography, presence of bodies of water, or other natural features; 
(2)  The reduction is limited to 20 percent of the otherwise required width of the buffer; and 
(3)  The reduction is limited to 20 percent of the otherwise required plant materials. 
(d)  In addition to the standards identified in subsections (a), (b) and (c) above, the building official shall also review proposed waivers to ensure the proposal, if granted: 
(1)  Would not cause substantial detriment to the public good; and 
(2)  Would comply with all fire safety, utility and environmental health requirements; and 
(3)  Would not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity; and 
(4)  Would not impair the purpose and intent of this Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-8.04.02 - Administrative waiver process. 
(a)  An application for an administrative waiver shall include such descriptions, maps or drawings as needed to clearly illustrate or explain the action requested, and such filing fees as may be required. The building official may request such additional information from the appellant as necessary to provide a full understanding of the appellant's request. 
(b)  The building official shall render a final decision on any application within 15 days receive of a complete application for an administrative waiver. 
(c)  Any administrative waiver approval shall be made in writing to the applicant and also by made a part of the department's records. 
(d)  Upon the building official's denial of any application, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such denial in accordance with the appeals process in article IX. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 

26-9.01.00 - GENERALLY. 
26-9.01.01 - Purpose. 
Article IX sets forth the procedures and requirements that shall be followed in order to seek approval for any development in unincorporated Burke County. Article IX also sets forth the requirements for appealing decisions and for enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.01.02 - Approvals required. 
(a)  No person shall develop any property within Burke County without first obtaining an approved subdivision plat and permits to perform such activities. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of a subdivision plat shall conform to the specifications of such approved plat. 
(b)  A plat of a land subdivision shall be recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Burke County when approved as required by this article. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without such approval is declared to be a violation of this LDC. 
(c)  The transfer of, sale of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval as required by this article and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Burke County is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in such an instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from prescribed penalties. 
(d)  A building permit, or a sign permit in case of a sign, issued by Burke County is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving, or alteration of any building, structure, or sign except for those specific situations which are exempted as set forth in this Code. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation or filling of any lot for any construction of any building, or to commence construction of any building, or to commence the moving or alteration of any building until a building permit for such work has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.01.03 - Expiration of approvals. 
(a)  Any building permit or other permit shall become void if the work authorized by the permit has not begun within six months after the date of issuance of the permit. 
(b)  If construction described in a building permit or other permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(c)  The time period for which a permit is valid may be extended for one or more periods of not more than 90 days each where an application for such extension is filed and such extension has been granted in writing by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.01.04 - Fees required. 
(a)  All applications shall be accompanied by payment of application fees, as adopted by the board of commissioners, and any other fees that may be assessed in accordance with Georgia statutes or code requirements. 
(b)  An application shall not be complete until all required fees are paid. Such fees shall include the filing fee, and where notice is required, shall include an additional fee to defray the expense of preparing and mailing such notices. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.01.05 - Procedures for conducting public hearings. 
Public hearings concerning a proposed zoning decision or application under consideration by the board of commissioners shall adhere to the following procedures: 
(a)  All persons who wish to address the board of commissioners at a hearing concerning a proposed zoning decision or application under consideration by the board of commissioners shall first sign up on a form to be provided by the county administrator prior to the commencement of the hearing. 
(b)  The board of commissioners chairman or his designee will read the proposed zoning decision or application under consideration and any county departmental reviews pertaining thereto prior to receiving public input on such proposed zoning decision or application. Proposed zoning decisions or applications shall be called in the order in which they were filed. 
(c)  The chairman of the board of commissioners or his designee shall then call each person who has signed up to speak on the zoning decision or application in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak. 
(1)  The applicant will always speak first. 
(2)  Prior to speaking, the speaker will identify himself or herself and state his/her current address. 
(3)  Only those persons who signed up to speak prior to the commencement of the hearing shall be entitled to speak. 
(d)  Each speaker shall be allowed sufficient time to address the board of commissioners concerning the zoning decision or application then under consideration. 
(1)  The county administrator shall be designated as the time keeper to record the time expended by each speaker. 
(2)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and as amended from time to time, both proponents and opponents of any proposed zoning decision shall be given a minimum of ten minutes per side for their presentation. 
(e)  Each speaker shall: 
(1)  Speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning decision or application under consideration and shall address his remarks only to the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning decision or application under consideration. 
(3)  The board of commissioners may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
(f)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the board of commissioners from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to assure that the public hearing on a proposed zoning decision or application is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.01.06 - Notice requirements—Planning commission. 
(a)  Notice requirements—Variance requests. 
(1)  Published notice. At least 15 days prior to the public meeting to consider the variance request, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing and the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the nature of the requested action. 
(2)  Posting of signs. 
a.  In addition to the newspaper notice, a sign or signs shall be placed by an official of the department of planning, permits and inspections in a conspicuous location on the property frontage in such manner as to be legible from the public road. On lots with more than one road frontage, the sign shall be placed on each road at each location where access will be gained to the property. 
b.  The sign(s) must be placed no less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing and shall state the date, time and place for the public hearing and the nature of the proposed variance. 
(b)  Notice requirements—Zoning decisions. 
(1)  Before making a recommendation concerning a proposed rezoning, the planning commission shall hold a public meeting to consider the application after adequate notice of the meeting has been given. 
(2)  The county shall give notice of such public meeting and the application to be considered by providing notice of the meeting in the same manner as required for public hearings under section 26-9.01.07. 
(3)  After hearing comments from all interested parties, the planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its recommendation to the board of commissioners, unless extended upon request of the applicant and the approval of the planning commission. If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation within the specified period, the board of commissioners may vote to proceed with a public hearing on the application without a recommendation from the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.01.07 - Notice requirements—Board of commissioners. 
Prior to making any zoning decision, including any amendment to this LDC or the official zoning map, the board of commissioners shall conduct a public hearing. The public hearing shall be called and a public notice provided in accordance with this LDC and with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4, Public hearing notice, as follows: 
(a)  A notice of time and place of the hearing shall be published at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days, prior to said public hearing in the official legal organ of Burke County or another newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the county. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4. If the proposed amendment is a rezoning of property initiated by a party other than the board of commissioners, then: 
(1)  The published notice, in addition to the foregoing, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and, 
(2)  A sign or signs containing that same information shall be placed on the property by the department of planning, permits and inspections not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days, prior to the date of the hearing. The sign or signs shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property frontage in such manner as to be legible from the public road. On lots with more than one road frontage, a sign will be placed facing each public road. If the property has no road frontage, a sign shall be placed at a location on each road where access will be gained to the property. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.01.08 - Notice of agricultural adjacency. 
(a)  Generally. When a non-agricultural use is proposed for property abutting an existing general agricultural (A-1) district or will be located within the required minimum setbacks for such district, the developer or property owner shall be provided with a "notice of agricultural adjacency" at the time an application for a building permit or for a change in zoning classification or use is filed. 
(b)  Requirements. 
(1)  As a condition of and prior to any administrative action on either the change in zoning classification or use request, or the issuance of any land use, building, or occupancy permit, the applicant shall be required to sign a waiver on a form prepared by the building official which will indicate that the applicant understands that there is an ongoing agricultural land use adjacent to the subject property which could produce odors, noise, dust, and other effects which may not be compatible with the applicant's development. Nevertheless, understanding the effects of agricultural operations and uses on adjacent land, the applicant agrees, by executing the form, to waive any objection to those effects and understands that his change in zoning classification or use and/or his permits are issued and processed in reliance on his agreement not to bring any action against adjacent land owners, whose property is agricultural and or an agricultural operation, or any local government, asserting that the adjacent agricultural operations or uses of agricultural land constitutes a nuisance; provided that said existing agricultural use is operated in conformance with this LDC and with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations. 
(2)  Any such notice or acknowledgement provided to or executed by a land owner adjoining an existing agricultural use or within the required minimum setbacks for said use shall be public record. The agricultural use notice shall include the following information in substantially the same or similar format and content: 
You are hereby notified that all or part of the property you are proposing to use or build upon is located adjacent to agricultural land with one or more existing agricultural operations. You may be subject to inconvenience or discomfort from lawful agricultural operations. Discomfort and inconvenience may include, but are not limited to, noise, odors, fumes, dust, smoke, burning, vibrations, insects, rodents, and/or the operation of machinery (including aircraft) during any 24-hour period. One or more inconveniences may occur as a result of agricultural operations that are incompliance with existing laws and regulations and accepted customs and standards. If you live or operate a use near an agricultural area, you should be prepared to accept such inconveniences or discomfort as a normal and necessary aspect of living in an area with a strong rural character and an active agricultural sector. Your signature constitutes an agreement not to bring any action against adjacent landowners whose property is agricultural land or in agricultural operation, or against local government, asserting that the adjacent agricultural operation or uses of agricultural lands constitutes a nuisance. 
Signature of Applicant:  
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.01.09 - Requirements regarding developments of regional impact (DRI). 
The Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act, has established criteria for the identification of certain large-scale developments, which have the potential to cause land use impacts beyond the boundaries of the respective local government where a project might be proposed. These developments, known as Developments of Regional Impact (DRIs), shall be submitted, based on established DCA standards, procedures, and format, to the Central Savannah River Area Regional Commission for review and recommendation prior to issuance of any local building or development permit, utility tap, or rezoning, whichever occurs first. As such, these requirements establish an official delay in the local permitting and/or review process to allow for compliance with these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.02.00 - SUBMITTAL AND PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS. 
26-9.02.01 - Determination of completeness. 
All applications shall be complete before acceptance for review and decision making. A determination of completeness is a determination that all required documents and plans include the information required by this LDC, that said documents and plans have been submitted in sufficient number, and that all fees have been paid. A determination of completeness is not a determination of compliance with substantive standards and criteria. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.02.02 - Subdivisions—Generally. 
(a)  Persons desiring to subdivide land within the county shall seek the approval of the planning commission according to the following procedures: 
(1)  The prospective subdivider should consult with the building official and county health office to obtain advice and assistance prior to his preparation of a subdivision plat. The subdivider should submit subdivision design sketches, a property boundary survey, and other general information as necessary to communicate his intentions regarding land subdivision. 
(2)  Prior to his making any improvements, including site grading or clearing, road construction, or utilities installation, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission a subdivision plat, as provided for in [section 26-9.02.00] of this article unless exempted by the planning commission as provided for in section 26-4.04.01. 
(3)  Approval of a preliminary subdivision plat by the planning commission shall constitute authorization for the subdivider to subdivide the land and make improvements thereto in accordance with the approved plat. 
(4)  After the land has been subdivided, roads or other improvements completed, or a surety bond posted therefor, the subdivider shall submit the subdivision plat to the planning commission for final approval. 
(5)  Upon final approval of a subdivision plat, the subdivider shall record the subdivision plat in the office of the clerk of the superior court no later than 180 days after final approval. Thereafter, the subdivider may transfer by sale, lease, legacy or agreement all subdivided lots, parcels or building sites, or may apply for permits to erect structures. 
(b)  Minor subdivisions. The building official may review and approve or disapprove subdivisions containing five or less tracts provided that no new roads area created and that the divisions meet all requirements of this LDC. 
(c)  Family ties land division. 
(1)  The building official may review and approve or disapprove applications involving family ties land divisions provided that the application meets the requirements of section 26-4.04.04 of this LDC. 
(2)  Applications shall include an affidavit to indicate the family relationship. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.02.03 - Subdivision plat procedures. 
(a)  Submit to the planning commission. The subdivider or his agent shall submit to the planning commission, at least ten days prior to its next regular meeting, the following: 
(1)  A letter requesting the planning commission's review of a subdivision plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom a notice may be sent specifying the date, time and place of meeting of the planning commission when it will act on the plat; 
(2)  Three copies of the plat of the proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with section 26-9.02.04; and 
(3)  A check payable to the order of the county in appropriate amount based on a review fee of $10.00 (or the dollar amount adopted by the board of commissioners in a separate fee schedule, which may be updated from time to time) per each lot, parcel or building site shown on the subdivision plat. 
(b)  Approval. 
(1)  Upon submission of a preliminary subdivision plat, the planning commission shall conduct its review and disapprove or approve the plat. 
(2)  Whenever a subdivision plat shall have been granted preliminary approval by the planning commission, the chairman shall inscribe and verify by his initial on each sheet of three copies of the plat the following notation: 
"Preliminary Approval of the Plat granted by the planning commission on (date)." 
(3)  Preliminary approval is valid for a period of 180 days from the date of approval. If construction has not begun or is not complete, an extension application must be made with the planning commission. The planning commission may grant an extension for a term not more than 180 days from the original termination date. 
(c)  Stipulations to preliminary approval. As a part of its preliminary approval of a subdivision plat, the planning commission may stipulate modifications in subdivision design, required improvements, or subdivision plat as it may deem necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article; however, such modifications shall be included in the official action of the commission granting preliminary approval. 
(d)  Distribution of notice of preliminary approval. After a subdivision plat shall have received preliminary approval, copies of the approved plat, bearing the required inscription and verification, and statements of any stipulations of preliminary approval, shall be distributed as follows: 
(1)  One copy of each returned to the subdivider together with a written notice of such action; 
(2)  One copy of each forwarded to the county health officer; and 
(3)  One copy of each retained in the files of the planning commission. 
(e)  Exclusion of property transfer. 
(1)  The preliminary approval of a subdivision plat authorizes the excavation and grading of land, the construction of roads, and the installation of other required improvements. 
(2)  Such preliminary approval however shall not authorize the transfer of property by sale, lease or legacy; nor any agreement or negotiation of such transfer; nor use of the approved plat for such purposes; nor constitute the final approval of a subdivision plat as required for the plat. 
(f)  Interim modifications to preliminary subdivision plat. 
(1)  Modifications to an approved preliminary subdivision plat may be authorized by the planning commission at the request of the subdivider when the subdivider shows to the satisfaction of the commission that extraordinary and exceptional conditions encountered in the development of the approved subdivision necessitate such modifications. 
(2)  No modification to an approved subdivision shall be made by the subdivider until approved in writing by the planning commission. 
(3)  The county shall not grant a modification to an approved subdivision that would be detrimental to the public safety, convenience or welfare, or contrary to the purposes and intent of this article. 
(g)  Inspections and notice to comply. 
(1)  The planning commission shall have the authority to inspect subdivision development and site preparation to determine if such activities are in accordance with an approved plat or stipulated conditions or modifications approved thereto. 
(2)  Whenever it has been determined that such activities are not being conducted in such accord, a written notice to comply, bearing the signature of the chairman of the planning commission, shall be sent to the subdivider by registered or certified mail. 
(3)  The notice required in subsection (2) above shall set forth the violations cited as the result of the inspection, measures to be constituted by the subdivider to remedy the violations cited, and time period within which such measures are to be completed. 
(h)  Denial of preliminary approval. 
(1)  The planning commission may deny preliminary approval of a subdivision plat on any of the following grounds: 
a.  The subdivision plat, together with the required certifications, letters or fees, are not submitted in complete and required form; 
b.  The planning commission determines that the land proposed for subdivision is unsuitable for subdivision because of flood hazard or other conditions that could endanger public health; or 
c.  The planning commission determines that a proposed subdivision is premature because of inadequate utilities, public schools, transportational facilities, law enforcement or public maintenance funds, and because such subdivision development would necessitate excessive expenditure of public funds for the provisions and maintenance of such services. 
(2)  Whenever a plat shall have been disapproved, the planning commission shall state the grounds for disapproval in the official record of the meeting at which such action was taken. 
(3)  The subdivider shall be notified in writing of such action, including grounds for the action, with a copy of such notice forwarded to the clerk of the superior court and the county health officer. 
(i)  Denial of final approval. 
(1)  The planning commission may deny final approval of a subdivision plat on any of the following grounds: 
a.  When the plat, together with required accompanying information, fees and letters are not submitted in complete and proper form. 
b.  Where the plat does not conform to the approved preliminary plat, including any modifications as may have been granted. 
c.  Where the plat does not reflect the required minimum standards of improvement. 
d.  Where the preliminary approval of a plat shall have been declared void by the planning commission; or 
e.  Where the plat shall have been previously disapproved by the planning commission. 
(2)  Whenever a plat shall have been disapproved, the planning commission shall state the grounds for such action in the official record of the meeting at which such action was taken. 
(3)  The subdivider shall be notified in writing of such action, including grounds therefore, with a copy of such notice forwarded to the clerk of the superior court and the county health officer. 
(j)  Time limitations on planning commission action. 
(1)  Upon submission of a final plat, the planning commission shall have 45 days in which to review the plat and grant its final approval or disapproval of the subdivision plat. 
(2)  Failure by the planning commission to grant final approval or disapproval of a plat within 45 days from date of submission is hereby deemed to constitute approval, and certification of approval shall be issued by the chairman of the commission on demand; however, the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of the review period. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.02.04 - Subdivision plat requirements. 
(a)  The subdivision plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch = 200 feet and shall show the following information: 
(1)  All dimensions to the nearest tenth of a foot and all bearings and angles to the nearest minute; 
(2)  The name, location and acreage of the proposed subdivision; the name and address of the owner; the name of the subdivision designer; 
(3)  The date prepared, north point, and graphic scale; 
(4)  The location of existing property lines, topography contours, streets, streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, railroads, sewer lines, water lines, septic tanks, filtration fields, wells, bridges and drainage structures within the subdivision. If any land disturbance will result from the construction of the subdivision, the plat shall reflect the resulting topographic conditions and to be constructed drainage plans and easements; 
(5)  The names of the owner of adjoining properties and the names of any adjoining subdivisions; 
(6)  The proposed names, locations, widths and other dimensions of streets, easements, recreational areas, drainage plan, topographical plan, and rights-of-way; all utilities easements shall be located along side and rear property lines. Plats shall also contain on all side and rear property lines a dedicated right-of-way of at least five feet and ten feet, respectively. NOTE: all utilities shall be underground. 
(7)  The arrangement and dimensions of proposed lots; 
(8)  The limits of any area subject to flooding; 
(9)  Sufficient data to readily determine and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street, lot line, block line or boundary line; 
(10)  Zoning of all properties proposed for subdivision and zoning for all properties abutting the proposed subdivision; 
(11)  A location sketch map showing relationships of the proposed subdivision to the surrounding area (within one mile of the subdivision site); and 
(12)  A statement inscribed on the plat and signed by a registered engineer or qualified surveyor certifying the accuracy of the dimensions and bearings shown on the plat. 
(13)  In the event of variance approval by the planning commission, a statement shall be added stating the date of the approval of the variance and the board approving the variance. 
(b)  Public health certification. 
(1)  Where individual septic tanks or means other than connection to a public sanitary sewerage system are to be employed temporarily or permanently as a method of sewage disposal for one or more lots within a subdivision, evidence of the tentative approval of such methods by the county health officer shall be submitted with the subdivision plat. 
(2)  Acceptable evidence of such tentative approval shall be a written statement bearing the signature of the county health officer and specifying that the subdivider has consulted the county board of health as to the suitability of such methods within the subdivision and each lot therein and that the tentative approval of the board of health has been granted for the use of such methods or that the subdivider has been apprised of subdivision design modifications to be made to render proposed lots suitable for septic tank use. Such modifications shall be specifically stated in the health officer's certification statement. 
(c)  Road development certification. A statement signed by the land owner, developer, and/or subdivider shall be submitted with the subdivision plat and shall certify that all easements, rights-of-way, utilities, and road improvements, including grading, base and surface materials, and other drainage facilities will be made in accordance with the provisions of article VI of this LDC, or that a surety bond in the amount of 150 percent of the value of the utilities and road improvements has been posted by the land owner, developer, and/or subdivider, in a form acceptable to the planning commission, as a guarantee that the required improvements will be made. In addition to the requirements of this section, the owner or developer shall remain liable to the county for any repairs or maintenance of such road and drainage facilities for a period of one year from date of acceptance by the county. 
(d)  Final plat requirements. 
(1)  After a subdivision plat has received preliminary approval by the planning commission and the required improvements have been made by the subdivider or a surety bond posted in lieu thereof, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission the following: 
a.  A letter requesting the planning commission to consider the subdivision plat for final approval and giving the name and address of a person to whom a notice shall be sent specifying the date, time and place of the meeting of the planning commission when it will act on the request; 
b.  The original drawing of the subdivision plat, corrected to show any modifications in subdivision design and development as may have been stipulated by the planning commission as part of its preliminary approval of the plat or as may have been necessary due to the topography or other conditions peculiar to the land subdivided and as may have been approved by the planning commission; 
c.  A copy of the terms of any surety bond as may have been posted by the subdivider guaranteeing any required improvements; and 
d.  A check payable to the county in the amount of $25.00 (or a dollar amount established by the board of commissioners in a separate fee schedule, which may be updated from time to time). 
(2)  Whenever a subdivision plat shall have been granted final approval, the chairman of the planning commission shall inscribe and verify by his signature on each sheet of the original drawing of the plat, the following notation: 
(3)  Pursuant to the Land Development Code of Burke County, Georgia, and with all improvements for approval having been met, final approval of this subdivision plat has been granted by the county. 

 
(4)  After final approval from the planning commission, the plat shall be submitted to the board of commissioners for acceptance by the county of roads, rights-of-way and drainage easements shown on the plat within the subdivision for public maintenance. 
a.  The dedication to and acceptance by the county of the roads, rights-of-way and drainage easements within the subdivision shall be shown by the following inscribed on the plat: 

 
b.  Commission action granting final approval of a subdivision plat shall be entered into the official record of the meeting at which such action was taken. 
(5)  Distribution of plats. After a subdivision plat shall have received final approval and the required inscription and verification entered on the original drawing of the plat, the building official shall require the developer to submit three copies with the original and shall distribute the original drawing and copies thereof as follows: 
a.  The original drawing of the plat shall be returned to the subdivider; 
b.  One of the copies of the plat transmitted to the clerk of the superior court within 180 days from the date of approval from the planning commission, together with written authorization from the chairman of the planning commission, for the clerk to record the plat in the county's register of deeds and property transactions; 
c.  One copy forwarded to the county health officer; and 
d.  One copy retained in the files of the planning commission. 
(6)  Recording of plats. 
a.  No plat of a subdivision shall be filed or recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing and certified by the chairman and the building official on the plat. 
b.  Plats shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court no later than 180 days from date of approval by the planning commission. 
c.  The clerk of the superior court shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision that does not include a statement of approval by the planning commission certified by its chairman and the building official. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.02.05 - Development plans. (Reserved) 
26-9.02.06 - Building permits. 
(a)  Any person who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move or demolish any building or structure, or to erect, install, alter, remove, repair, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, where the cost of such work exceeds $1,500.00, shall first obtain the required permit from the building official. Also, any person who desires to change the use of a building or structure or of land or install a manufactured home, regardless of cost, shall first obtain the required permit from the building official. 
(b)  Application for a building permit shall be made to the building official in accordance with the administrative regulations of the Standard Building Code. 
(c)  Fees. 
(1)  Permit fees for construction, gas, mechanical or plumbing work shall be listed in the appendix of the applicable code. Fees for electrical permits shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(2)  Permit fees for installation of a mobile or manufactured home or change of use of a building, structure or land will be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(3)  The fee for demolition of any building shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(4)  Any person who commences any work on a building, structure or system before obtaining the necessary permit shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee. 
(d)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  No land or structure for which a building permit has been issued shall be occupied or used until the building official shall have issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  A certificate of occupancy shall be issued only when the building, structure and/or land is determined to be in conformity with the provisions of this article. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any use of land or structure where on-site means of sewage disposal are employed until the county health officer shall have certified in writing his approval of the installation and operation of such on-site disposal means. 
(3)  If a certificate of occupancy is not granted upon request, the building official shall state in writing the reasons for such action and shall identify any corrections or modifications necessary for compliance certification. 
(e)  Remedial nature of article. The provisions of this section are remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interest and purposes of this article, which are public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises. 
(f)  Compliance with technical codes and state laws. 
(1)  All construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, location, area, maintenance of buildings, structures, and any appurtenances, mechanical, gas, plumbing and electrical, shall be performed in compliance with the codes adopted in section 26-1.08.03. 
(2)  All work performed which by law requires a state license (including but not limited to electrical, low-voltage electrical, plumbing, mechanical and installation of manufactured housing) shall be accomplished only by those individuals so licensed; except the owner of a residence (excluding manufactured housing) may accomplish such work in or on his residence subject only to the requirements of permitting and inspection. 
(g)  Completion of prior permitted construction. Nothing contained in this article shall require any change in the plans, construction, designated use, or occupancy of a building or structure for which: 
(1)  There is physical evidence that construction had commenced prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives and where the entire building or structure shall be completed within one year from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives; or 
(2)  A building permit had been issued pursuant to the requirements of previous development regulations as may have been modified or repealed by the ordinance from which this section derives and where the entire building or structure shall be completed within six months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(h)  Enforcing official. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the building official). The building official shall have the right to enter upon any property or into any building or structure for the purpose of making inspections as necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  The building official shall issue all building permits and make and maintain records of permits issued or denied, or inspections made, of any violations cited and remedies ordered, and of any appeal proceedings and of certificates of occupancy issued. 
(3)  The building official shall not issue a building permit until he has determined that the proposed activity is in conformity with this article. 
(i)  Insurance. Prior to approval of a permit for any person, evidence shall first be shown of a minimum of $100,000.00 general liability insurance coverage, except for permits for change of use, or for individuals performing work on their own residence. 
(j)  Public health certification. The building official shall not issue a building permit where the proposed building, structure or use involves on-site means of sewage disposal until the applicant shall have first obtained the written certification of the county health officer that on-site sewage disposal means can satisfactorily accommodate the expected sewage discharge from the proposed use, and that the site on which the proposed use is located or is to be located contains sufficient land area to accommodate the on-site disposal of the expected discharges without adversely affecting groundwater or surface water supplies. 
(k)  Exemptions from state law. The board of commissioners, pursuant to 1996 Ga. Laws, page 1632, does hereby exempt the county from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.02.07 - Land disturbance permits. (Reserved) 
26-9.02.08 - Official zoning map amendments (Rezoning applications). 
(a)  Initiation of amendments. 
(1)  A change in the zoning classification of a property by amending the official zoning map may be initiated by the owner of the property or the owner's authorized representative by filing an application with the building official. If submitted by a representative of the owner, such authorization shall be notarized and attached to the application. 
(2)  A change in the zoning of a property may be initiated by the board of commissioners on its own motion or at the request of any of the following: the building official, the planning commission, or the owner of a property due to extraordinary circumstances. 
(3)  An application for an amendment to the zoning map affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months, such interval to begin on the date of the final decision by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  The 12-month interval shall not apply to applications initiated by the board of commissioners, except for amendments to the zoning maps which were defeated by the board of commissioners, in which case the interval required for the subsequent applications shall be at least 12 months. 
(5)  An application to alter conditions of rezoning may be submitted at any time. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Each application to amend the official zoning map shall be filed with the planning, permits and inspections department. Applications shall be submitted in compliance with the following: 
a.  A legal description of the tract to be rezoned. 
b.  Three copies of a plat, drawn to scale, showing a north arrow, land lot and district, the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid. The preparer's seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
c.  The present and proposed zoning district for the tract. 
d.  Existing and intermediate regional floodplain and structures. 
e.  The names and addresses of the owners of the land and their agents, if any. 
f.  The names and addresses of all adjoining property owners. 
g.  Such other and additional information as may be requested by designated representative of the county or required by this article. 
(2)  All applications shall be sworn to be true and correct and shall be signed by the landowner requesting the zoning change or by his/her authorized agent. 
(3)  Withdrawn applications. 
a.  An application may be withdrawn without prejudice at any time prior to the first appearance of the legal advertisement required by this article. 
b.  An application may be withdrawn prior to a vote on the amendment by the planning commission or prior to final action by the board of commissioners, but in such event an application for the same amendment may not be resubmitted for consideration by the planning commission for a period of six months from the date of withdrawal. 
c.  Unless withdrawn at the hearing, the withdrawal must be in writing, signed and dated by the applicant. 
(c)  Procedures. 
(1)  Upon presentation of an application for a zoning change, the application shall be forwarded to the planning commission who will examine the property and make a recommendation to the board of commissioners for action on the application. 
(2)  The planning commission may recommend approval and/or the board of commissioners may approve a rezoning request conditioned upon the applicant complying with specified conditions, the planning commission and/or the board of commissioners deem reasonable and appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article and which are designed to harmonize applicant's request with the public interest. 
(3)  In the event the request is approved upon the compliance with certain conditions, the applicant will have so much time as may be granted to the applicant by the board of commissioners to comply with such conditions and if the applicant fails to comply with such conditions the rezoning request will be deemed denied. 
(4)  No building permits or other permits shall be issued until such time as the building official determines that the applicant has complied with the specified conditions. 
(5)  The application for a zoning change may be acted upon by the board of commissioners at the first meeting of the board of commissioners to which such application is submitted following the recommendation of the county planning commission. 
(6)  Such application shall be read at the first meeting of the board of commissioners following the recommendation of the planning commission, and may be acted upon by the board of commissioners following the presentation of both the proponents and the opponents to the proposed zoning decision. 
(7)  Action by the board of commissioners regarding proposed zoning change shall be taken at an advertised public hearing, and shall be based on the following information: 
a.  The recommendation of the planning commission; 
b.  The application and supporting documentation; and 
c.  Testimony during the public hearing. 
(d)  Zoning standards. The planning commission and board of commissioners shall consider the following when considering an amendment to the zoning map: 
(1)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(2)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(3)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
(4)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the future development map and comprehensive plan; and 
(5)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.02.09 - Land Development Code amendments. 
(a)  Only the board of commissioners may initiate a change to the text of this LDC or a comprehensive amendment to the zoning map. Such an initiation may be in response to a request from the building official, the planning commission, or any private citizen or property owner, or on its own motion, upon a determination that the public necessity, general welfare or good zoning practice justifies such action. 
(b)  No amendment to the text of this LDC or comprehensive amendment to the zoning map (hereinafter referred to as a "code amendment") shall become effective unless it shall have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendations. The following information shall be provided for review: 
(1)  Identification of the specific provision proposed for amendment; 
(2)  The proposed modifications in a strikethrough and underline format; 
(3)  A detailed explanation of the rationale and justification for the requested amendment; and 
(4)  A detailed explanation of the potential impacts of the modification on the development of Burke County. 
(c)  Before enacting a code amendment to this LDC, the county shall hold public hearings thereon. At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to each public hearing, notice is to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. The notice is to state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(d)  Public hearings by the planning commission and the board of commissioners on a code amendment shall follow the same procedures as a public hearing for a rezoning, as described in this LDC. 
(e)  Decisions on a Code amendment. 
(1)  The planning commission shall make a recommendation for approval, denial or such other action it deems appropriate, no later than their next regularly scheduled meeting following their public hearing, or the proposed amendment shall go forward with no recommendation. The report of the planning commission shall be forwarded in writing to the board of commissioners for final approval or denial. 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall hold its public hearing and take action on each code amendment at a regularly scheduled meeting for which adequate notice can be published. 
(3)  The building official shall maintain a record and date of such amendments as approved or denied by the board of commissioners, and shall update this LDC or the zoning map as amended within 30 calendar days of the board of commissioner's action. 
(f)  Standards for a Code amendment. The planning commission and the board of commissioners shall consider the following standards in reviewing any code amendment to this LDC, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(1)  Is the proposed amendment consistent with the purpose and intent of this Development Code as stated under article I? 
(2)  Does the proposed amendment further or is it compatible with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan? 
(3)  Is the proposed amendment required to adequately address new or changing conditions or to properly implement the comprehensive plan? 
(4)  Does the proposed amendment reasonably promote the public health, safety, morality or general welfare? 
(g)  Effect of text amendment approval. 
(1)  Approval of a text amendment shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the board of commissioners or upon the stated effective date thereof. 
(2)  For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this LDC prior to the effective date of a text amendment affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed by the provisions for nonconformities under article VIII of this LDC, as applicable. 
(3)  Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this LDC prior to the effective date of a text amendment may continue to completion as though no change had occurred and, upon completion, shall be governed by the provisions for Nonconformities under article VIII of this LDC, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.03.00 - APPEALS. 
26-9.03.01 - Application for appeal. 
(a)  A request for an interpretation of this LDC or an appeal for variance from its terms may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department or board of the county affected by a decision or order of the building official. Such appeal shall be taken within 15 days' time after the decision has been rendered, by filing with the building official a notice of appeal. The appeal shall be filed on forms provided by the building official and upon deposit of a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the planning commission all papers constituting the record regarding the action appealed. 
(b)  Any appeal or application may be withdrawn upon written notice to the building official, but no appeal shall be withdrawn after a notice of public hearing has been posted without the written consent of the planning commission. 
(c)  In reviewing an appeal for variance, the burden of showing that the variance should be granted shall be the responsibility of the party applying for the variance. Any variance granted by the planning commission shall terminate automatically when the use ceases to be in full compliance with any conditions imposed by the planning commission, when the use has been abandoned, when the building permit shall have expired or if the variance has not been acted upon within one year. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.03.02 - Public hearing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a request for appeal proceedings, the planning commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal and shall give, or cause to be given, a public notice thereof by means of a notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the county at least 15 days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. 
(b)  The notice shall contain the time, date and place of the hearing and a general statement as to the nature of the appeal request as well as the name of the appellant. 
(c)  A sign, no less than four feet by four feet, shall be posted on the property containing the same information contained in the notice provided for in this section. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.03.03 - Decision of planning commission. 
(a)  The planning commission shall decide upon an appeal request within 30 days after the date of the public hearing. 
(b)  The building official shall advise the board of commissioners of the decision of the planning commission and the reasons therefor. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, adopted September 11, 2018, set out two sections numbered as § 26-9.03.04. To maintain sequential numbering within this chapter, this section has been renumbered as 26-9.03.03, at the discretion of the editor. 
26-9.03.04 - Appeals from a decision of the planning commission. 
Any person may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the board of commissioners. Such appeal shall be taken within 15 days' time after the planning commission decision has been rendered, by filing with the county administrator a notice of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.04.00 - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES. 
26-9.04.01 - Jurisdiction. 
The jurisdiction for actions brought pursuant to the LDC shall be in the Magistrate Court of Burke County. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.04.02 - Violations. 
Any person who violates any provision of this Code or fails to comply with the requirements thereof shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in the Burke County Code of Ordinances, part II, chapter 1, section 1-11, and in addition shall pay the cost of such action. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof; and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.04.03 - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcing official. 
(1)  The provisions of this Code shall be administered and enforced by the building official. This official or his designee or subordinate shall have the right to enter upon any premises for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this Code. In addition, he shall issue all permits called for by this Code and make and maintain records thereof, issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records thereof, and conduct inspections as prescribed by this Code and other such inspections as are necessary to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(2)  The building official or his designee or subordinate shall have the right to issue citations to any person in violation of any provision of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.04.04 - Penalties. 
(a)  Injunction or mandamus. If any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this chapter, the building official, county attorney or other appropriate authority of the county or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specially damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use; or to correct or abate such violation; or to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land. 
(Ord. No. 18-01 , §§ 1, 2, 9-11-2018) 
26-9.04.05 - Remedies. (Reserved) 
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1—28-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - 9-1-1 CHARGE ON PREPAID WIRELESS SERVICE 

Sec. 28-36. - Imposed. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 8-9-2011) 
Sec. 28-37. - Collection. 
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. Tit. 48, Ch. 8 with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 8-9-2011) 
Sec. 28-38. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this county from charges imposed by this article shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by this county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 8-9-2011) 
Sec. 28-39. - Reserved. 
Article III. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

Sec. 28-40. - Disorderly conduct. 
A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if he or she: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in fear of safety for his life, limb or health or whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(2)  Endangers lawful pursuits of another through acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct; 
(3)  Assembles or congregates with another or other persons for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(4)  Assembles or congregates with another or other persons for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gambling; 
(5)  Frequents any public place with the intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device; 
(6)  Assembles with another or other persons for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device, or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the county, or aids or abets therein or assembles or congregates with another or other persons for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another; 
(7)  Utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets; 
(8)  Frequents any place where gambling or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is openly practiced, allowed or tolerated; 
(9)  Uses "fighting words" directed toward any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil; 
(10)  By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(11)  Congregates with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority; 
(12)  Makes an unreasonably loud and unnecessary noise to the disturbance of the peace of the surrounding area or neighborhood; 
(13)  Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition; 
(14)  Consumes alcoholic beverages on any public street, sidewalk, or any other public property within the county. Possession of an open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of the consumption; 
(15)  Consumes alcoholic beverages, in a vehicle or not, on any public or private parking lot with the county, except those maintained at establishments holding a valid on-premises license for retail sale of alcoholic beverages. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of the consumption. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-41. - Disorderly house prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit disorderly assemblages, or assemblages of persons for illegal purposes in his house to the disturbance of citizens residing in the neighborhood or area. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-42. - Frequenting disorderly houses or houses of ill fame. 
Any person who, by visiting or frequenting disorderly houses or houses of ill fame, shall disturb any citizen of the county, shall be guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-43. - Loitering or prowling. 
A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted under this section is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-44. - Property damage or destruction, trespass. 
No person shall write, draw, cut, print or carve any letter, word, device or figure upon, or in any manner mutilate, deface, or injure any of the public or private buildings, churches, monuments, tombstones, fences, trees, shrubbery, or other private or public property, or trespass upon any public or private premises. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-45. - Gambling. 
It shall be unlawful for two or more persons to congregate, assemble or come together for the purpose or intent of gambling, playing and betting for money or other things of value, at any game played with cards, dice or balls. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-46. - Opposing, obstructing, or abusing a county officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to oppose, obstruct, molest, or abuse any officer or employee of this county in the execution of his duty, or for having performed his/her duty. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-47. - Failure to supervise a minor-parental responsibility. 
A person commits the offense of "failing to supervise a minor" if the person is the parent, legal guardian or person with legal responsibility for the safety and welfare of a child under 17 years of age, a juvenile as defined by the Official Code of Georgia, and the child has been found in violation of any provision of the Code for the county of Burke, Georgia or any violation of the State Criminal Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-48. - Juvenile evening curfew. 
Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Emergency errand means a mission that results from an unforeseen combination of circumstances that call for immediate action. The term "emergency errand" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Minor means any un-emancipated person under the age of 18. 
Persons having lawful custody or control includes, in addition to the parent or guardian of the person of the minor, any person who is over 21 years of age or any public or private agency or other legal entity authorized by a parent, guardian of the person of the minor, or court to have the custody or control of such child. 
Public place means any place to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, eating establishments, playgrounds, malls, or other places or buildings open to the public; any cemeteries, school yards, bodies of water or watercourses; any privately or publicly owned places of amusement, entertainment, or public accommodation including parking lots; and any vacant lot or land. 
Hours of curfew; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, stroll, or play in any public place unsupervised by his/her parent, legal guardian, or other adult over the age of 21 years having the lawful custody or control of the minor and having lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on weekdays (not to include Friday) and Sunday evening; provided however, that on Friday and Saturday evening the effective curfew hours are between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m.; and provided further that the provision of this section shall not apply in the following circumstances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his/her parent, guardian, or other adult over the age of 21 years having the lawful custody or control of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand as directed by his/her parent, guardian, or other adult over the age of 21 years having the lawful custody or control of the minor; 
(3)  When the minor is traveling to, or returning directly from home from, lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the proscribed period of time; 
(4)  When the minor is attending an official school, religious, or recreational activity or any activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion, provided such activity is supervised by adults and sponsored by an entity which takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or recreational activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion, provided such activity is supervised by adults and sponsored by an entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(5)  When the minor is engaged in interstate and intrastate vehicular travel through the city with parental or guardian consent; or 
(6)  When the minor is legally emancipated. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-49. - Parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of child to permit minor's violation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent/guardian of the person of the minor, or other person having lawful custody or control of any child under the age of 18 years to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow such minor to violate the provisions of this article. A person charged with violation of this section for the first time shall be given a warning citation. Upon subsequent violation, the person shall be charged with such violation. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-50. - Jurisdiction. 
Any minor under the age of 17 who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court of Burke County, Georgia. Any parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of a minor who violates this article shall be subject to the jurisdiction of Magistrate Court. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-51. - Interference with an officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly interfere with or prevent, or attempt to prevent, any peace officer, in any arrest, or in the discharge of any other duty, or to strike or attempt to strike such officer. This section shall be held to include any resistance or opposition offered to the officer when such officer is attempting to make an arrest, or executing any process which he may be authorized or directed to execute, whether or not such party so offering resistance or opposition is the party that such officer is attempting to arrest or on whom such officer is attempting to execute the process. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the following meaning: 
Employee shall mean an individual, including the sheriff, jailers, deputies, bailiffs and dispatchers employed by the Burke County Sheriff's Office whose work is performed under the supervision of the Burke County Sheriff's Office and the Burke County Commission. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Sec. 28-53. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person, agency or other legal entity violating the article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine in the amount of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days or both, provided the judge shall probate not less than 120 days of any sentence imposed, and further provided, however, that a person under 17 years of age shall be referred to the juvenile court of the county in which the crime was committed for disposition pursuant to O.C.G.A, Title 14, Ch. 11, Art. 6. 
(Ord. No. 17-05 , § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Chapter 30 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county saved from repeal, § 1-6(6); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county saved from repeal, § 1-6(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; land development code, ch. 26; traffic and vehicles, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Probate court's jurisdiction involving the removal of obstructions from roads, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.1; obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq.; inspection of and reports on roads and bridges by county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-6; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TIMBER OPERATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-31. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide regulations governing use of public roads by persons engaged in timber operations in the county and establish procedures for the conduct of such operations in order to assure the public safety and to protect the county roadways and environment. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, art. I) 
Sec. 30-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Permit means the permit issued by the road department to do timber operations in the county. 
Road department means the Burke County road department. 
Road superintendent means the superintendent of the Burke County road department. 
Surety bond means a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or a bond issued by a licensed surety authorized to do business in the state. 
Timber means softwood or hardwood trees harvested for commercial purposes. 
Timber operations means buying, cutting, harvesting, loading and/or hauling timber. 
Timber operator means any person engaged in timber operations. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, art. II) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-33. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon notice from the issuing authority, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the permit holder, the person in charge of the operations, and the owner of the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may resume. When an emergency exists, written notice shall not be required. 
(b)  If the conditions are not brought into compliance within five working days of the notice, the road department shall accomplish the work and deduct the costs from the posted bond. Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, art. V) 
Sec. 30-34. - Concluding operations. 
(a)  The timber operator shall be given written notification to the road superintendent upon completion of operations. The road superintendent shall inspect the site to assure that the area has been restored to its original condition, including any shaping of ditches, grading or seeding as required. The timber operator shall be notified in writing of any deficiencies and given 15 days to correct those deficiencies. If not accomplished during that period, the road department shall complete the work and deduct the cost from the posted bond. 
(b)  When the road superintendent has determined that the road and access site are in a proper state of repair, the superintendent shall provide a written release of liability to the timber operator. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, art. VI) 
Secs. 30-35—30-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT AND SURETY BOND 

Sec. 30-56. - Required. 
No person shall engage in timber operating in the county without first obtaining a permit and furnishing a surety bond. Entry onto the property shall not be considered timber operations for the purposes of these ordinances. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, art. III, intro. ¶; Ord. No. 15-01 , § 1, 8-11-2015) 
Sec. 30-57. - Permit application. 
(a)  A timber operations permit may be obtained upon application to the road department. The applicant shall furnish all information requested on the permit application regarding location and duration of the operation and the persons involved. The permit shall be valid for only the particular operation for which it is issued. 
(b)  The permit fee shall be established by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, art. III, § 3-100; Ord. No. 15-01 , § 1, 8-11-2015) 
Sec. 30-58. - Surety bond. 
(a)  A timber operations permit will be issued only after posting a surety bond. The amount of the bond shall be $2,500.00 for an operation of five acres or less; if greater than five acres, the bond shall be $5,000.00. No more than one bond will be required from each person or firm harvesting timber within the County, regardless of the number of tracts being currently harvested. 
(b)  Upon completion of any necessary repairs to public property and removal of all waste and debris, the county will release the permit holder from the bond. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, art. III, § 3-200; Ord. No. 15-01 , § 1, 8-11-2015) 
Secs. 30-59—30-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 30-81. - Culverts. 
Prior to the timber operator's commencing operations, the road superintendent shall inspect the point of access to the county road from the operation site to determine its suitability. If a culvert is required at the point of access, it shall be installed by the timber operator as directed by the road superintendent. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, art. IV, § 4-100) 
Sec. 30-82. - Signs. 
The timber operation shall post two signs in each direction from the point of access onto the county road. One sign at a distance of 1,000 feet stating "Warning: Logging Operations Ahead," and one sign at a distance of 500 feet stating "Slow Truck Entering Highway." Signs shall be 36″ × 36″, erected in a diamond shape, painted orange with black legend and posted at least three feet from the travel surface of the roadway. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, art. IV, § 4-200) 
Sec. 30-83. - Timber operations. 
During the period of operations the timber operator shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All harvesting operations shall be conducted on the selected site and off the county roads and rights-of-way. Logging and skidding of logs on county roads and rights-of-way are strictly prohibited. 
(2)  Ditches shall be kept clear of all debris and residue at all times to permit proper drainage. 
(3)  There shall be no blockage of county roads at the access site, and roads must remain open at all times. 
(4)  No equipment, trucks or trailers shall be allowed to park on any public road or right-of-way. 
(5)  Mud shall not be carried onto paved roads by logging vehicles. Where necessary, a temporary construction exit of gravel shall be maintained by the timber operator to eliminate any hazard to traffic or unsightly conditions on the public right-of-way. 
(6)  During periods of rain or inclement weather, logging vehicles shall not be operated over the county's unimproved roads when such travel causes sufficient damage to the road system that the passage of smaller and lighter vehicles is hampered. 
(Ord. of 9-12-95, art. IV, § 4-300) 
Chapter 34 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., the county adopted a comprehensive solid waste management plan on March 9, 1993. An official copy of the plan is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners of the county. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The ordinance for refuse, storage, collection and disposal of solid waste adopted September 10, 1974, is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Secs. 34-2—34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 34-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collection area means an area provided or designated by the county to be used for the collection and disposal of garbage and solid waste or for the location of collection containers. 
Collection container means a container provided by the county and placed in the unincorporated area thereof to be used for the collection and disposal of garbage and solid waste. 
(Ord. of 4-13-93) 
Sec. 34-27. - Purpose of article. 
In order to govern and police the unincorporated area of the county for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens thereof, the garbage and solid waste disposal regulations in this article are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. of 4-13-93) 
Sec. 34-28. - Administration and enforcement of article. 
The sheriff or a designated representative of the board of commissioners is hereby granted and shall hereafter have the power and authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection and disposal of garbage and solid waste in the county. 
(Ord. of 4-13-93) 
Sec. 34-29. - Acceptable waste. 
The county has placed garbage and solid waste collection containers in several locations or collection areas and the county may from time to time hereafter provide other such collection containers and collection areas in the unincorporated areas of the county, and only household garbage or solid waste, domestic kitchen refuse and discarded food, beverages and beverage containers, newspapers, publications, clothing, wearing apparel and discarded wrappings or containers, and such other household and nonhousehold items sufficiently small in size as to not impair the intended use and maintenance of the collection containers may be dumped or placed in such garbage and solid waste containers as provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 4-13-93) 
Sec. 34-30. - Placement of items within container. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to dump or place any items outside collection containers or to leave any items at collection areas unless the items have been dumped or placed inside one or more of the collection containers located at the collection area. 
(Ord. of 4-13-93) 
Sec. 34-31. - Dumping unacceptable items. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to dump, place or leave any other items, property or matter at any garbage and solid waste collection area in any collection container at any collection area except as provided under section 34-29. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to dump, place or leave bricks, blocks, rocks, lumber, asphalt, cement, concrete, concrete products or waste, roofing, sheetrock, leaves, limbs, bushes, trees, roots, dead animals, appliances, equipment, bed springs, mattresses, furniture, fixtures, motors, engines, chemical wastes, industrial or commercial waste or rubbish, scrap metal, fence wire, vehicles or parts thereof, building materials or supplies, and inorganic material of any type or kind except as authorized in section 34-29 at any garbage or solid waste collection area or in any collection container. 
(Ord. of 4-13-93) 
Sec. 34-32. - Scavenging. 
Scavenging from any collection container is prohibited, and it shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person except as fully authorized by the board of commissioners to enter, examine, and sift through the contents of or remove any matter from collection container. 
(Ord. of 4-13-93) 
Sec. 34-33. - Burning, otherwise damaging containers. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the article to set any fire, to allow a fire to continue to burn, or in any other way attempt to damage or destroy the garbage and solid waste collection containers provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 4-13-93) 
Sec. 34-34. - Use of containers by nonresidents. 
The placement of garbage and solid waste collection containers in several locations or collection areas is for the convenience and use, in accordance with the provisions of this article, of county residents only. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this article for any person to dump, place or leave any item at such garbage and solid waste collection area or in any collection container unless such person is a resident of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-13-93) 
Sec. 34-35. - Dumping by commercial collectors. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person engaged in the business of any type of garbage and solid waste collection to dump, place or leave garbage and solid waste collected in the conduct of business at any garbage and solid waste collection area or in any collection container. 
(Ord. of 4-13-93) 
Sec. 34-36. - Violations, remedies. 
Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this article as it exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this article as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended, is hereby declared to be in violation of this article and the regulations herein set forth by the county, punishable upon conviction thereof as prescribed in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 4-13-93) 
Secs. 34-37—34-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste management facilities, § 26-4.03.23 

Sec. 34-40. - Title and purpose. 
(a)  Title. This article will be known as "Burke County Solid Waste Management Facility Ordinance." 
(b)  Statement of purpose. The intent of this article is to provide location standards for solid waste management facilities in Burke County. This article will act in tandem with Burke County's Solid Waste Management Plan to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and natural resources of Burke County. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-41. - Definitions. 
100-year floodplain means the lowland and relatively flat areas adjoining inland and coastal waters, which are inundated by the 100-year flood. A 100-year flood is a flood with a one percent or greater chance of recurring in any given year or a flood of a magnitude equaled or exceeded once in 100 years on the average over a significantly long period of time. 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited land disturbances. 
Division means the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Fault means a fracture or a zone of fractures in any material along which strata on one side have been displaced with respect to that on the other side. Displacement is the relative movement of any two sides of a fault measured in any direction. 
Groundwater means water below the land surface in a zone of saturation. 
Holocene means the most recent epoch of the quaternary period, extending from the end of the pleistocene epoch to the present. 
Landfill means any disposal facility where any amount of waste (of any variety) is disposed of except permit by rule for inert material. 
Lateral expansion means a horizontal expansion of the waste boundaries of an existing landfill unit. 
Leachate means a liquid that has passed through or emerged from solid waste and contains soluble, suspended, or miscible materials removed from such wastes. 
Letter of assurance means the letter from the proper local governing body acknowledging that the planned landfill complies with local zoning and land use regulations required by EPD to be submitted along with a solid waste management facility site design and operational plan. 
Liner means a continuous layer of natural or manmade materials, beneath or on the sides of a disposal site or disposal site cell which restricts the downward or lateral escape of solid waste, solid waste constituents, or leachate. 
Litter means discarded materials of every kind as referenced in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(1). 
Municipal solid waste landfill (MSWL) means a disposal where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not, mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges, or small quantity generator hazardous wastes, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Operator means the person(s) responsible for the overall operation of a facility or part of a facility. 
Owner means the person(s) who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
Person means the State of Georgia or any other state or any agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or a public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. 
Seismic impact zone means an area with a ten percent or greater probability that the maximum horizontal acceleration in lithifield earth material, expressed as a percentage of the earth's gravitational pull will exceed 0.10g in 250 years. Maximum horizontal acceleration in lithified earth material means the maximum expected horizontal acceleration depicted on a seismic hazard map, with a 90 percent or greater probability that the acceleration will not be exceeded in 250 years, or the maximum expected horizontal acceleration based on a site-specific seismic risk assessment. Lithified earth material means all rock, including all naturally occurring and naturally formed aggregates or masses of minerals or small particles of older rock that formed by crystallization of magma or by induration of loose sediments. This term does not include manmade materials, such as fill, concrete, and asphalt, or unconsolidated earth materials, soil, or regolith lying at or near the earth surface. 
Significant groundwater recharge area means any area of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer that has been mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition) within Burke County. Hydrologic Atlas 18, prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and published by the Georgia Geologic Survey, identifies the most significant groundwater recharge areas of Georgia as spotted areas labeled as "areas of thick soils" is adopted by and incorporated as part of this article as if fully included. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). 
Solid waste management means the systematic administration of activities which provide for the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment, and disposal of solid waste. 
Solid waste management facility includes any facility for the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment or disposal of solid wastes. 
Waste disposal boundary means the limit of all waste disposal areas, appurtenances, and ancillary activities (including but not limited to internal access roads and drainage control devices). 
Waters of the state means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions and those areas defined as wetlands by the U.S. Corps. of Engineers. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Unstable areas means areas susceptible to natural or human-induced events or forces capable of impairing the integrity of some or all of the landfill structural components responsible for preventing releases from a landfill, such as, but not limited to, poor foundation conditions, areas susceptible to mass movements, and karst terrains. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-42. - Environmental protection and location standards. 
(a)  All landfills shall comply with the liner and leachate collection requirements. Liners and leachate collection systems: New landfill units and lateral expansions shall be constructed with liners and leachate collection systems. The liner and leachate collection system must ensure that the concentration values listed in Table 1 will not be exceeded in the uppermost aquifer at the relevant point of compliance. The liner and leachate collection system must be designed and installed under the supervision of a professional engineer registered to practice in Georgia who shall certify the installation. 
TABLE 1 

 
(1)  The liner and leachate collection system must, at a minimum, be designed with: 
a.  A composite liner, as defined in paragraph c. of this section and a leachate collection system that is designed and constructed to maintain less than a 30-cm depth of leachate over the liner; and 
b.  At least a 20-foot separation between the synthetic liner and the seasonal high groundwater elevation. 
c.  For purposes of this section, "composite liner" means a system consisting of two components; the upper component must consist of a minimum 30-mil flexible membrane liner (FML), and the lower component must consist of at least a two-foot layer of compacted soil with a hydraulic conductivity of no more than 1 x 10-7 cm/sec. FML components consisting of high density polyethylene (HDPE) shall be at least 60-mil thick. The FML component must be installed in direct and uniform contact with the compacted soil component. 
(2)  The relevant point of compliance shall be no more than 150 meters from the waste management unit boundary and shall be located on land owned by the owner of the MSWLF unit. In determining the relevant point of compliance, at least the following factors will be considered: 
a.  The hydrogeologic characteristics of the facility and surrounding land; 
b.  The volume and physical and chemical characteristics of the leachate; 
c.  The quantity, quality, and direction, of flow of groundwater; 
d.  The proximity and withdrawal rate of the groundwater users; 
e.  The availability of alternative drinking water supplies; 
f.  The existing quality of the groundwater, including other sources of contamination and their cumulative impacts on the groundwater and whether groundwater is currently used or reasonably expected to be used for drinking water; 
g.  Public health, safety, and welfare effects; and 
h.  Practicable capability of the owner or operator. 
(b)  No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located within four miles of the outer boundary of a significant groundwater recharge area. 
(c)  No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located within 500 feet of waters of the state. 
(d)  No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located within 1,000 feet of a public or private water supply well. 
(e)  No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located within two miles of any surface water intake point or water supply watershed. 
(f)  No solid waste management facility shall be located in wetlands. No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located within two miles of a wetland. 
(g)  No solid waste management facility shall be located in the 100-year floodplain. 
(h)  No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located in seismic impact zones. 
(i)  No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located in unstable areas. 
(j)  No new landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall be located within 400 feet of a fault that has had displacement in holocene time. 
(k)  The waste disposal boundary of any landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall not be located within 400 feet of the property line. 
(l)  The waste disposal boundary of any landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any occupied dwelling. The 1,000-foot buffer may be reduced if the current owner of the dwelling provides a written waiver consenting to the waste disposal boundary being closer than 1,000 feet. 
(m)  No disposal area shall interfere with the established natural flow of surface waters to the detriment or damage to adjoining public or private properties. The board of commissioners shall have the right to require an applicant to construct adequate detention, retention, sediment basins of stormwaters if it appears that substantial water or sediment may be carried into any nearby property or state waters. 
(n)  Hazardous wastes, as the term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-62(10), as may be amended from time to time, are prohibited. 
(o)  Prior to the commencement of any landfill operation within the county, the owner/operator of the proposed landfill shall obtain a water sample from all state waters and from all water supply wells located within two miles of the boundaries of all property owned by the owner/operator of the landfill, which shall be analyzed for all constituents listed in Appendix I and Appendix II to 40 C.F.R. Par 258, Subpart E, as amended, 56 Fed. Reg. 51032-51039 (October 9, 1991), by a properly certified laboratory to meet EPA standards. These samples shall contain the exact location from which they were obtained, the name and address of the property owner who owns the land from which the water sample was taken, the name and address of the principal user of the water supply well, if different from the owner of the property upon which the well is located. The results of the individual analyses shall be certified by the laboratory and submitted to each property owner from whose property a sample was taken, and to the board of commissioners. 
(p)  All wells to be included in the groundwater monitoring program required by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division shall be monitored quarterly for all constituents in Appendix I and annually for all constituents contained in Appendix II of 40 C.F.R. Par 258, Subpart E, as amended, 56 Fed. Reg. 51032-51039 (October 9, 1991). Copies of all monitoring test well results shall be delivered to the board of commissioners promptly upon receipt by the owner/operator. 
(q)  The height of any landfill or vertical expansion thereof shall be limited to match the surrounding topography with in five miles. 
(r)  Any plant material used for landscaping, buffer, cover or erosion control shall be limited to indigenous plants only. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-43. - Traffic safety. 
(a)  All such operations shall be located on a state highway or county primary road, as defined by the board of commissioners, for ingress and egress thereto, and on a road that does not create traffic through an area developed primarily for residential purposes. Where necessary, the board of commissioners may require the applicant to construct and/or improve a road to accommodate the truck travel necessitated by the operations, as condition of such operation, and for the purpose of routing traffic around residential areas. A stop sign shall be erected and maintained by the owner/operator at all egress roads from the landfill. Under no circumstances shall trucks use private drives or private access routes to or from the applicants' property that are within 300 feet of any residence. 
(b)  Sufficient setback shall be provided from all property lines and public highways to assure adequate lateral support for the maintenance of adjacent public and private property. No disposal area shall be permitted closer than 500 feet from the interior boundary lines. Disposal areas shall at no time be permitted where adjoining lateral support for the maintenance of adjoining land is not maintained. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-44. - Sight barriers and fencing. 
(a)  Sight barriers shall be provided along all setback lines of the sites which lack natural screening conditions. Sight barriers shall consist of the following: a berm of at least ten feet in height and plantings of evergreen trees, not more than ten feet apart, or evergreen shrubbery not more than five feet apart, in staggered rows, on the berm, parallel to the boundaries of the property. Evergreens shall be at least two-year transplants at the time of planting, shall grow to not less than ten feet in height within two years or less, and shall be sufficiently spaced to provide effective sight barriers when ten feet in height. Trees or shrubs that die must be promptly replaced. 
(b)  The landfill is to be completely fenced with eight-foot high, chain-link fence with three strands of barbed wire, angled 45 degrees toward the outside of the premises to the top. Such fence shall be located inside any berms or screening following the exterior boundaries. All entrances shall have an eight-foot high gate, which shall be closed and locked at all times that the landfill is not open. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-45. - Nuisance abatement. 
(a)  Air pollution, noise, and vibration, and their effects upon adjacent property owners shall be minimized by the use of adequate sound-proofed equipment and buildings designed to accomplish such minimization and approved by the board of commissioners, and by the proper use of berms, walls, and natural planting screens. Interior and adjoining roads used in the operations shall have their surfaces treated to minimize air pollution, noise and vibration. 
(b)  Rodent traps shall be placed 100 yards apart around the perimeter of the landfill, inside the fence, and shall be inspected and cleaned not less than once per day. 
(c)  Any security lighting deemed necessary by the owner/operator shall be the sodium vapor type and shall be aligned so that no part of the illuminated field falls on adjacent property. 
(d)  Every landfill shall, at its own expense, connect to a public water supply and install at least one outlet per square acre in order to ensure adequate water supply and facilities for quick delivery of water to any part of the property for the purpose of extinguishing fires. Capacity shall be such that at least 50 gallons of water per minute can be applied to any fire, continuously, for at least ten hours. The source of the water supply and facilities to provide for the delivery of the water shall be indicated on the plans submitted for approval to the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Every landfill shall, at its own expense, connect to a public sewer system for the disposal of its leachate. If necessary for the local publicly owned treatment works to handle the leachate, the owner/operator shall fund all necessary improvements to the publicly owned treatment works through which the leachate will be discharge. 
(f)  All litter shall be collected from the landfill site by the end of each working day and either placed in the fill, compacted and covered that day, or stored in a covered container. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-46. - Operating hours. 
(a)  All operations, other than maintenance of equipment in fully-enclosed buildings, shall be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. A sign clearly indicating the hours of operation and prohibiting dumping at all other times shall be placed in a conspicuous location at the entrance. Disposal facilities shall have a certified landfill operator per EPD on duty at all times to direct the dumping, spreading, compaction, and covering of materials. All such personnel shall reside within the county in close enough proximity to respond in the event of a fire. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-47. - Access by citizens of Burke County. 
(a)  Any landfill shall be open to use by county residents, property owners, and businesses, during established business hours, at a rate to be agreed upon by the board of commissioners. Special handling fees may be charged for bulky or difficult to process items. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-48. - Mitigation trust fund for landfill problems. 
(a)  A trust fund shall be established at a bank within the county chosen by the board of commissioners. The operator shall pay $1.00 per ton of waste disposed into this trust fund for the life of the landfill. Expenditures from the trust fun are to be approved by a committee consisting of one citizen appointment by the board of commissioners, the chairman of the board of commissioners, and one representative of the owner/operator. Funds may be used, without limitation, for off-site litter control, groundwater and surface water monitoring, provision of alternative water supplies, and payments to adjacent property owners and others, at the discretion of the committee, for damages caused as a result of the landfill or its related operations. The trust fund shall exist and earn interest for 20 years following the expiration of the post-closure period, and at that time the remaining funds shall be paid to the owner/operator or its successor or assigns. 
(b)  In the event that there is a statistically significant increase over background values, as determined by the board of commissioners, for any constituent for which monitoring is required, further waste disposal shall cease until such time as the groundwater contamination has been remediated to background values. When any water supply well is located downgradient and within one mile of a contaminant plume, as determined by the board of commissioners, an alternate water supply shall, at the discretion of the board of commissioners, be provided by the owner/operator of the landfill, and at the expense of the owner/operator, for protection of the public health and welfare. Bottled water shall be provided as a temporary measure until a permanent, alternate water supply can be provided by installing a new well in a location approved by the board of commissioners and the affected property owner, by connecting the property owner to an existing municipal water supply if acceptable to the property owner, or, if so requested by the board of commissioners, by building for and donating to the county a public water supply system. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-49. - Reclamation or redevelopment. 
(a)  A reclamation plan for the closed landfill shall be submitted to and approved by the board of commissioners along with the application submitted to this article. The plan shall propose reclamation or redevelopment that will best serve the needs and interests of the citizens of Burke County. Reclamation or redevelopment shall be accomplished as soon as practicable following closure of any areas of the landfill. Substantial completion of reclamation or redevelopment shall be effected within two years after termination of the waste disposal facility. Inactivity for six consecutive months shall constitute, for this purpose, termination of disposal activities. 
(b)  Approval of a reclamation or redevelopment plan by the board of commissioner will be based upon consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  The most advantageous use of the land, resources, and property. 
(2)  The character of the area in question and its particular suitability, if any, for the particular use. 
(3)  Conservation of property values as well as natural resources and the general appropriate trend and character of development in the subject area. 
(4)  The protection and preservation of the general health, safety, and welfare of the county. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-50. - Application required. 
(a)  Each person proposing to locate a solid waste management facility in Burke County shall submit an application for a letter of assurance demonstrating compliance with the provisions contained in this article and consistency with the Burke County Solid Waste Management Plan. 
(b)  Upon Enactment of this article, no new landfills shall be operated in Burke County without a letter of assurance from the Burke County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-51. - Application procedures. 
An applicant shall prepare and file an application for a letter of assurance with the Burke County Board of Commissioners. The application shall include all related documents submitted to the United States government and to the State of Georgia. 
(1)  An application shall contain the following information: 
a.  A description of the company, information on its financial capability, and a detailed history of all its past activities in the field of solid waste management, including a synopsis of every other facility it has operated, and including a detailed account of all past and pending litigation, favorable and unfavorable. Include the record of any subsidiary or parent corporation having an interest greater than five percent of the outstanding shares of the applicant corporation. Also include a list of all past and present litigation, favorable and unfavorable, the subsidiary or parent corporation has been involved in. 
b.  Evidence of liability insurance coverage with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 for sudden events and $10,000,000.00 for non-sudden events. Such insurance shall cover injury or damage occurring upon the site of the operation and upon properties in the vicinity of the landfill as the result of conditions or activities occurring in connection with the operation of the landfill. An insurance carrier approved by the board of commissioners shall issue such policies, and such policies shall be filed with the board of commissioners. The deductible written into the insurance policy shall not exceed five percent of the per-incident limit of the liability of the policy. The coverage obtained by the owner/operator to fulfill the requirements of this section shall include the provision that the insurer shall notify the board of commissioners 30 days prior to the cancellation of the insurance for any reason. The insured must provide evidence that $10,000,000.00 liability insurance is to run for five years subsequent to closure to cover post-closure costs. Also provide a history of any claims against the company at any site, including the record of any subsidiary or parent corporation as defined above. 
c.  Justification for and anticipated benefits from the project. 
d.  A description of the scope of the proposed project, including an estimated schedule of how much and what kinds of waste the facility would accept, where the material would come from, what pretreatment will be required of wastes unacceptable to the facility without such pretreatment, and how long the facility is expected to operate. 
e.  Yearly site operation expenses and an estimate of the costs for the lifetime of the project. 
f.  The proposed method of financing the project, including development, operation and closure stages. Include a list of the financial institution name(s) which will be funding construction. 
g.  Provide resumes of management personnel and the proposed number of employees and types of positions, including information on the training and experience required for each position, and safety precautions undertaken for the protection of personnel. 
h.  The anticipated date to begin construction. 
i.  The anticipated date to begin operation. 
j.  A detailed estimate of the types and amount of local government services required by the operator in each year. 
k.  A description of emergency procedures and safety and security precautions that will be in use at the facility. This information should include details on emergency assistance and emergency medical treatment that will be required from the area's medical facilities and the Burke County EMA. 
l.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken by the applicant to prevent contamination in and around the facility site and the description of planned monitoring systems, with an estimated annual budget of each of these items. 
m.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be used during transportation of materials to and from the facility, with an estimated annual budget for these arrangements and an estimate of the volume of material to be transported during each year of operation. 
n.  A description of anticipated need for post-closure care. 
(2)  A map or other written material attached to the application shall include but is not limited to the following information: 
a.  Ownership. 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of legal owner (and/or agent) of the subject property. 
2.  Name address and telephone number of professional persons responsible for the plat of survey. 
3.  Description of any existing rights-of-way or easements affecting the property. 
4.  Reference to any existing restrictive covenants on the property. 
b.  Description. Location of property tax map and parcel number. This description should include a reference to the deed book and page number or other evidence of title the current property owner may have. 
c.  Features. Each map shall contain the following information: 
1.  Drawn to scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch. 
2.  Location sketch map showing relationship of the project to the surrounding area. 
3.  Graphic scale, date, north arrow, and legend. 
4.  Location of property with respect to surrounding property and roads, and the names and addresses of adjacent property owners according to county tax records. 
5.  Existing uses of the surrounding property. 
6.  The location of all boundary lines of the property. 
7.  The total acreage of land in the project. 
8.  The location of existing and/or platted streets, easements, buildings, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, sewers, water mains, culverts, wells and gas and electric transmission lines. 
9.  The location of water bodies, water courses, groundwater aquifers, springs, Carolina bays, wetlands and other pertinent features. 
10.  The location, dimensions, and acreage of all property proposed to be set aside for various uses on the applicant's property. 
11.  The location of all test wells and/or borings. 
12.  The location of the 500- and 100-year flood plain, and records of flood, including inundation due to dam break. 
13.  The location of historic properties and gravesites, including any plans of relocation of graves and properties having historical significance. 
14.  The location of any archeological sites. 
15.  The location of all wildlife habitats and wildlife management areas, including endangered protective species of state and federal governments. 
16.  The location of any cultural facilities such as churches, campgrounds, schools, burial sites. 
17.  The location of any food crop production areas. 
18.  The location of any commercial plant nurseries. 
d.  Geological map. A map showing location of faults, dikes, sills and other pertinent geologic features, including bedrock type and strike and dip of any mappable bedding; the depth and degree of weathering (saprolite); identification and location of clay as to thickness, type and permeability; and location of the water table as to approximate depth, gradient and surface configuration. 
e.  Topographic map. A topographic map with contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet at the same scale as to the project site map shall be included. Date, method of preparation and preparer of said survey shall be stated. 
f.  Transportation route map. A map showing proposed transportation routes to and from the facility site, including location of towns and emergency and safety facilities. Include an estimate of the volume of material to travel on each route. 
(3)  The application shall address the following factors with regard to, but not limited to, on-site storage and/or disposal: 
a.  Contaminant flow to water table, including leachate monitoring, collecting and withdrawal systems; clay and synthetic liners (extra thickness, multiple liners); spill prevention and containment measures. 
b.  Contaminant movement to groundwater, including groundwater monitoring systems at the site and in potentially affected areas; subsurface "slurry wall" barrier controls and other groundwater withdrawals in the area. 
c.  Predictability of contaminant movement, based on preconstructed borings and groundwater modeling. 
d.  Potential effect on surface waters, planned collection systems for surface water run-off, and planned exclusion systems for surface water run-on. 
e.  Potential effect on aquifers, planned provisions for alternate water supply systems and facilities for immediate pumping and treatment of contaminated water. 
f.  Potential effect on public water supply, planned run-off collection and treatment and provisions for alternate supply systems. 
g.  Possibility of site flooding; and planned special facility design, special control dikes, and buffer zone setback in area of standard project flood area. 
h.  Potential human exposure to untreated waste water, including planned safety procedures, clothing, instruction, and practice for employees; and planned oversized of redundant treatment capacity, effluent monitoring and automatic shutdown systems. 
(4)  In addition to the above, an application shall show the ability to comply with each provision of section 34-42, location standards. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-52. - Application processing fees. 
(a)  The Burke County Board of Commissioners shall require an application fee in the amount of $5,000.00 to reimburse the county for the costs of any needed professional assistance that may be required to evaluate the permit application and amendments, verify its contents and evaluate the impact of such a permit on the community, public health and environment. This assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, the assistance of lawyers, biologists, geologists, engineers, chemists, hydrologists, emergency response, transportation and public health experts, land appraisers and professional testing laboratories. Funds not so expended in the legitimate review of the permit application shall be returned to the applicant. 
(b)  Failure to provide these funds within 30 days of demand shall result in termination of the permit process or cancellation of the permit. The Burke County Board of Commissioners may take legal action against the applicant for any costs incurred to the county up to the point of termination. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-53. - Public notice and review of application. 
(a)  Before the applicant identifies a potential site and conducts a hydrological study for submission to the division for site suitability, the applicant shall notify the local government and participate in a public meeting as described herein: 
(1)  The local government shall give notice of the meeting published in a newspaper of general circulation at least twice per week for two weeks immediately preceding the date of the meeting. The cost of publication shall be the applicant's responsibility. 
(2)  The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the meeting. 
(3)  The purpose of the public meeting shall be to discuss the waste management needs of the local government, to describe the siting process to be followed, and to allow for public input. 
(4)  The meeting shall be conducted by the local government, the county commission or its designee. 
(b)  The applicant shall submit to Burke County Board of Commissioners eight copies of all information required by federal and state agencies for the facility for which it requests a county permit at the time such information is submitted to the state and federal government. The review procedure shall not begin nor shall the application be designated as complete until such time as all required data are submitted and the appropriate fees are paid, or suitable arrangements for payment have been approved by the Burke County Board of Commissioners. 
(c)  A designee of the board of county commissioners shall compile copies of all reports, applications, minutes of meetings, reports by consultants and similar materials. These materials shall be placed in one location with free access to the public and be made available for copying any portion or all of any document at cost. 
(d)  Within 45 days of the submission of the application, the Burke County Board of Commissioners shall set a time for a public hearing so that the applicant can present his plans and answer questions regarding the same. 
(e)  The applicant shall be required to pay for notice to be published at least twice in the county's legal organ prior to the hearing. Notice shall be published beginning at least seven but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Copies of all ads or a certification from the publisher must be submitted to the board prior to each hearing. 
(f)  After the hearing, the Burke County Board of Commissioners shall have 60 days in which to determine if the application is complete and shall mail notice of its determination to the applicant. If the application is not complete, the applicant will have six months to complete the application. However, the applicant may at the end of six months make a showing of cause to the Burke County Board of Commissioners, and, if the Burke County Board of Commissioners finds that the delay is justified and in good faith, they can grant the applicant a maximum three-month extension. 
(g)  Once a completed application is submitted to the county the applicant shall be required to send a letter via first class mail to all adjoining property owners, as shown on the tax records of the county on the date of the application, and to all property owners where any portion of their property is within 1,000 feet of the boundary of the facility. This notice shall be required to state that the applicant is seeking a letter of assurance for a solid waste management facility. Certification of this notice must be provided to the board, along with a list of all owners prior to the public meeting for public comment on the completed application. 
(h)  Each application shall require an analysis conducted by the county staff and a consultant or consultants selected by the Burke County Board of Commissioners. The analysis shall be completed within 90 days from the day the application is determined to be complete. In certain instances where the complexity of the application requires more than the usual 90 days, the county staff and/or consultant may request an additional 60 days from the Burke County Board of Commissioners, and the proponent has the option of requesting the Burke County Board of Commissioners to extend the analysis period to allow time for responding to staff and/or consultant requests for additional information on a completed application. In the event the integrated long-range solid waste management plan shall not be completed by the end of the analysis period, the consultant or staff may request an additional 90 days to allow for the completion of the plan. 
(i)  The Burke County staff and each consultant shall make reports on the application to the Burke County Board of Commissioners at their meetings. 
(j)  The Burke County Board of Commissioners shall call a public meeting for public comment on the completed application along with the analysis of county staff and consultants. The purpose of this meeting shall be for public review of the application. The staff shall give notice by regular mail of the time and place of the public meeting to the owner and adjacent property owners as specified on the map. Said notice shall be mailed not less than 14 days prior to the date specified thereon. Notice of a public meeting shall be posted by the applicant on the proposed facility property on each and every street of access not less than 14 days prior to the date specified thereon. Said posted notice shall be at intervals of not greater than 1,500 feet. The applicant shall also place notice in the county newspaper not less than 14 days prior to the dates specified thereon. 
(k)  At the public meeting for public comment the applicant shall again present its application, and any supplemental information requested by the board of commissioners. The board members shall have the opportunity to ask questions of the staff, consultants, any experts, the applicant, supporters and opponents. The hearing shall be transcribed or recorded so that it may be transcribed later if necessary. The applicant and supporters shall be granted equal time as opponents. The minimum time allowed per side is 15 minutes. The board may allow more time than the minimum if the application is complex, or the number of witnesses warrants a further extension. If the board determines that there are a great number of opponents with the same interest (for example, members of the same neighborhood), the board may require that a spokesman be designated. The opponents may also be represented by an attorney. The applicant, supporters and opponents shall have the right to provide testimony, including expert testimony, in support of their position. Each party shall have a reasonable opportunity to ask questions of the other side, in an orderly manner as controlled by the board. 
(l)  Within 45 days after receipt of the final analysis, complete application and public comment, the county staff and consultants shall make a recommendation to the Burke County Board of Commissioners at a public meeting whether to accept the application, deny it, or accept it with modifications. This recommendation shall be made to the full board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-54. - Evaluation criteria. 
The county commission shall issue a letter of assurance for any solid waste management facility in Burke County, as required by state law and regulations, if such facility complies with the location standards and is consistent with the Burke County Solid Waste Management Plan. 
(1)  The Burke County Board of Commissioners, however, before deciding whether to accept the proposal or to accept it with modifications, shall make the following determinations: 
a.  That there is a bona fide need for the facility and there is no reasonable alternative facility which will pose a lesser threat to the environment. 
b.  That the construction and operation of the facility will not pose an unreasonable health or environmental risk to the surrounding locality. 
c.  That the applicant (or facility operator) has the capability and financial resources to construct, operate and maintain the facility. 
d.  That the applicant or operator has taken or consented in writing to take any and all reasonable measures to comply with the applicable federal, state and local regulations and ordinances. 
e.  That the applicant's plan represents the best available technology for handling the waste and the applicant has demonstrated that it will employ the best management practices in handling the waste at the proposed facility. 
f.  Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact to traffic on adjacent streets and in regard to adjacent residential, commercial and industrial uses. 
g.  Whether the proposed use is compatible with the surrounding properties, uses, and governmentally regulated facilities. 
h.  Whether the proposed use will have a negative impact on health, safety, aesthetics, property value, or other elements of the community. 
i.  If there are environmentally sensitive areas on the subject property, whether the proposed plans adequately protect those areas. 
j.  That the facility is compatible with Burke County's integrated county long-range solid waste management plan, taking into account alternative methods of management such as recycling. 
(2)  At its next scheduled meeting, the Burke County Board of Commissioners shall make its decision to grant the permit, deny it, or grant it with specified conditions. 
(3)  Each board member shall prepare a written decision or decisions to be voted one by the board at the next scheduled meeting. Board members may individually meet with the county attorney's office to prepare a written decision. 
(4)  Written decisions should be based on the evidence in the record and the criteria in the ordinance. 
(5)  At the next scheduled meeting any board member may put forward a written decision to be voted on. Written decisions may be supplemented with further conditions proposed at the meeting. No vote shall be final until the board of commissioners adopts a written decision. 
(6)  Any proposal shall be specifically conditioned to the site plan, maps, elevation renderings, and other detailed plans to insure that the development is erected in accordance with the presented materials. The approval may also impose additional conditions, if the conditions are designed to minimize the impact of the use on the neighboring property, streets, and so forth. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-55. - Appeal process. 
In the event that an application is denied, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of Burke County within 30 days. The applicant shall file a copy of the appeal with the clerk of the board of commissioners, and the clerk shall forward a copy of the entire record (including evidence submitted by all sides) to the superior court as soon as is practicable, along with the minutes of the hearings, copies of the tapes or transcriptions of the hearings, the written decision, a copy of the ordinance, and all other relevant ordinances, maps and documents. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-56. - Enforcement. 
Failure to comply with this section will result in denial, suspension of application, permit, and/or business license and a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00 per day per violation. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Sec. 34-57. - Existing sanitary landfill operations. 
This article shall not apply to any permitted landfill operation existing on the effective date of this article, and any such landfill shall be allowed to continue in operation in accordance with the permit issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. This article shall apply, however, to any new or expanded landfill for which a permit is issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division on or after the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, 12-13-2005) 
Chapter 38 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-6(2); any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-6(7); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein saved from repeal, § 1-6(14); administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 38-31. - Levied. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied for each year an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. 
(b)  "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. "Depository financial institutions" shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Res. of 1-1-84, § 1) 
Sec. 38-32. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 38-31 shall be $1,000.00. 
(Res. of 1-1-84, § 2) 
Sec. 38-33. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. This return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Res. of 1-1-84, § 3) 
Sec. 38-34. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 38-33 unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 1-1-84, § 4) 
Secs. 38-35—38-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GROSS PREMIUMS TAX ON INSURERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 38-66. - Gross premiums tax on insurance other than life insurance. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is levied for each year an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). "Gross direct premiums" shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Res. of 8-10-83, § 1) 
Secs. 38-67—38-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 

Sec. 38-101. - Authorized. 
Pursuant to Ga. Const. art. VII, § II, ¶ III, 100 percent of the value of that tangible property defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2 shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation, including all taxes levied for educational and state purposes. 
(Res. of 10-8-85) 
Secs. 38-102—38-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - JOINT COUNTY-MUNICIPAL SALES AND USE TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Joint county and municipal sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-80 et seq. 

Sec. 38-131. - Levied. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-82, the board of commissioners does hereby levy a joint county and municipal sales and use tax at the rate of one percent within the special district whose boundaries are conterminous with the boundaries of the county. 
(Res. of 1-1-82) 
Secs. 38-132—38-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - AD VALOREM TAXATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; county ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq. 

Sec. 38-166. - Tax commissioner's authority to waive penalties. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-242, the board of commissioners delegates to the county tax commissioner the authority to make the final determination on a case-by-case basis as to whether or not to waive penalties following sound business guidelines; and the county tax commissioner is vested with the authority to make the final decision as to whether or not to waive or assess penalties on ad valorem taxes. 
(Res. of 9-12-95) 
Secs. 38-167—38-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-01, § 1, adopted June 10, 2014, repealed Art. VII § 38-200—38-212, which pertained to occupational tax and derived from Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 9-10-2013. 

Secs. 38-200—38-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HOTEL/MOTEL TAX 

Sec. 38-220. - Repeal of hotel/motel tax 
The Burke County Hotel Motel Tax which was imposed under authority of the O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3) is hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 15-03 , § 1, 8-11-2015) 
Chapter 42 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Land development code, ch. 26; roads and bridges, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; stopping, standing and parking,O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; Handicapped Parking Law, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq.; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); responsibility of railroad employees for obstructing crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197; sirens, whistles and bells prohibited on vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70(b). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11. 
Secs. 42-2—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED ZONES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The cities of Keysville, Girard and Vidette have adopted resolutions to allow the county sheriff to use speed detection devices to enforce speed limits within the city limits of such cities. 

Sec. 42-31. - Adopted. 
(a)  Authority. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183, concerning local authorities' power to alter lawful speed limits, this article, regulating speed limits within the county is adopted. 
(b)  Speed zones established. The board of commissioners establishes the speed zones in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law. 
(c)  On-system. 
State Route 17: 
From the Jenkins County line (M.L. 0.00) to the Midville city limit (M.L. 4.44), a distance of 4.44 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From the Midville city limit (M.L. 6.15) to the Jefferson County line (M.L. 11.06), a distance of 4.91 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 23: 
From the Jenkins County line (M.L. 0.00) to the Sardis city limit (M.L. 3.46), a distance of 3.46 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From the Sardis city limit (M.L. 5.03) to the Girard city limit (M.L. 9.07), a distance of 4.04 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From the Girard city limit (M.L. 9.07) 0.81 mile south of County Road #450 to a point 0.35 mile south of County Road #450 - Mill Haven Road (M.L. 9.53), a distance of 0.46 mile, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From a point 0.35 mile south of County Road #450-Mill Haven Road (M.L. 9.53) to a point 0.10 mile south of County Road #450-Mill Haven Road (M.L. 9.78), a distance of 0.25 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
From a point 0.10 mile south of County Road #450-Mill Haven Road (M.L. 9.78) to County Road #79-Brigham Landing (M.L. 10.20), a distance of 0.42 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
From County Road #79-Brigham Landing (M.L. 10.20) to a point 0.35 mile north of County Road #79-Brigham Landing (M.L. 10.55), a distance of 0.35 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
From a point 0.35 mile north of County Road #79-Brigham Landing (M.L. 10.55) to the Girard city limit (M.L. 10.90) 0.22 mile south of County Road #85, a distance of 0.35 mile, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From the Girard city limit (M.L. 10.90) to State Route 56 (M.L. 29.33), a distance of 18.43 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 24: 
From the Screven County line (M.L. 0.00) to the Sardis city limit (M.L. 2.91), a distance of 2.91 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From the Sardis city limit (M.L. 4.82) 0.60 mile east of County Road #153 to the Waynesboro city limit (M.L. 19.20) 0.08 mile north of County Road #197, a distance of 14.38 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From the Waynesboro city limit (M.L. 21.79) 0.09 mile south of State Route 56 to the Vidette city limit (M.L. 34.40) 0.49 mile south of State Route 305, a distance of 12.61 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From the Vidette city limit (M.L. 34.40) 0.49 mile south of State Route 305 to a point 0.33 mile west of the Vidette city limit (M.L. 34.73), a distance of 0.33 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
From a point 0.33 mile west of the Vidette city limit (M.L. 34.73) to County Road #274-College Avenue (M.L. 34.98), a distance of 0.25 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
From County Road #274-College Avenue (M.L. 34.98) to the Vidette city limit (M.L. 35.34) 0.36 mile west of College Avenue, a distance of 0.36 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
From the Vidette city limit (M.L. 35.34) to the Jefferson County line (M.L. 37.28), a distance of 1.94 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 56: 
From the Midville city limit (M.L. 1.15) to State Route 24 (M.L. 21.95), a distance of 20.80 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 56 runs common with State Route 24 from (M.L. 21.95) to (M.L. 23.18), a distance of 1.23 miles. 
From the Waynesboro city limit (M.L. 24.60) to the Richmond County line (M.L. 35.67), a distance of 11.07 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 56 Spur: 
From State Route 56 (M.L. 0.00) to State Route 80 (M.L. 6.54), a distance of 6.54 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 78: 
From the Jefferson County line (M.L. 0.00) to State Route 17 (M.L. 0.64), a distance of 0.64 mile, to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 80: 
From State Route 56 Spur (M.L. 0.00) to State Route 56 (M.L. 8.75), a distance of 8.75 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 80 runs common with State Route 56 from (M.L. 8.75) to (M.L. 13.27), a distance of 4.52 miles. 
State Route 80 runs common with State Route 24 from (M.L. 13.27) to (M.L. 14.76), a distance of 1.49 miles. 
From State Route 24 (M.L. 14.76) to the Jefferson County line (M.L. 29.13), a distance of 14.37 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 88: 
From the Jefferson County line (M.L. 0.00) to the Keysville city limit (M.L. 0.44), a distance of 0.44 mile, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From the Keysville city limit (M.L. 0.44) 0.03 mile west of County Road #216 to City Street #577-Center Avenue (M.L. 0.81), a distance of 0.37 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
From City Street #577-Center Avenue (M.L. 0.81) to City Street #575-Cheatham Street (M.L. 1.24), a distance of 0.43 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
From City Street #575-Cheatham Street (M.L. 1.24) to a point 0.36 mile east of City Street #575-Cheatham Street (M.L. 1.60), a distance of 0.36 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
From a point 0.36 mile east of City Street #575-Cheatham Street (M.L. 1.60) to the Keysville city limit (M.L. 2.20) 0.26 mile west of County Road #07, a distance of 0.60 mile, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From the Keysville city limit (M.L. 2.20) 0.26 mile west of County Road #07 to the Richmond County line (M.L. 4.20), a distance of 2.00 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 121: 
From the Jenkins County line (M.L. 0.00) to the Waynesboro city limit (M.L. 10.78), a distance of 10.78 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From the Waynesboro city limit (M.L. 13.36) to the Richmond County line (M.L. 22.43), a distance of 9.07 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
State Route 305: 
From the Midville city limit (M.L. 0.61) 0.14 mile south of County Road #319 to the Vidette city limit (M.L. 14.74) 0.28 mile south of City Street #451, a distance of 14.13 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From the Vidette city limit (M.L. 14.74) 0.28 mile south of Gordon Street to City Street #451-Gordon Street (M.L. 15.02), a distance of 0.28 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
From City Street #451-Gordon Street (M.L. 15.02) to a point 0.02 mile south of City Street #453-Johnson Avenue (M.L. 15.27), a distance of 0.25 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
From a point 0.02 mile south of City Street #453-Johnson Avenue (15.27) to the Vidette city limit (M.L. 15.64) 0.35 mile north of Johnson Avenue, a distance of 0.37 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
From the Vidette city limit (M.L. 15.64) 0.49 mile south of County Road #274 to a point 0.45 mile south of County Road #257-Hill Street (M.L. 18.49), a distance of 2.85 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
From a point 0.45 mile south of County Road #257-Hill Street (M.L. 18.49) to County Road #266-Whitehead Street (M.L. 19.13), a distance of 0.64 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
From County Road #266-Whitehead Street (M.L. 19.13) to County Road #263-Cates Street (M.L. 19.33), a distance of 0.20 mile, to be zoned 35 mph. 
From County Road #263-Cates Street (M.L. 19.33) to a point 0.12 mile north of County Road #226-Gay Road (M.L. 19.53), a distance of 0.20 mile, to be zoned 45 mph. 
From a point 0.12 mile north of County Road #226-Gay Road (M.L. 19.53) to State Route 88 (M.L. 29.04), a distance of 9.51 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
Signs to be erected by the state department of transportation. 
(d)  Off-system. 
County Road #2: 
From Blythe city to County Road #454, a distance of 1.9 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #15 (Farmers Bridge Road): 
From Richmond County line to State Route 305, a distance of 8.1 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #17 (Corley Road): 
From County Road #455 to County Road #15, a distance of 4.4 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #24 (Tucker Road): 
From County Road #456 to County Road #26, a distance of 1.2 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #25 (Winston-Sands Drive): 
From County Road #26 to County Road #26, a distance of 3.8 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #25 (Old Waynesboro Road): 
From Norfolk Southern Railroad overpass to State Highway #56, a distance of 1.5 miles, to be zoned 35 mph. 
County Road #26 (Greiner Road): 
From County Road #25 to State Route 121, a distance of 1.3 miles, to be zoned 45 mph. 
County Road #28 (Hunnicutt-Gresham Road): 
From State Route 121 to County Road #25, a distance of 3.4 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #40 (Collins Road): 
From State Route 56 to State Route 56 Spur, a distance of 2.8 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #47 (Saxon Road): 
From State Route 56 to State Route 23, a distance of 2.2 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #48 (Springbranch Church Road): 
From State Route 56 to State Route 23, a distance of 3.0 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #52 (Sam Mead Road): 
From County Road #54 to County Road #110, a distance of 1.2 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #54 (Cates Mead Road): 
From State Route 56 to County Road #52, a distance of 2.9 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #57 (Ben Hatcher Road): 
From State Route 23 to County Road #59, a distance of 4.3 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #58 (River Road): 
From State Route 80 to County Road #59, a distance of 1.8 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #59 (River Road): 
From County Road #96 to County Road #58, a distance of 6.0 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #79 (Brigham Landing Road): 
From the Girard city limit to County Road #80, a distance of 2.15 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #91 (Creek Road): 
From County Road #457 to State Route 23, a distance of 5.3 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #96 (Ebenezer Church Road): 
From State Route 23 to County Road #59, a distance of 3.9 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #98: 
From County Road #110 to County Road #59, a distance of 6.9 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #110 (Seven Oaks Road): 
From State Route 23 to County Road #457, a distance of 5.4 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #118 (Munnerlyn-Alexander Road): 
From State Route 121 to State Route 24, a distance of 8.4 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #136 (Parker-Bonnell Road): 
From State Route 23 to State Route 24, a distance of 3.5 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #142 (Murray Hill Road): 
From State Route 24 to County Road #450, a distance of 5.7 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #148 (Ellison Bridge Road): 
From Sardis city limit to County Road #142, a distance of 3.1 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #199 (Clark Place Road): 
From State Route 24 to County Road #202, a distance of 2.5 miles, to be zoned 45 mph. 
County Road #202 (Bates Road): 
From State Route 56 to County Road #199, a distance of 1.7 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #206 (Hadden Pond Road): 
From State Route 121 to the Waynesboro city limit, a distance of 3.1 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #209 (Cohen Road): 
From State Route 121 to County Road #451, a distance of 1.1 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #212 (Spread Oak Road): 
From State Route 121 to County Road #451, a distance of 4.4 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #226 (Gay Road): 
From State Route 305 to the Jefferson County line, a distance of 3.5 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #236 (Stephens Road): 
From State Route 80 to State Route 80, a distance of 2.2 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #255 (Drone Road): 
From State Route 24 to County Road #478, a distance of 5.7 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #336 (Bynes-Sunshine Road): 
From County Road #351 to County Road #452, a distance of 3.9 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #345 (Chappell Road): 
From State Route 56 to County Road #452, a distance of 2.1 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #349 (Porterville Church Road): 
From County Road #373 to County Road #348, a distance of 2.3 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #351 (Rozier Road): 
From State Route 56 to State Route 305, a distance of 6.6 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #373 (Porter-Carswell Road): 
From County Road #452 to County Road #349, a distance of 5.5 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #450 (Millhaven Road): 
From the Girard city limit to the Screven County line, a distance of 4.55 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #451 (Quaker Road): 
From the Waynesboro city limit to State Route 80, a distance of 11.6 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #452 (Herndon Road): 
From the Waynesboro city limit to the Jenkins County line, a distance of 11.6 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #453 (Stoney Bluff Road): 
From the Girard city limit to the Screven County line, a distance of 6.8 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #454 (Hephzibah-Keysville Road): 
From the Keysville city limit to the Richmond County line, a distance of 5.23 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #455 (Storey Road): 
From the Richmond County line to State Route 56, a distance of 13.7 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #456 (Winter Road): 
From State Route 121 to a point 0.25 mile south of the Blythe city limit, a distance of 12.00 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #456 (Spring Hill Church Road): 
From a point 0.25 mile south of the Blythe city limit to the Blythe city limit, a distance of 0.25 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
County Road #457 (Thompson Bridge Road): 
From State Route 23 to State Route 24, a distance of 9.9 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #458 (Magruder-Scott's Store Road): 
From State Route 305 to the Jenkins County line, a distance of 7.7 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
County Road #459 (Perimeter Road): 
From State Route 121 to the Waynesboro city limit, a distance of 2.4 miles, to be zoned 45 mph. 
County Road #459 (Perimeter Road): 
School zone from the Waynesboro city limit to a point 0.50 mile south of the Waynesboro city limit, a distance of 0.50 mile, to be zoned 25 mph from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days only. 
County Road #478 (Gough Spur): 
From State Route 80 to State Route 305, a distance of 2.7 miles, to be zoned 55 mph. 
Signs to be erected by the county. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 94.144, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 01-01, § 1, 12-11-2001) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 