THE CODE OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCEVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2015 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Judy Jordan Johnson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Keith Roche 
David Still 
Tony Powell 
Robert Clark 
City Council 
____________ 
Chuck Warbington 
City Manager 
____________ 
V. Lee Thompson, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Karen Pierce 
City Clerk 
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Judy Jordan Johnson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Keith Roche 
Marie Beiser 
Tony Powell 
Robert Clark 
City Council 
____________ 
Robert Baroni 
City Manager 
____________ 
V. Lee Thompson, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Karen Pierce 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2005 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2005 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel F. Walker, Code Attorney, and Kayla Mahnken, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Karen Pierce, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia. 
© ;hg;Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia. 2015. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2015-39  ORDINANCE TO ADOPT NEW CODE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF LAWRENCEVILLE, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1 . The Code entitled "Code of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 38, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2 . All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 31, 2014, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference in Section 1-11 therein, are repealed; however, this repeal shall not affect any utility rates approved by the City Council or any ordinances not continued in previous versions of the codified code of the City. 
Section 3 . The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4 . Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished in accordance with code Section 1-8. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5 . Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6 . Ordinances adopted after January 1, 2015, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. The following are included within the terms of this section: 
(a)  Ordinance 2015-14 - amending Section 44-117 [How Funds Used provisions] of the Hotel/Motel Occupancy Tax regulations; 
(b)  Ordinance 2015-99 - amending Section 34-170 [Drinking in Public provisions] of the Alcohol regulations; 
(c)  Ordinance 2015-27 - amending Section 3-603 [Vacancies created by appointed officials qualifying for elected office provisions] of the Boards and Commissions regulations; and 
(d)  Ordinance 2015-33 - amending Section 17-401 [Overcrowding & Sleeping areas provisions] of the Property Maintenance regulations. 
Section 7 . The following amendments shall be incorporated into the new code of ordinances being adopted: 
(a)  In Section 8-1, replace each and every reference of Chapter 46 Articles 2 & 3 (of the Gwinnett County Code) with a reference to Chapter 10 Articles 1 & 2 (of the Gwinnett County Code. 
(b)  In Article 5 of Chapter 2 related to the Identity Theft Prevention Program regulations, replace each and every reference to the City Clerk with a reference to the City Manager. 
Section 8 . In order to provide time for the city's Police Department and Municipal Court to update and change code sections within their software systems, this ordinance shall become effective December 1, 2015. The existing code of ordinances shall remain in full force and effect until the new code enacted by this ordinance becomes effective on December 1, 2015. 
Passed and adopted by the city council this 2nd day of November, 2015. 

ATTEST: 

1st Reading: October 5, 2015 
2nd Reading: November 2, 2015 
Council Action: November 2, 2015 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council, held on the 2nd day of November, 2015. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter for the City of Lawrenceville as approved on May 4, 2017 ( Act No. 155, House Bill 594 ). Prior to the approval of Act No. 155, the Charter was approved March 28, 1986, with amendments occurring on October 6, 2014; May 11, 2011 (Act No. 144); and April 11, 2012 (Act No. 528). Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Amendments are indicated by a history note immediately following the amended section. 

PREAMBLE 
To provide a new charter for the City of Lawrenceville; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, powers, and construction; to provide for a governing authority and its membership, elections, and terms; to provide for vacancies; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for meetings and voting of the governing authority; to provide for powers of the mayor and city council; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for ordinances; to provide for a city manager, city clerk, and city attorney; to provide for employment matters; to provide for a municipal court, its judges, jurisdiction, and powers; to provide for certiorari and rules of the court; to provide for budgets; to provide for disposition of municipal property; to provide for taxes, fees, franchises, and other charges and assessments; to provide for bonds and short-term loans; to provide contract procedures; to provide for bonds for officials, prior ordinances, existing personnel and officers, pending matters, and construction; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to provide a specific repealer; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
ARTICLE I. - CREATION, INCORPORATION, POWERS 

Sec. 1.01. - Name. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style "City of Lawrenceville" and by that name shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 1.02. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the City of Lawrenceville shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official map (or description) of the corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.03. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. The city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. 
(c)  The powers of the city shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide penalties for the violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation . To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts . To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies . To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Eminent domain. The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures now or hereafter established under the general laws of this state; 
(9)  Employee benefits. To provide and maintain a retirement plan, insurance, and such other employee benefits for appointed officers and employees of the city as are determined by the city council; 
(10)  Environmental protection . To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of stormwater and establishment of a stormwater utility, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(11)  Ethics . To adopt ethics ordinances and regulations governing the conduct of municipal elected officials, appointed officials, and employees, establishing procedures for ethics complaints and setting forth penalties for violations of such rules and procedures; 
(12)  Garbage fees . To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal, and other sanitary service charge, fee, or, if authorized by general law, tax for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing or doing business therein benefitting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(13)  General health, safety, and welfare . To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city; and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Gifts . To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such reasonable terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(15)  Health and sanitation . To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(16)  Jail sentences . To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by law, or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(17)  Motor vehicles . To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(18)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power . To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(19)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(20)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, hold, sell, exchange, rent, lease, or otherwise acquire or dispose of any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, whether held by the city in its proprietary, governmental, or other capacity, inside or outside of the corporate boundaries of the city and wherever located; 
(21)  Municipal property protection . To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city, and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(22)  Municipal utilities . To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, stormwater management, gas works, electric works, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes if authorized by general law, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(23)  Nuisance . To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(24)  Penalties . To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(25)  Planning and zoning . To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(26)  Police and fire protection . To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers, and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(27)  Public hazards and removal . To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(28)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(29)  Public opinion questions . The city council may place public opinion questions on the ballots of general and special elections and are authorized by this charter to expend public funds to conduct such nonbinding public opinion questions; 
(30)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(31)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(32)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for, or impose taxes if authorized by general law on, public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(33)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(34)  Roadways . To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, landscape with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands, and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(35)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax, if authorized by general law, as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(36)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse, and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials, and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(37)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate junk dealers and pawn shops; to regulate or prohibit the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and flammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(38)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(39)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(40)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(41)  Taxicabs . To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(42)  Urban redevelopment . To organize and operate an urban development program; 
(43)  Other powers . To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.04. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the City of Lawrenceville or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 2.01. - City council creation; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of the City of Lawrenceville, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council. 
(b)  The city council of Lawrenceville, Georgia, shall consist of a mayor and four councilmembers. The mayor shall be a voting member. 
(c)  General municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year. 
Sec. 2.02. - Mayor and city councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)  The mayor and city councilmembers shall serve terms of four years and their terms shall expire January 1 when the term of office of their successor begins in accordance with Section 2.09 of this charter. 
(b)  No person elected in the general municipal election of 2012, or any election thereafter, shall serve as mayor or as city councilmember for more than 12 consecutive years. Years of service, whether by special election or appointment, prior to the first full term of four years shall not count toward the term limit set forth in this subsection. 
(c)  Any person serving as mayor or councilmember shall be a qualified elector of the city. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the City of Lawrenceville for a continuous period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of the election, shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service, and shall continue to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Lawrenceville. 
Sec. 2.03. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  Except as authorized by law, elected officials shall not hold any other elected public office or hold any position of employment with the City of Lawrenceville during the term for which the officer was elected. The elective offices of the city's government shall become vacant upon the member's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or by the general laws of the State of Georgia. The following shall result in an elected city official forfeiting his or her office: 
(1)  Violating the provisions of this charter; 
(2)  Being convicted of, or pleading guilty or "no contest" to, a felony or crime of moral turpitude; or 
(3)  Failing to attend one-third of the regular meetings of the council in a one-year period without being excused by the city council. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or city councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election if such vacancy occurs 12 months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office. If such vacancy occurs less than 12 months prior to the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. This subsection shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of the mayor or any city councilmember. 
Sec. 2.04. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices, and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designation. 
Sec. 2.05. - Election votes. 
The candidates for mayor and city council who receive a majority of the votes cast of the qualified electors of the city at large voting at the elections of the city shall be elected to a term of office. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast in said election, a run-off election shall be held between the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes. Such run-off election shall be held at the time specified by state election law, unless such run-off date is postponed by court order. 
Sec. 2.06. - Applicability of general laws; qualifying; other provisions. 
All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended or otherwise provided by law. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate, including but not limited to the establishment of qualifying fees, to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended or otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 2.07. - Compensation and expenses. 
The city council shall be authorized to fix the compensation of the mayor and councilmembers in accordance with the provisions of Code Section 36-35-4 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as may be amended from time to time. 
Sec. 2.08. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof, and for this purpose, may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.09. - Meetings, oath of office, and mayor pro tempore. 
(a)  The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the third Wednesday in December of each election year for the purpose of swearing in elected officials whose term will begin January 1 of the following year. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor-elect and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected mayor and councilmembers collectively by the city clerk or a judicial officer authorized to administer oaths. The oath shall, to the extent that it comports with federal and state law, be as follows: "I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully execute the office of [councilmember or mayor, as the case may be] of the City of Lawrenceville and that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of Georgia, and the charter, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Lawrenceville. I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I by the laws of the State of Georgia am prohibited from holding. I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia. I have been a resident of the City of Lawrenceville for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal charter. I will perform the duties of my office in the best interests of the City of Lawrenceville to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward, or expectation thereof." 
(b)  Following the induction of the mayor and councilmembers, the city council, by a majority vote of the councilmembers, shall elect a councilmember to be mayor pro tempore, who shall serve for a term of one year and until a successor is elected and qualified. The number of successive terms an individual may hold a position as mayor pro tempore shall be unlimited. 
(c)  The mayor pro tempore shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's temporary disability, suspension, or absence. If the mayor pro tempore is absent because of sickness or disqualification, any one of the remaining councilmembers, chosen by the councilmembers present, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor as described in this charter and shall perform the mayor's duties in the same manner as the mayor pro tempore. 
(d)  The city council shall, at least once a month, hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The city council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meeting to any day or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(e)  Special meetings of the city council shall be held on the call of either the mayor and one councilmember or two councilmembers. Notice of such special meetings shall be delivered to all councilmembers, the mayor, and the city manager personally, by registered mail, or by electronic means at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor, all councilmembers, and the city manager are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by the mayor, a councilmember, or the city manager in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice. The notice of such special meeting shall state what business is to be transacted at the special meeting. Only the business stated in the call shall be transacted at the special meeting. 
Sec. 2.10. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business for the city council. The mayor shall be counted toward the making of a quorum. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the yeas and nays shall be recorded in the minutes, but on the request of any member there shall be a roll-call vote. In order for any ordinance, resolution, motion, or other action of the city council to be adopted, the measure must receive at least three affirmative votes and must receive the affirmative votes of a majority of those voting. The mayor shall have one vote on all matters brought before the council. 
(b)  The following types of actions require an ordinance in order to have the force of law: 
(1)  Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter, or abolish a department, office, or agency not specified in this charter; 
(2)  Provide for a fine or other penalty; 
(3)  Levy taxes; 
(4)  Grant, renew, or extend a franchise; 
(5)  Regulate a rate for a public utility; 
(6)  Authorize the borrowing of money; 
(7)  Convey, lease, or encumber city land; 
(8)  Regulate land use and development; or 
(9)  Amend or repeal an ordinance already adopted. 
(c)  The city council shall establish by ordinance procedures for convening emergency meetings. In an emergency, an ordinance may be passed without notice or a hearing if the city council passes the ordinance by majority vote; provided, however, that the city council cannot in an emergency meeting: 
(1)  Levy taxes; 
(2)  Grant, renew, or extend a franchise; 
(3)  Regulate a rate for a public utility; or 
(4)  Borrow money. 
Sec. 2.11. - General power and authority of the city council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Lawrenceville as provided by Article I of this charter. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the city council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter and the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Lawrenceville and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
Sec. 2.12. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Serve as the ceremonial head of the city and as its official representative to federal, state, and local governmental bodies and officials and to be the official spokesperson for the city council and the chief advocate of city council policies; 
(3)  Recommend to the councilmembers such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as such officer may deem expedient; 
(4)  Administer oaths and take affidavits; 
(5)  Execute all contracts, deeds, and other obligations of the city within a level of authorization as established by the city council; and 
(6)  Vote on matters before the city council to the extent provided in subsection (a) of Section 2.10 of this charter. 
Sec. 2.13. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the mayor and city councilmembers for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by applicable state law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or any applicable law of the State of Georgia. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until the member has executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating the member to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the member's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor or a judicial officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office with or without cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson for terms of one year and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or applicable state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Sec. 2.14. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance and resolution shall be introduced in writing, and the city council shall have the authority to approve, disapprove, or amend the same. After the title of any proposed resolution or ordinance is read at a city council meeting, it may be approved and passed at such time by the city council. 
(b)  The catchlines of sections of this charter or any ordinance printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be: 
(1)  Deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or as any part of the section; and 
(2)  So deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted unless expressly provided to the contrary. 
(c)  Furthermore, the article and section headings contained in this charter shall not be deemed to govern, limit, or modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any article or section hereof. 
(d)  The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt rules and bylaws to govern the conduct of its business, including procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of an absent mayor or councilmember. Such rules may include punishment for contemptuous behavior conducted in the presence of the city council. 
Sec. 2.15. - Submission of ordinances to the city clerk. 
(a)  Every ordinance, resolution, and other action adopted by the city council shall be presented to the city clerk within 15 days of its adoption or approval. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery from the city council. 
(b)  An ordinance or resolution that has been passed by the city council shall become effective on the date the ordinance is passed by the city council or on such other date as may be specified in the ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - Holding other office; voting when financially interested. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the City of Lawrenceville are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  No elected officer, appointed officer, employee, or member of a board, commission, or authority, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction, or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. concerning the property, governance, or affairs of the governmental body by which the official is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of the official or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, object, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to the official's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which the official is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiations or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which the official has a financial interest. 
(c)  Any elected officer, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected officer, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  No elected officer, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit or profit but shall use such property only in his or her capacity as an officer or employee of the city. 
(e)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(f)  Except as authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or appointive office in the City of Lawrenceville or otherwise be employed by the City of Lawrenceville or any agency thereof during the term for which he or she was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which the official was elected. 
(g)  No appointed officer of the city, other than the city attorney, shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office in this city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the city council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)  (1)  Any officer or employee of the city who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit an office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 3.01. - City manager. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint an officer whose title shall be "city manager" and the city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city manager shall not be subject to annual reappointments. The city manager shall be appointed without regard to political beliefs and solely on the basis of his or her education and experience in the accepted competencies and practices of local government management. 
(b)  The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the manager's charge by or under this charter. As the chief executive and administrative officer, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint all and, when he or she deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove any city employees and administrative officers he or she appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Attend all city council meetings, except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline, or removal of the city manager, and have the right to take part in discussion but not vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual budget to the city council; 
(6)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the manager deems desirable; and 
(9)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city council. 
(c)  Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.08 of this charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction or supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders or supervisory direction to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(d)  The city manager shall not continue in such position upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. 
Sec. 3.02. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk. The city clerk shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the clerk's charge. The city clerk shall keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council, maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city, and perform such duties as may be required by law or ordinance or as the city council or city manager may direct. The city clerk shall not be subject to annual reappointments. The city clerk shall not continue in such position upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. 
Sec. 3.03. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney together with such assistant city attorneys as may be deemed appropriate who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city council shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.04. - Position classification and pay plans; employment at will. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Said plan shall apply to all employees of the City of Lawrenceville and any of its departments, agencies, and offices. When such a plan has been adopted by the city council, neither the city council nor the city manager shall increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees, except in conformity with such plan or pursuant to an amendment of said plan duly adopted by the city council. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all employees of the city shall be subject to removal or discharge, with or without cause, at any time. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 4.01. - Creation. 
There is established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Lawrenceville, which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of the state, as permitted by law, and said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law, including ordinances of the city; to impose bench warrant and failure to appear fees; to hold contempt proceedings and to punish any person found in contempt; to punish witnesses for nonattendance and to punish also any person who may counsel, advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases and other misdemeanor cases which, under the laws of Georgia, are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal courts to the extent of, and in accordance with, the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. Said court shall be presided over by the judge of said court. In the absence or disqualification of the judge, the associate judge shall preside and shall exercise the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. 
Sec. 4.02. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided for by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge of the municipal court unless he or she meets the requirements provided for by general law. The judges shall be appointed by the mayor and city council in conformance with general law. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Before entering on the duties of his or her office, the judge shall take an oath before the mayor or an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state declaring that he or she will truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(e)  The judge shall serve for a term of one year and may be removed from the position as provided by general law. 
Sec. 4.03. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary by the judge to keep current the dockets thereof. 
Sec. 4.04. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the State of Georgia, as permitted by law, the City of Lawrenceville, and for violation of said city ordinances. The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction to the fullest extent allowed by state law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to recommend to the city council for approval a schedule of fees to defray the costs of operation. 
(c)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as security for appearances of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited to the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the City of Lawrenceville, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears, by probable cause, that a state law has been violated. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of said court. 
(f)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by state law. 
(g)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the judicial jurisdiction and judicial powers throughout the entire area of the City of Lawrenceville granted by state laws generally to municipal courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
(h)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $500.00 or 20 days in jail. 
(i)  The municipal court shall have authority to impose bench warrant and failure to appear fees. 
Sec. 4.05. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.06. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE 

Sec. 5.01. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide by ordinance the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 5.02. - Sale and lease of city property. 
The city council may acquire, hold, sell, exchange, rent, lease, or otherwise acquire or dispose of any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, whether held by the city in its proprietary, governmental, or other capacity, inside or outside of the corporate boundaries of the city and wherever located. 
Sec. 5.03. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and Gwinnett County. Said ad valorem tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 5.04. - Millage rate; due date; payment method. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which such tax must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of such tax by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time the tax is due. 
Sec. 5.05. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 5.11 of this charter. 
Sec. 5.06. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within the city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 5.11 of this charter. 
Sec. 5.07. - Franchises. 
The city council, except as otherwise provided by general law, shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 5.08. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, assessments, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 5.11 of this charter. 
Sec. 5.09. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutter, sewer, or other utility main and appurtenance from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 5.11 of this charter. 
Sec. 5.10. - Construction; other taxes and fees. 
The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 5.11. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 5.03 through 5.10 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. Such means shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions or any other means permitted by law. Bills for ad valorem taxes on real property shall not include nontax related fees or assessments but may include fees, assessments, charges, or costs related to delinquent ad valorem property tax collections. 
Sec. 5.12. - Bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 5.13. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 5.14. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; and 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6.01. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 6.02. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city and not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 6.03. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 180 days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointed officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 6.04. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue, and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 6.05. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 6.06. - Specific repealer. 
An Act to provide a new charter for the City of Lawrenceville, approved March 28, 1986 (Ga. L. 1986, p. 4961), as amended, is hereby repealed. 
Sec. 6.07. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 2005, § 1-101) 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council: 
(1)  General rule . All words and phrases shall be construed and understood to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(2)  Gender; singular and plural . Every word in any Code provision or ordinance importing the masculine gender shall extend to and be applied to females as well as males; and every word importing the singular number only shall extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; and every word importing the plural number only shall extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
(3)  Tenses . The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future when applicable. 
(4)  Joint authority . All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more City officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise declared in the law giving the authority. 
(5)  Delegation of authority . Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or other officer of the City to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
(6)  Computation of time . The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any Code provision or ordinance or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day be a Sunday or a holiday it shall be excluded; and when any such time is expressed in hours the whole of Sunday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall be excluded. 
(7)  Overlapping provision . Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
(Code 2005, § 1-102) 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advice and consent . Whenever the term "advice and consent" of the City Council is used in this Code, it shall be construed to mean an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire City Council. 
City . The term "the City" or "this City" means the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia. 
City Council, Council . The term "City Council" or "the Council" means the City Council of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia. 
City Hall. The term "City Hall" means the building which houses the Municipal Court of the City, the offices of the Mayor and Council, the Council Chambers and serves as the primary administrative offices of the City. 
Clerk. The term "Clerk" mean the City Clerk of Lawrenceville or his designee. 
County . The term "the County" or "this County" means the County of Gwinnett, Georgia. 
Court or Municipal Court . The term "Court" or "Municipal Court" means the Municipal Court of the City. 
Court Administrator . The term "Court Administrator" means the Court Administrator or Clerk of Court of the City of Lawrenceville Municipal Court. 
Governing authority, governing body . The "governing authority" or "governing body" means the Mayor and City Council of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia. 
Judge or Recorder . The term "Judge" or "Recorder" means the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City. The terms "Recorder's Court" and "Municipal Court," as used in this Code, mean the City of Lawrenceville Municipal Court. 
Manager . The term "Manager" means the City Manager of Lawrenceville, Georgia or his designee. 
Mayor . The term "Mayor" means the Mayor of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia. 
Mayor and Council . The term "Mayor and Council" means the Mayor and City Council of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia. 
Misdemeanor . The term "misdemeanor" means a violation of the State criminal law, punishable by a fine not in excess of $1,000.00 or confinement in a County or other jail for a term not exceeding 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Municipality . The term "Municipality" is synonymous with the term "City," "Town," or "Municipal Corporation." 
Oath . The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the terms "swear" and "sworn." 
Ordinance . The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the City of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner . The term "owner," when applied to a building or to land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person . The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property . The term "personal property" includes every piece of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Police Chief or Chief of Police . The term "Police Chief" or "Chief of Police" means the head or chief law enforcement official in charge of the City of Lawrenceville Police Department. 
Preceding, following . The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property . The term "property" includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests. 
Real property . The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or notice . The term "reasonable time or notice" means only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Resolution . The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the City of a special or temporary character. 
Sidewalk . The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature, subscription . The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State . The term "State" or "this State" means the State of Georgia. 
Street . The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approaches thereto, within the City. 
Tenant or occupant . The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or to land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Town . See Municipality . 
Week . The term "week" means seven days. 
Writing or written . The term "writing" or "written" includes printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year . The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 2005, § 1-103) 
Sec. 1-4. - Section headings. 
The underlined headings of the several sections and subsections of this Code are intended as mere captions to indicate the contents of the section or subsection and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section or subsection, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections or subsections, including the headings, is amended or reenacted. 
(Code 2005, § 1-104) 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code section. 
(a)  The repeal of a Code section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
(Code 2005, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amending Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as the Code and subsequent ordinances omitted are readopted as a new Code by the City Council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section of the Code of Ordinances, City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or subsection or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:…." The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, chapters, or provisions sought to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, chapter, or provision number, as the case may be. 
(Code 2005, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the Mayor and City Council. 
(Code 2005, § 1-107) 
Sec. 1-8. - Penalty where no penalty provided. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall subject the person committing the violation to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and costs or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or to both such fine and imprisonment, any or all of such penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court. 
(b)  The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the City's Charter or Code. 
(Code 2005, § 1-108) 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the Council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code, provided that such changes are approved by the City Clerk. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code, as of its date of adoption, or the ordinance adopting this Code, shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following ordinances otherwise in effect upon the date of adoption of the Code: 
(1)  Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)  Any ordinance consistent with this Code fixing salaries of officials, officers or employees of the city; 
(5)  Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; any ordinance levying any tax; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution to any person; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for platting or subdividing of property; 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing or changing the boundary of the city; 
(12)  Any ordinance regulating zoning or land use in the City, including, but not limited to, the Planning and Zoning Code of Ordinances, the Development Regulations and the Landscape Ordinance. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Applicability. 
Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, the enforcement of the provisions contained in this Code of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, shall be enforced via the methods enumerated in this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 49-101) 
Sec. 1-13. - Complaints regarding violations. 
Whenever a violation of this Code occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the administrative official. He shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 49-102) 
Sec. 1-14. - Enforcement. 
This Code shall be enforced by the Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning, by the Director's duly authorized representative, by the City Manager, by the City Manager's duly authorized representative, by the City Clerk, by the City Clerk's duly authorized representative, or by the City of Lawrenceville Police Department. 
(Code 2005, § 49-103) 
Sec. 1-15. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with, or in violation of, any provision contained in this Code. 
(b)  The owner and tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(Code 2005, § 49-104) 
Sec. 1-16. - Penalties. 
(a)  Fines and/or sentence . Unless otherwise specifically stated herein, any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this Code shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the City and shall be punished either by a fine not less than $250.00 per day and not to exceed $1,000.00 per day, or by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed six months in jail, or both a fine and jail or work alternate. Each day that violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Powers of the Court. The Court shall have the power and authority to order the violation corrected in compliance with this Code of Ordinances and the Court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(c)  Lien imposition . If, after 30 days from the date of the Municipal Court-imposed fine, any person or entity has not paid said fine in full, the City of Lawrenceville shall have the authority to file a lien on the property in violation for the amount of the imposed fine and shall record it with the Gwinnett County Clerk's Office. 
(d)  Other legal remedies. 
(1)  In any case in which a violation of this Code of Ordinances has occurred, the City, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(2)  Where a determination is made that the property is in violation of this Code and any other codes and laws enforced by the City of Lawrenceville, and all reasonable efforts and means to obtain compliance having been exhausted, the City of Lawrenceville is authorized to effect such compliance at public expense. The cost of effectuating compliance shall constitute a lien upon the property and said lien shall be recorded by the City of Lawrenceville with the Gwinnett County Clerk's Office. 
(Code 2005, § 49-106) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Articles II and III of the city Charter exhaustively set the administrative and governmental structure of the city. 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Exercise of governmental authority. 
The corporation governmental powers of the City shall be exercised by the Mayor and Council in the manner provided by the Charter and by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 3-101) 
Sec. 2-2. - Code of Ethics. 
(a)  Code of Ethics for City employees. 
(1)  Prohibited conduct. Employees of the City shall treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness, and equality under the law, and shall avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. Prohibited conduct of each such employee shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Requesting, using, or permitting the use of any publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor, or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of themselves or any other person, except as otherwise allowed by law; 
b.  Engaging in private employment with, or rendering services for, any private person who has business transactions with the City, unless they have notified their Department Director and the Human Resources Director in writing of the nature and extent of such employment or services; 
c.  Appearing on behalf of any private person, other than themselves, before any public body in the City; 
d.  Accepting gifts with a value of more than $100.00, whether in the form of money, things, favors, loans, or promises, that would not be offered or given to them if they were not an employee; [2] 
e.  Disclosing any confidential information concerning any official or employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the City, without prior formal authorization of the governing body; 
f.  Using or permitting the use of confidential information to advance the financial or personal interest of themselves or any other person; or 
g.  Appointing of any person related to them by blood or marriage to fill an office, position, employment, or duty, when the salary, wages, pay, or compensation is to be paid out of public funds. 
(2)  Hearings and determinations. A name clearing hearing shall be held as described in the City of Lawrenceville Personnel Policy. 
(b)  Code of Ethics for City Officials. 
(1)  Principal policies. The public trust requires public servants to fulfill their duties faithfully and honestly and to subordinate any personal interest, which conflicts with the public interest. A public servant is a trustee of the people and should strive to further the general welfare and not use public office or position to unethically improve their own private standing. The principal policies that form the foundation of this Code of Ethics are as follows: 
a.  The trust of citizens in their government is cultivated when individual public servants act with integrity and when the public is aware that its servants act with integrity. 
b.  The constitutions, laws and regulations of the United States and the State of Georgia and ordinances of the City of Lawrenceville should be upheld as a minimum standard of conduct. 
c.  The most effective way to eradicate unethical practices is to consistently act with the highest moral principles and react appropriately to the ethical decisions of others. 
d.  City of Lawrenceville Officials should exercise sound judgment and apply ethical principles in making decisions that in any manner reflect upon their elected office. 
e.  All citizens should be treated with courtesy, impartiality and equality. 
(2)  Intent. It is the intent of this Code of Ethics that City of Lawrenceville officials shall not knowingly engage in any activity that is incompatible with the proper discharge of their official duties or which would tend to impair their judgment or actions in the performance of their official duties. Furthermore, City of Lawrenceville Officials should avoid any action that might result in or create the appearance of: 
a.  Using public office or position in an unethical manner for private gain; 
b.  Impeding City of Lawrenceville efficiency or economy; or 
c.  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of those who conduct the affairs and business of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(3)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed to them below (unless otherwise required by context): 
a.  Benefit means anything of monetary value that a reasonably prudent person would recognize as being likely to be intended to influence a City of Lawrenceville Official in the performance or non-performance of an official action. 
b.  Confidential information means information which has been obtained in the course of holding public office, employment, an independent contract or otherwise acting as a public servant, and which information is not available to members of the public under the Georgia Open Records Act or other law or regulation and which the public servant is not authorized to disclose, including: 
1.  Any written information that could lawfully be excepted from disclosure pursuant to state law, unless the public servant disclosing it is authorized to do so by state law, or pursuant to some other pertinent law, policy or procedure; 
2.  Any non-written information which, if it were written, could be excepted from disclosure under state law, unless the public servant disclosing it is authorized to do so by the state law, or pursuant to some other pertinent law, policy or procedure; and 
3.  Information which was obtained in the course of or by means of a record or oral report of a lawful executive or closed session, whether or not the disclosure of the information would violate state law, unless the public servant disclosing it is authorized by state law to do so, or unless the public servant disclosing it has been properly authorized to disclose it pursuant to an applicable law, policy or procedure; however, when such information is also available through channels which are open to the public, this provision does not prohibit public servants from disclosing the availability of those channels. 
c.  Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
d.  Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any City of Lawrenceville Official related by blood, adoption, or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
e.  City of Lawrenceville Official means the members of the City Council, Municipal Court Judges (including substitute judges), City Manager, Deputy City Manager, City Clerk, Assistant City Clerk, City Attorney and all other persons holding positions designated by the City Charter. The term City Official also includes all individuals appointed by the City Council to all City authorities, boards, commissions, committees, task forces, or other bodies unless specifically exempted from this article by the City Council. 
f.  Interest means any personal pecuniary benefit accruing to a public servant or the public servant's partner in interest, whether in the public servant's own name or the name of any person or business from which the public servant is entitled to receive any personal benefit, as a result of a matter which is or which is expected to become the subject of an official action by or with the City. 
g.  Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
h.  Partner in interest means, when used in this article in connection with a public servant, as in the phrase "a public servant or a partner in interest," any and all of the following: 
1.  A member of the public servant's immediate family; 
2.  A business with which the public servant or a member of the public servant's immediate family is associated; 
3.  Any other person with whom the public servant or a member of their immediate family is in business, or is negotiating or has an agreement concerning future employment or the future conferring of any personal benefit, whether in the public servant's own name or the name of any business or person from whom the public servant is entitled, or expects to become entitled, to receive any personal benefit, as a result of a contract or transaction which is, or which is expected to become, the subject of an official action by or with the City. The term "partner in interest" does not imply or require any form of legal partnership or formal agreement; or 
4.  When used in the phrase "a public servant or partner in interest," the term "partner in interest" refers only to a partner in interest of the public servant to whom reference is being made, and not to any other person's partner in interest. 
i.  Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a City Official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general City fees, City utility charges, comprehensive zoning ordinance, or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
j.  Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
1.  The interest is as follows: 
(a)  Ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity; or 
(b)  Ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity. 
2.  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed: 
(a)  $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(b)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the City Council; or which entity receives an amount of $5,000.00 or more; or 
(c)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(4)  Prohibited conduct. City of Lawrenceville Officials shall treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness, and equality under the law, and shall avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. Prohibited conduct of each City of Lawrenceville Official shall include the following: 
a.  City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not have a substantial interest that conflicts with their responsibilities and duties as trustees of the public good; or 
b.  City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not directly or indirectly engage in financial transactions as a result of, or primarily rely upon, confidential information obtained in the course of their office or received due to their position. 
c.  Acceptance of gifts. City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not solicit or accept, directly or indirectly, any benefit or payment from any person, corporation or group that has, or is seeking to obtain, a contractual or other business or financial relationship with the City of Lawrenceville. 
1.  The above prohibitions shall not apply in the case of: 
(a)  Occasional nonmonetary gift(s) of insignificance or trinkets or gifts, such as a calendar, memento or pen, received in the normal course of business with a value of/or less than $100.00; [3] 
(b)  Award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
(c)  Transaction authorized by and performed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6 as now or hereafter amended; 
(d)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such loan or financial transaction; 
(e)  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia laws; 
(f)  Items listed under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-2 that are specifically itemized as "a thing of value shall not include" as now or hereafter amended; 
(g)  Promotional items generally distributed to the general public or to public officials; or 
(h)  Food, beverage, admission or expenses afforded City Officials, members of their immediate families, or others that are associated with normal and customary business or social functions, activities, or events. 
d.  Use of public property. City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not use City of Lawrenceville property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall they direct a City of Lawrenceville employee to use such property for other than official purposes. 
e.  Use of confidential information . City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not directly make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, City of Lawrenceville information not made available to the general public. 
f.  Coercion . City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not use their position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing: 
1.  Another person to provide any benefits to themselves or to their immediate family as defined herein; 
2.  A City of Lawrenceville employee, an appointed official of the City of Lawrenceville, or a contract employee to provide any benefit to themselves or to their immediate family as defined herein; or 
3.  Any judge in the outcome of matters before the court. 
g.  Purchases . City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not order any goods or services for the City of Lawrenceville or on behalf of the City of Lawrenceville without proper authorization in compliance with the City of Lawrenceville Code. 
h.  Conflicts of interest . City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not represent private interests, other than their own, in any action or proceeding against the City of Lawrenceville or any portion of its government; or vote or otherwise actively participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract between the City of Lawrenceville government and any business or entity in which they have a substantial interest. City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the City except as authorized by state law. 
1.  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the City Attorney in their work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the City. 
2.  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the City and a City Official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a City Manager). 
3.  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an entity doing business with the City shall make that interest known in writing to the City Council and the City Clerk. 
i.  City of Lawrenceville employees. City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not use a City of Lawrenceville employee for personal or private business during regular business hours or during the employee's scheduled shift. 
j.  Travel expenses. City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not draw per diem or expense money from City of Lawrenceville to attend a seminar, convention, conference or similar meeting and then fail to attend the seminar, conference, convention or similar meeting without promptly reimbursing the City thereafter. 
k.  Commitments . City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not act or create the appearance of acting on behalf of the City of Lawrenceville by promising to authorize or prevent any future official action of any nature, without proper authorization. 
l.  False statements. City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not make an intentionally false or materially misleading statement or in any manner commit fraud in relation to any City of Lawrenceville or public business. 
m.  Disclosure . City of Lawrenceville Officials shall disclose the nature of any substantial interest they have in a matter at the time such matter is presented to the City Council for discussion and/or action. Such disclosure shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and become part of the public record. 
n.  Deliberation and vote prohibited. City of Lawrenceville Officials shall not participate in a City of Lawrenceville Council appointed Board, Committee or Council meeting during the discussion, debate, deliberation or vote, or otherwise take part in the decision-making process on any agenda item, or any official act or action in which he or she has a substantial interest. Provided, however, that such officials shall not be precluded from addressing a Council appointed Board, Committee or the City Council during the discussion of any agenda item or any official act or action in the same manner as a member of the general public. Where the interest of a City Official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the City Official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
o.  Duty to leave meeting. To avoid the appearance of impropriety, after any member of the City Council or Council appointed Board or Committee member is determined to have a substantial interest or a potential substantial interest in any matter, they shall leave their regular seat as a member of the City Council or Council appointed Board or Committee and not return to it until deliberation and action on the matter is completed. Provided, however, that such official shall not be precluded from addressing an appointed Council Board or Committee or the City Council during the discussion of any agenda item or any official act or action in the same manner as a member of the general public. 
p.  Ethics hearing officer. The Chief Judge of Municipal Court, or, in their absence, their designee who shall be another municipal court judge, or if no municipal court judge is available, the City Attorney, is hereby designated as the Ethics Hearing Officer. The Ethics Hearing Officer shall serve without compensation and may be removed for cause by a majority vote of the City Council. If the hearing officer is removed for cause, the next most senior Municipal Court Judge or the City Attorney shall serve as hearing officer. 
q.  Receipt of complaints. All complaints against a City of Lawrenceville Official shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk to be referred to the Ethics Hearing Officer in such form as may be prescribed by the Ethics Hearing Officer. All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn, and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this ordinance. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the City Clerk will deliver a copy of the complaint to the Ethics Hearing Officer, who shall: 
1.  Review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke disciplinary action or is to be considered for further investigation. 
2.  Be empowered to dismiss those complaints that are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or that fail to state facts sufficient to constitute a violation of this article; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the Ethics Hearing Officer shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he or she might otherwise have at law or in equity against the City of Lawrenceville Official. 
3.  Notify the City of Lawrenceville Official charged in the complaint as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a verified complaint. 
4.  Be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add to the findings and results of its investigation to the file containing such complaint. 
5.  Be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings. The Ethics Hearing Officer shall give the City of Lawrenceville Official notice and an opportunity for a hearing. 
6.  Be empowered to recommend to the City Council that any City of Lawrenceville Official found to have violated any provision of this article receive a reprimand, censure or be requested to resign their office. 
7.  Be empowered to refer a complaint to the appropriate law enforcement agent or agency for investigation and possible prosecution. 
8.  Take action within 60 days of receipt of the complaint. The decision by the Ethics Hearing Officer shall be reduced to writing and served upon all parties of interest within five days of reaching a decision. 
9.  The Ethics Hearing Officer shall appear in a public hearing before the City Council to present argument and evidence to justify the recommendation contained in paragraph (6) above and make a recommendation of the proper penalty to be imposed. The City Council shall have the final authority to act on or reject the recommendation within 30 days of the presentation by the Hearing Officer. 
r.  City Council action. Within 30 days following the presentation of the findings of the Ethics Hearing Officer, the City Council shall have the final authority to act on or reject the recommendations of the Ethics Hearing Officer. If the subject of the complaint is a member of the City Council, he or she will not be allowed to vote pursuant to this section or participate in any discussion related thereto. Nor shall such position be counted for the purpose of establishing a quorum for this particular purpose. 
s.  Penalties . Upon majority vote of the City Council, any violation of this Code of Ethics shall subject the offender to disciplinary action including reprimand, censure, or a request to the offending City of Lawrenceville Official that he or she resign their office. 
t.  Right to appeal . Any City of Lawrenceville Official adversely affected by a disciplinary action taken by the City Council may appeal the decision to the Gwinnett County Superior Court in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia. Provided, however, that no action of the Hearing Officer refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this Code of Ethics shall be reviewable by the Superior Court. 
u.  Election tolling. To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a City official, whether currently serving as a City official or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(Code 2005, § 3-102; Ord. No. 2018-4, 3-21-2018 ) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
A gift of $25.00 or less is exempt from reporting. A gift of $25.01 to $99.99 is only exempt if the gift is reported in writing to the City Clerk within 30 days of receipt. The Clerk shall disclose all such gifts in a consent agenda report published on a quarterly basis. 
 --- (3) --- 
A gift of $25.00 or less is exempt from reporting. A gift of $25.01 to $99.99 is only exempt if the gift is reported in writing to the City Clerk within 30 days of receipt. The Clerk shall disclose all such gifts in a consent agenda report published on a quarterly basis. 

Sec. 2-3. - Administrative policy and procedures. 
(a)  Officers . Each employee shall perform all duties required of his office by State law, the Charter, and this Code, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the City Manager, or such other official as designated by the Council or in the Charter. 
(b)  Department directors. All department directors shall: 
(1)  Be responsible to the City Manager for the effective administration of their respective department and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the City Manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Submit quarterly and annual reports of the activities of their respective department to the City Manager; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the City Manager; 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the City Manager, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all City property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
(c)  Departments . Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the City Manager, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the director of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
(d)  Records . All municipal records, except those which by order of a State court are prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for public inspection as provided by the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(Code 2005, § 3-1013) 
Secs. 2-4—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - Qualifications for office. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election shall be set by the Mayor and Council in accordance with State law. 
Sec. 2-27. - Meetings. 
The City Council shall hold regular meetings on the first Monday of every month at 7:00 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the City Council. The City Council shall hold work session meetings on the third Wednesday of every month at 3:00 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the City Council. A special called meeting of the City Council may be convened at any time in accordance with Georgia law. All meetings at which official actions are to be taken shall be open to the public in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
(Code 2005, § 3-203) 
Sec. 2-28. - Standing committees. 
The Mayor shall appoint standing committees to be composed of members of the City Council should he so desire. 
(Code 2005, § 3-204) 
Sec. 2-29. - Rules for the conduct of business. 
Robert's Rules of Order, most recent edition, shall govern the conduct of Council meetings. 
(Code 2005, § 3-205) 
Sec. 2-30. - Compensation. 
The Mayor and Councilmembers shall be compensated in the amount as established from time to time pursuant to law. 
(Code 2005, § 3-207) 
Secs. 2-31—2-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-5, adopted May 7, 2018, repealed former Art. III, §§ 2-49—2-52, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2005, §§ 3-204, 3-401; Ord. of 8-1-2011. 

Sec. 2-49. - City Attorney. 
(a)  Appointment and qualifications. The City Attorney shall be appointed by City Council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. No person shall be so appointed unless he is a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and has been actively engaged in the practice of law for at least three years preceding his appointment. 
(b)  Oath . Before entering upon the duties of his office, the City Attorney shall take the oath prescribed by this Code for City officers. 
(c)  Powers and duties . The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the City and in such capacity shall: 
(1)  Advise the City Council or its committees or any City Officer, when thereto requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of City business; 
(2)  Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the City Council or any City Officer; 
(3)  Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to him by the City Council, or any of its committees, or by any City Officer; 
(4)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the City is a party and approve, as to form, all bonds required to be submitted to the City; 
(5)  Prepare, when authorized by the City Council, all charges and complaints against, and appear in the Municipal Court in the prosecution of, every person charged with a violation of this Code or of a City ordinance or of any regulations adopted under authority of the Charter, and see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the City; 
(6)  Defend any and all suits and actions at law or equity brought against the City unless otherwise directed by the City Council; 
(7)  Make immediate report to the City Council of the outcome of any litigation in which the City has an interest; 
(8)  Make an annual report to the City Council of all pending litigation in which the City has an interest and the status thereof; 
(9)  Keep complete and accurate records of the following, which records shall forever remain the property of the City: 
a.  All suits in which the City had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties, the nature of the action, the disposition of the case or its status, if pending, and the briefs of counsel; and 
b.  All written opinions prepared by the City Attorney and all certificates or abstracts of titles furnished by him to the City, or any department or official thereof; and 
(10)  Render such other legal services as may be required by the City Council. 
(d)  Compensation . The City Attorney shall submit to the City Clerk bills on a regular basis, itemizing the type of work performed, date, and number of hours he was so engaged. 
( Ord. No. 2018-5, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-50. - City Manager. 
The City Manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To be responsible for supervising all paid employees of the City. 
a.  The City Manager shall have the authority to supervise all City employees, and this authority shall include the ability to hire, discipline or dismiss any such employee within the limits created under the City's personnel policies. The City Manager shall be responsible for the supervision and control of the City Clerk, and all employees reporting to the City Clerk. Actions of the City Manager regarding hiring, disciplinary and termination decisions related to the City Clerk shall be submitted for prior approval by the City Council. 
(2)  To sign and execute deeds and bonds of the City duly authorized by the City Council and permitted by the City Charter or by State law. 
(3)  To investigate, examine, or inquire into, either personally or by any employee or person designated by the City Manager for that purpose, the affairs or operation of any department of the City, including the power to employ consultants and other professionals, when so authorized by the City Council, to aid in such investigations, examinations or inquiries. 
(4)  To set aside, in his discretion, any action taken by a department head and supersede the department head in the functions of that office. 
(5)  To direct any department to perform the work for any other department and to authorize any department head or officer responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates serving under such person. 
(6)  To examine all proposed contracts to which the City may be a party, and to sign and execute on behalf of the City any contracts authorized by the City Council, except where the City Council directs that some other office or officer shall do so. 
(7)  To assist all boards, authorities, commissions and committees created by the City Council, as requested by the City Council. 
(8)  To perform such other tasks as may be delegated or assigned by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 2018-5, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-51. - City Clerk. 
The City Clerk shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To prepare and distribute City Council agenda packets, provide notice of all City Council meetings and publish other public notices are required by law, including notifying the news media of the same. 
(2)  To attend all meetings of the City Council and to take and transcribe minutes of all City Council meetings. 
(3)  To catalog and publish City Council minutes and City ordinances and ensure Code books are revised to reflect City Council action. 
(4)  To maintain the City Charter. 
(5)  To serve as the Municipal Election Superintendent. 
(6)  To provide administrative support to the City Council. 
(7)  To support the maintenance of City records and public documents and perform certification and recording for the City as required on legal documents. 
(8)  To maintain all records and invoices on City quality of life, nuisance and abatement cases and to coordinate with the City Attorney on the filing of liens and collection of payments. 
(9)  To provide public records and information to citizens, civic groups, the media and other agencies as requested. 
(10)  To oversee the administration of hotel/motel, occupation tax and alcohol licenses for the City, including processing and approving applications, calculating applicable taxes, coordinating the annual renewal process and ensuring compliance with the City's ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2018-5, 5-7-2018 ) 
Secs. 2-52—2-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 2-78. - Municipal Planning Commission. 
(a)  Regulations . The Municipal Planning Commission shall be bound by the rules and ordinances of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lawrenceville, as amended. The Municipal Planning Commission shall also abide by the terms and provisions of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated as amended which define the function and regulations of the Municipal Planning Commission. 
(b)  Composition, appointment, and tenure period. The Municipal Planning Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice of the City Council. The terms of the members shall be for four years each. 
(c)  Vacancies . Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only and in the same manner as for original appointments. 
(d)  Removal . Any member of the Planning Commission may be removed by the City Council for cause. Any member who misses more than three meetings in any one calendar year without excuse shall be removed from the Commission by the Council. The Chairman of the Commission shall keep an attendance record and report attendance to the Mayor's office on a monthly basis. 
(e)  Compensation . All members of the Municipal Planning Commission shall receive compensation in an amount to be determined by the Council. 
(f)  Officers and rules of procedure . The Planning Commission shall elect for one of its members as Chairperson, who shall serve for one year or until such person is reelected or a successor is elected. A second appointive member shall be elected as Vice-chairperson and shall serve for one year or until such person is reelected or a successor is elected. The Commission shall appoint a Secretary, who may be an employee of the City or a member of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall meet at least once each month as required at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the transaction of business requires. The Planning Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings, which record shall be open to public inspection. 
(g)  Powers and duties . The Municipal Planning Commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and prepare plans for physical, social, and economic growth in an effort to promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or general welfare of the Municipality. In carrying out its objectives, the Planning Commission shall have the following specific powers and duties: 
(1)  To prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the City; 
(2)  To prepare and recommend for adoption a zoning ordinance and map for the City; 
(3)  To prepare and recommend for adoption regulations for the subdivisions of land within the City limits to administer the regulations that may be adopted; and 
(4)  To prepare and recommend for adoption a plat or an official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, unlined or narrowed streets, public open spaces, or public building sites and provide for the regulation of construction of buildings or other structures within such lines. 
(h)  Meetings. The meetings of the Municipal Planning Commission shall be held on the second Monday at 7:00 p.m., provided that notification of such is given to the members of the commission by the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
(i)  Quorum . For the purpose of transacting business, a quorum of the Municipal Planning Commission shall be deemed to be three of the five members. 
(j)  City appointment to Municipal-County Planning Commission. 
(1)  There is hereby determined and declared to be a present and future need for the City of Lawrenceville to participate in the Municipal-County Planning Commission established under the Code of Gwinnett County, Georgia. 
(2)  There is hereby created and activated in the City a position titled "Representative of the City of Lawrenceville to the Municipal-County Planning Commission." 
(3)  The appointed representative for the City of Lawrenceville shall be a person who is a resident of the City of Lawrenceville and be a person who has demonstrated special interest, experience or education in issues affecting the City of Lawrenceville and County of Gwinnett. The position shall be filled by appointment of the City Council. 
(4)  The representative shall serve for four years from the date of appointment. In the event a vacancy shall occur in this position other than by expiration of the representative's regular four-year term, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term remaining. The Board of Commissioners of Gwinnett County shall have the power to remove the representative appointed under this section for cause, after written charges have been drawn and after a public hearing has been held. 
(5)  The representative appointed may participate in all discussions before the Municipal-County Planning Commission to represent the interest of the City of Lawrenceville and is hereby empowered to vote in the City's best interest on any issue which affects property within the City limits. 
(6)  The representative shall receive all rights and privileges of this position provided by law and shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in connection with official duties on behalf of the City of Lawrenceville while serving on the Municipal-County Planning Commission. Compensation shall be set by the Council. 
(Code 2005, § 3-601; Ord. of 2-5-2011; Ord. No. 2015-6, 1-5-2015) 
Sec. 2-79. - Vacancies created by appointed officials qualifying for elected office. 
The office of any appointed official of this City shall be declared vacant upon such appointed official qualifying, in a general primary or general election, or special primary or special election, for any state, county, or municipal elective office or qualifying for the House of Representatives or the Senate of the United States if the term of the office for which such official is qualifying begins more than 30 days prior to the expiration of such official's present term of office. The vacancy created shall be filled as provided by this Code. The provisions of this section shall not apply to members of the Downtown Development Authority of Lawrenceville, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2015-27 , 8-3-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-27 , adopted Aug. 3, 2015, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2005, § 3-603. 
Secs. 2-80—2-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-102. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Code 2005, § 3-701; Ord. of 10-15-2008) 
Sec. 2-103. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the City. 
(Code 2005, § 3-702; Ord. of 10-15-2008) 
Sec. 2-104. - Findings. 
(a)  The City is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  A covered account offered to customers for the provision of City services includes water, gas, and electric accounts. 
(c)  The City's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: Minimal complaints only. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, unauthorized entry to the storage room where applications are kept, and verifying the social security number when provided have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The City limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system or on a hard copy stored in a locked room. 
(Code 2005, § 3-703; Ord. of 10-15-2008) 
Sec. 2-105. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer, including a valid driver's license and social security number. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number. 
(Code 2005, § 3-704; Ord. of 10-15-2008) 
Sec. 2-106. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the City Manager and the password changed immediately. 
(c)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the City Manager and the City Attorney. 
(Code 2005, § 3-705; Ord. of 10-15-2008; Ord. No. 2015-39 , § 7(b), 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 2-107. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the City's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Code 2005, § 3-706; Ord. of 10-15-2008) 
Sec. 2-108. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft, and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents . Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing addresses, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account . Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the City receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The City is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The City is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The City is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
i.  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Code 2005, § 3-707; Ord. of 10-15-2008) 
Sec. 2-109. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any City employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the Account Clerk of Utilities or the City Manager. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to a supervisor, who may, in his discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. If the supervisor, in his discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a City employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the Account Clerk of Utilities or the City Manager: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within two business days of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any City employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the Account Clerk of Utilities or the City Manager. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the supervisor, who may, in his discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. If the supervisor, in his discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a City employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the Account Clerk of Utilities or the City Manager: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Code 2005, § 3-708; Ord. of 10-15-2008 Ord. No. 2015-39 , § 7(b), 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 2-110. - Updating the program. 
The City Council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the Council, update the Identity Theft Prevention Program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the City and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the City Council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The City's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the City offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Code 2005, § 3-709; Ord. of 10-15-2008) 
Sec. 2-111. - Program administration. 
(a)  The City Manager is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The Account Clerk of Utilities or the City Manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the Account Clerk of Utilities or the City Manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the City Council for consideration by the council. 
(b)  The Account Clerk of Utilities will report to the City Manager at least annually, in compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
(1)  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of City in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
(2)  Service provider arrangements; 
(3)  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
(4)  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(c)  The City Manager is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the Identity Theft Prevention Program. The City Manager shall exercise his discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Code 2005, § 3-710; Ord. of 10-15-2008 Ord. No. 2015-39 , § 7(b), 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 2-112. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the City engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the City Manager shall exercise his discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Code 2005, § 3-711; Ord. of 10-15-2008 Ord. No. 2015-39 , § 7(b), 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 2-113. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(a)  Purpose . Pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1, the purpose of this section is to establish a process by which the City will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the City has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 USC 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(c)  Policy . In the event that the City receives a notice of address discrepancy, the City employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the City maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
b.  Information the City obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant City employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(d)  Methods of confirming consumer addresses . The City employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Code 2005, § 3-712; Ord. of 10-15-2008) 
Secs. 2-114—2-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 2-140. - Public benefits. 
In order to receive State or local benefits provided by the City as part of compensation for employment, each new employee must submit a sworn affidavit attesting to the affiant's immigration status. The status of employees who swear by affidavit to be a qualified alien or nonimmigrant under the federal Immigration and Nationality Act will also be verified through the Systematic Alien Verification of Entitlement (SAVE) program. 
(Code 2005, § 3-801) 
Sec. 2-141. - State income tax withholding. 
The City will withhold six percent of an employee's compensation for State income tax if the employee fails to provide a taxpayer identification number, fails to provide a correct taxpayer identification number, or provides a taxpayer identification number issued for nonresident aliens. 
(Code 2005, § 3-802) 
Secs. 2-142—2-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 2-166. - Recognition of beneficial qualities. 
The City recognizes that certain targeted businesses in fields, such as healthcare, advanced manufacturing, technology, and trade/distribution bring high level jobs to the City and are especially beneficial to the community. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10, § 1, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-167. - Interest of City. 
In order to compete for targeted businesses, it is in the City's best interest to have the availability of offering strategic inducements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10, § 2, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-168. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Targeted business means any preferred business or industry type as identified by the City, Partnership Gwinnett or a special impact project of such magnitude as may be determined by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10, § 3, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-169. - Eligibility for inducements. 
Targeted businesses meeting defined threshold levels, as outlined in section 2-171, may be eligible for inducements as determined by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10, § 4, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-170. - Possible inducements for businesses. 
The City Council, at the recommendation of City management and economic development staff, shall be authorized to offer inducements to targeted businesses meeting threshold requirements and those inducements may include the following: 
(1)  Reduction of development permit fees. 
(2)  Reduction of building permit fees. 
(3)  Reduction of inspection and re-inspection fees. 
(4)  Reduction of application fees for public hearings. 
(5)  Reduction of any current or future impact fees. 
(6)  Reduction of utilities deposit and/or incremental financing on rates based on forecasted load and/or consumption. 
(7)  Acceleration of the plan review and permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10, § 5, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-171. - Business tier levels and thresholds. 
Inducements may be offered to targeted businesses which meet the following threshold levels: 
(1)  Tier 1 . Targeted business adds at least 25 new jobs and the jobs pay an average salary at least 1.25 times the County average for that industry. 
(2)  Tier 2 . Targeted business adds at least 100 new jobs and the jobs pay an average annual salary of at least 1.25 times the County average for that industry or $60,000.00 plus health benefits, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10, § 6, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-172. - Consideration of State funding. 
In determining whether to offer inducements, the City Manager may consider whether the targeted business has received a funding commitment from the State of Georgia contingent upon the business' relocation or expansion within the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10, § 7, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-173. - Requirement for targeted business. 
The targeted business must build a new building or make a lease commitment of at least three years for space within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10, § 8, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-174. - Inducement conditional upon not relocating from City. 
Any targeted business which receives any inducement under the provisions of this article shall agree to not relocate out of the City for the entire period during which the inducement is granted. Should the targeted business relocate outside the City or fall below 80 percent of any threshold requirement, the targeted business shall immediately reimburse the City for the full value of all inducements it received. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10, § 9, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 2-175. - Authority to sign agreements. 
The City Manager or his designee is authorized to sign confidentiality agreements with prospective businesses pursuant to this article, provided that those confidentiality agreements are made subject to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 2013-10, § 10, 7-1-2014) 
Secs. 2-176—2-203. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BUDGET[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Establishing fiscal year, adoption of budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3 et seq. 

Sec. 2-204. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for a system of financial administration, accounting, fiscal, and budgetary control which conforms to generally accepted accounting practices. 
(Code 2005, § 6-101) 
Sec. 2-205. - Responsibility. 
The responsibility for the proper execution of the provisions of this article shall be with the City Manager or his designee, except where the responsibility is explicitly given to the governing authority. 
(Code 2005, § 6-102; Ord. No. 2017-1, 1-4-2017 ) 
Sec. 2-206. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accrual basis means the basis of accounting under which revenues are recorded when earned or when levies are made, and expenditures are recorded as soon as the result in liabilities, notwithstanding that the receipt of the revenue or payment of the expenditure may take place, in whole or in part, in another accounting period. 
Appropriation means an authorization granted by the legislative body to make expenditures or to incur obligations for specific purposes. 
Appropriation balance means an unencumbered balance of appropriation or allotment, and unexpended balance of appropriation or allotment. 
Assets means property of all kinds of a government, including both current assets and fixed assets. 
Audit means the examination of records, documents, reports, systems of internal control, accounting and financial procedures, and other evidence for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  To ascertain whether the statements prepared from the accounts present fairly the financial position and the results of financial operations of the constituent funds and balanced account groups of the governmental unit in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to governmental units and on a basis consistent with that of the preceding year; 
(2)  To determine the propriety, legality and mathematical accuracy of a governmental unit's financial transactions; 
(3)  To ascertain whether all financial transactions have been properly recorded; and 
(4)  To ascertain the stewardship of public officials who handle and are responsible for the financial resources of a governmental unit. 
Balance sheet means a statement ordinarily prepared from books kept by double entry showing assets, liabilities, reserves and surplus of a fund of a governmental unit at a specified date properly classified to exhibit financial position of the fund or unit at that date. 
Budget means a plan of financial operation embodying an estimate of proposed expenditures for a given time and the proposed means of financing them. The annual budget refers to a period of one year. 
Budgetary control means the control of management of a governmental unit in accordance with an approved budget and keeping expenditures within the limitations of available appropriations or revenues. 
Cash basis means the system of accounting under which revenues are accounted for only when received in cash, and expenditures are accounted for only when paid. 
Contingent account means an appropriation to provide for unforeseen expenditures. 
Current surplus means the excess of the current assets of a fund over its current liabilities and reserves. 
Debit and credit are terms commonly used to indicate the manner in which a transaction is to be recorded. Every entry on the left side of the ledger sheet is called a debit. Every entry on the right side of the ledger sheet is called a credit. 
Debt service means the amount of money necessary annually to pay the interest on the outstanding debt and the principal of maturing bonded debt not payable from a sinking fund and to provide a fund for the redemption of bonds payable from a sinking fund. 
Delinquent taxes means taxes remaining unpaid on and after the date on which a penalty for non-payment is attached. Even though the penalty may be subsequently waived and a portion of the taxes may be abated or canceled, the unpaid balances continue to be delinquent taxes until abated, cancelled or converted into tax liens. 
Encumbrances means obligations in the form of purchase orders, contracts or salary commitments which are chargeable to an appropriation and for which a part of the appropriations is reserved. 
Fund means a sum of money or other resources (gross or net) set aside for the purpose of carrying on specific activities or to attain certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions, or limitations. A fund is a distinct financial and legal entity. 
Internal audit means an audit made by persons on the staff on the governmental unit whose accounts are being audited primarily for the purpose of internal control. An internal audit is usually a continuous audit. 
Liabilities refers to debts owed. 
Millage. 
(1)  The term "millage" is used to express the property tax rate. The term "millage" is derived from the term "mill," which is one-tenth of a cent. Thus, ten mills equals one cent or one percent. 
0.001 = 1 mill or 1/10 cent 
0.010 = 10 mills or 1 cent = 1% 
0.100 = 100 mills or 10 cents = 10% 
(2)  Millage is determined by dividing the total amount of money to be raised by the total assessed value of the Municipality. 
Example: 
Taxes needed: $ 100,000.00 
Assessed value: $8,000,000.00 
$100,000.00 = 0.0125 or 12½ mills; or 
$8,000,000.00 = 1.25% or assessed valuation. 
Taxes receivable means the uncollected portion of taxes which a governmental unit has levied. 
Trust funds means amounts received or appropriated and held in trust in accordance with an agreement or legislative act which may be expended only in accordance with the terms of such trust or act. 
(Code 2005, § 6-103) 
Sec. 2-207. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year shall begin on September 1 and end on August 31. 
(Code 2005, § 6-104) 
Sec. 2-208. - Date of adoption; balanced budget. 
An annual budget will be adopted by the City Council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. If the budget is not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, a resolution authorizing the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the City shall be adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year. The proposed budget shall be prepared by the City Manager and transmitted to members of the City Council for its review no later than July 1, before the required date of adoption. The budget shall be adopted by the City Council, in accordance with the City Charter, during the first Mayor and Council meeting conducted in the month of August. The budget, as adopted, shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues equal to appropriated expenditures, in accordance with Georgia Law. 
(Code 2005, § 6-105; Ord. No. 2017-1, 1-4-2017 ) 
Sec. 2-209. - Inspection. 
At the time the proposed budget is transmitted to members of the governing authority, a copy of the proposed budget shall be made available for public inspection in the Office of the City Clerk during regular office hours. 
(Code 2005, § 6-106) 
Sec. 2-210. - Public hearing. 
A public hearing shall be held to give the public the opportunity to present written and oral comments upon a proposed budget. Notice of such public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality no more than 20 days and no less than five days in advance of the hearing when the budget is to be adopted. 
(Code 2005, § 6-107) 
Sec. 2-211. - Adoption and amendment. 
The adoption of the budget shall be accomplished by the approval of a budget ordinance which specified the anticipated revenues by appropriate categories and the appropriated expenditures for each department and each non-departmental expense and for each fund covered by the budget. Amendments to the budget shall be approved by ordinance. 
(Code 2005, § 6-108) 
Sec. 2-212. - Publication. 
Upon completion, a statement of revenues and expenditures shall be made available for public inspection on the City's website and in the Office of the City Clerk during regular business hours. 
(Code 2005, § 6-109; Ord. of 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 2-213. - Post-adoption changes. 
Any increase in appropriation in a department budget or in a non-departmental expense category, whether accomplished through a change in anticipated revenues or through a transfer of appropriations among departments and non-department expenses, shall require the approval of the City Council in the form of an amendment to the budget ordinance. The transfer of appropriations among the various accounts within a departmental budget or within a non-departmental expense category shall only require the approval of the city manager, except that any transfer of appropriations within a departmental budget so as to increase the salary appropriation for the purpose of employing additional personnel shall require the approval of the City Council. 
(Code 2005, § 6-110) 
Sec. 2-214. - Sinking funds. 
No appropriation transfer shall be made from a sinking fund or debt retirement fund until all the legal obligations and requirements of such fund have been satisfied. 
(Code 2005, § 6-111) 
Sec. 2-215. - Anticipated revenues. 
The city manager shall present the statement of anticipated revenues on the basis of the ordinary and reasonable revenues which can be expected for the fiscal year. Property tax revenue estimates shall be based upon the anticipated tax digest, less a stated discount for delinquent taxes based on a consideration of the taxes which were delinquent at the close of the three prior fiscal years, plus a stated amount of delinquent taxes, including penalties and interest, to be collected in the fiscal year based on consideration of the actual experience in the collection of delinquent taxes in the three prior fiscal years. 
(Code 2005, § 6-112) 
Sec. 2-216. - Surplus. 
All appropriations which are not obligated, encumbered, or expended at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse and shall become a part of the unencumbered surplus which may be appropriated for the next fiscal year. 
(Code 2005, § 6-113) 
Sec. 2-217. - Account balancing. 
A complete, self-balancing group of accounts shall be established and maintained for each fund used. This group of accounts shall include all general ledger accounts and subsidiary records necessary to reflect compliance with legal provisions to set forth the financial position and the results of financial operations of the fund. 
(Code 2005, § 6-114) 
Sec. 2-218. - Accounts. 
Additional accounts shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)  To the extent possible, a fixed asset account for the purpose of accounting for those assets which: 
a.  Are of a tangible nature; 
b.  Have a life longer than one fiscal year; and 
c.  Have a significant value. 
Fixed assets shall be recorded at original cost, shall not be depreciated and shall be removed from the account when disposed of. 
(2)  A general long-term debt account for the purpose of accounting for long-term debt which is supported by general revenues and for recording and fairly representing the liability for long-term debt at any time from date of issuance until the debt is retired. 
(Code 2005, § 6-115) 
Sec. 2-219. - Accrual basis. 
To the extent possible, the modified accrual basis of accounting shall be used so that expenditures, other than accrued interest or long-term debt, are recorded at the time liabilities are incurred and revenues are recorded when cash is received, except for material or available revenues which shall be accrued to reflect properly the taxes levied and the revenues earned. All receipts and disbursements shall be posted promptly and at least on a monthly basis. To the extent possible, all inter-fund transfers shall be cleared by the end of the fiscal year. 
(Code 2005, § 6-116) 
Sec. 2-220. - Financial reports. 
Financial reports showing the current conditions of budgetary and proprietary accounts shall be prepared and presented to the governing authority at least every three months. No later than six months after the close of the fiscal year, a comprehensive annual financial report covering all funds and financial operations shall be prepared. A summary of this report containing at least a statement of revenues and expenditures as of the close of the preceding fiscal year and the combined balance sheet for all funds and account groups will be published in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(Code 2005, § 6-117) 
Sec. 2-221. - Audit. 
All the funds, accounts and financial transactions of the City shall be subjected to an annual audit by an independent certified public accountant who is to be selected by the City Council. The audit shall be conducted according to the standards set forth in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, "State and Local Governments - AICPA Audit and Accounting Guides." 
(Code 2005, § 6-118) 
Secs. 2-222—2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PROCUREMENT[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-6 , adopted May 7, 2018, repealed former Art. IX, §§ 2-251—2-282, and enacted a new Art. IX as set out herein. Former Art. IX pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2016-18; Ord. No. 2016-29, 12-5-2016; Ord. No. 2017-32, 12-4-2017. 
State Law reference— Contracts by political subdivision concerning procurement of federal equipment, supplies or property, O.C.G.A., § 50-16-81; local political subdivisions purchased through state, O.C.G.A., § 50-5-100 et seq.; local authorities' preference for products produced in Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-61. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-251. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the City of Lawrenceville Procurement Ordinance is to: 
(1)  Manage the procurement process in accordance with the law; 
(2)  Spend tax payers' money wisely, efficiently, and fairly; 
(3)  Meet the needs of City departments through continuous improvement of purchasing systems and procedures; 
(4)  Establish a comprehensive plan for the purchase of goods and services for the City and its departments; 
(5)  Protect against fraud and favoritism by providing fair and equitable treatment of all persons and entities involved in public purchasing; 
(6)  Ensure that all segments of the business community are encouraged to contract with the City for goods and services; 
(7)  Maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, to the fullest extent practicable, while giving consideration to the lifetime cost as well as other factors needed to determine the best overall interest to the City; 
(8)  Provide safeguards for the maintenance of a procurement system of quality and integrity; and 
(9)  Provide guidelines for purchasing equipment, materials, supplies, and services for the operational requirements of the City of Lawrenceville that insure competitive and unbiased selection of vendors. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-252. - Definitions. 
Absolute value means the numerical value of an acquisition or change order request without regard to its sign. 
Best and final offer means, in competitive negotiation, the final proposal submitted after negotiations are completed that contains the vendor's most favorable terms for price and services or products to be delivered. 
Bid means submission of information from a bidder that describes the bidder's commodities or services, and any other information necessary to respond to the specifications and other requirements set forth in an Invitation to Bid. 
Brand name or equal specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturer's names or catalogue numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance, and other salient characteristics needed to meet City requirements, and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
Brand name specifications means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers. 
Business means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal entity. 
Change order means a written order signed by a person authorized to act on behalf of the City directing the contractor to make changes that the "Changes" clause of the contract authorizes. 
Commodity means a discrete and distinct item of tangible personal property, including, without limitation, any such item which is intended to become an integrated part of another item of tangible personal property or of any improvement to real property. 
Confidential information means any information which is available to an employee only because of the employee's status as an employee of the City and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request. 
Contract means any agreement, purchase order, lease, or other document which creates or is intended to create binding reciprocal obligations including, without limitation, any document evidencing a bid or proposal award which has been accepted by the bidder. 
Contractor means any person who is party to a contract. 
Cooperative purchase means an arrangement whereby two or more public procurement units purchased from the same supplier using a single Invitation to Bid or Request for Proposal. 
Intangible means incapable of being perceived by the senses. 
Invitation to bid means all information and documentation disseminated by the City to solicit bids. 
Offeror means any person who has submitted a bid or proposal to the City or otherwise offered to form a contract with the City. 
Person means any individual or legal entity. 
Professional service means a service consisting in material part of advice, evaluation, planning, design, or other effort involving the exercise of judgement, discretion, and knowledge, including, without limitation, a service provided by a person whose profession is licensed or regulated by the state or federal government. 
Proposal means submission of information from a proposer (including a consultant) which states how that proposer intends to fulfill the specifications and other requirements described in a Request for Proposal. 
Qualified products list means an approved list of supplies, services or construction items described by model or catalogue numbers, which prior to competitive solicitation, the City has determined will meet the applicable specification requirements. 
Request for Proposals means all information and documentation disseminated by the City to solicit proposals. 
Responsible bidder means a person who has the capability in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements, and the experience, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment and credit which will assure good faith performance. 
Responsive bidder means a person who has submitted a bid or proposal that conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation to bids or Request for Proposals. 
Services means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor that is not intended to accomplish the delivery of a specified tangible product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance, including, without limitation, a professional or consulting service. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-253. - Eligibility. 
Every new contractor, and any subcontractor that a contractor hires, must register with the Employment Eligibility Verification (EEV)/Basic Pilot Program, or E-Verify, in order to be eligible to perform work for the City. Contracts between the City and contractors, and between the contractors and their subcontractors, must be accompanied by sworn affidavits attesting to the affiant's registration with E-Verify and compliance with E-Verify's citizenship requirements. This requirement shall apply to all contracts for the physical performance of services for all labor or service contracts that exceed $2,499.99 except for services performed by an individual who is licensed pursuant to Title 26, Title 43, or the State Bar of Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
State Law reference— Political subdivisions required to use E-Verify, O.C.G.A. § 13-10-91. 
Sec. 2-254. - State income tax withholding. 
The City will withhold six percent of any contractor or subcontractor's compensation for State income tax if the contractor or subcontractor fails to provide a taxpayer identification number, fails to provide a correct taxpayer identification number, or provides a taxpayer identification number issued for nonresidents. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-255. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Conditions for use. All contracts of the City over $100,000.00 shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as otherwise provided in sections 2-256 through 2-263. 
(b)  Invitation for bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include specifications, and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. 
(c)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given a reasonable time, not less than 15 calendar days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. Such notice may include publication in a newspaper of general circulation a reasonable time prior to the bid opening. The public notice shall state the place, date, and time of the bid opening. 
(d)  Receipt of bid. No written bid shall be eligible for consideration by the City unless it is placed in a sealed envelope or package and actually received by the Purchasing Department by the date and time specified in the Invitation to Bid. All bids shall be stamped or annotated with the date and time of receipt and secured until the designated opening time. A bid delivered late shall under no circumstances be eligible for consideration by the City. 
(e)  Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded. The record shall be open to public inspection in accordance with state law. 
(f)  Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this article. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability, such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation unless it is set forth in the invitation for bids. 
(g)  Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for the bid opening. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the City or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if: 
(1)  The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or 
(2)  The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made. The bidder shall give notice in writing of his claim of right to withdraw his bid due to an error within two business days after the conclusion of the bid opening procedure. 
All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the Purchasing Manager. 
(h)  Award. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by appropriate written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. In the event the low responsive and responsible bid exceeds available funds as certified by the appropriate fiscal officer, and such bid does not exceed such funds by more than five percent, the Purchasing Manager is authorized, when time or economic considerations preclude resolicitation of work of a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the low responsive and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. Any such negotiated adjustment shall be based only upon eliminating independent deductive items specified in the invitation for bids. 
(i)  Multi-step sealed bidding. When it is considered impractical to initially prepare a purchase description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation. 
(j)  Tie bids. In the event two responsive bids are tied for the lowest price and the other terms and conditions of the two bids are substantially the same, the bid shall be awarded to the local firm if only one of the bidders has a current City business license and office located within the boundaries of the City of Lawrenceville. If both or neither of the tied bidders are local firms, the Purchasing staff shall request the firms' best and final offers, and the award shall be to the lowest bid. If both firms have the same price after best and final offer, then the bid award shall be made to the winner of a coin toss by Purchasing staff in a public session. Bidders will be invited to attend and one or more witnesses may be present. 
(k)  Approval by City Council. All contracts exceeding $50,000.00 shall be approved by City Council. Once the contract has been approved by the City Council, all expenditures made in accordance with the terms of the contract are approved and shall require no further action by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-256. - Competitive sealed proposals. 
(a)  Conditions for use. When the Purchasing Manager determines that the use of competitive sealed bidding or other procurement methods is either not practicable or not advantageous to the City, a contract may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposals method. 
(b)  Public notice. Public notice shall be advertised as required by Georgia law. The public notice shall contain a general description of the item or service to be purchased, shall state the location where documents may be obtained and the date, time and place of proposal receipt. Notice of any required bonding and insurance shall be included in the public notice. 
(c)  Receipt. No written proposal shall be eligible for consideration by the City unless it is placed in a sealed envelope or package and actually received by the Purchasing Department by the date and time specified in the Request for Proposals. All proposals shall be stamped or annotated with the date and time of receipt and secured until the designated opening time. A proposal delivered late shall under no circumstances be eligible for consideration by the City. 
(d)  Opening proposals. Proposals shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses on the date and at the time and place designated in the Request for Proposals. The name of each Proposer shall be announced. 
(e)  Proprietary information. Information submitted by a Proposer that is specifically marked "proprietary" shall not be disclosed outside of the Purchasing Department without prior notification to the Proposer. The City of Lawrenceville is required to comply with the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. and therefore may not be able to protect information submitted in any response. Entire proposals may not be deemed "proprietary." 
(f)  Evaluation. Each proposal shall be evaluated to determine whether it is responsive to the specifications and other terms and conditions contained in the Request for Proposals. With the approval of the Purchasing Associate named in the solicitation, the evaluating team may communicate with each proposer to clarify and amplify each Proposer's proposal. No information concerning any other Proposer's proposal shall be communicated in any way to the Proposer. Additional information may be requested of Proposers. The Purchasing Department will initiate such requests. 
(g)  Discussion with responsible offerors and revisions to proposals. As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to ensure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of the identity of competing offerors or of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(h)  Award. Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the City, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
(i)  Approval by City Council. All contracts exceeding $50,000.00 shall be approved by the City Council. Once the contract has been approved by the City Council, all expenditures made in accordance with the terms of the contract are approved and shall require no further action by the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-257. - Informal purchases. 
(a)  Conditions for Use. Those purchases anticipated to be under $100,000.00 that do not justify the administrative time and expense for the conduct of competitive sealed bids or proposals. The Purchasing Manager is authorized to establish the methods and procedures to be used in handling informal purchases such as, but not limited to, telephone requests, e-mail requests, or informal written requests. Unless otherwise specifically provided, such purchases will be obtained competitively through informal written solicitations. 
(b)  General. Procurements that involve amounts less than $100,000.00 do not require a formal sealed bid/proposal process. However, the processes used for this type of procurement will include as much competition as is consistent with the anticipated cost of the procurement and the best interest of the City. The formal sealed bid/proposal process may still be exercised with an informal purchase if deemed in the best interest of the City. 
(c)  Prohibition of improper use. Purchases may not be artificially divided as to constitute an informal purchase, thereby circumventing the dollar limit requirement for competitive sealed bids/proposals or applicable approvals. 
(d)  Small purchases between 1,000.00 and $5,000.00. Insofar as it is practical for small purchases between $1,000.00 and $5,000.00, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations unless adequate source supply is not available. Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of the businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(e)  Small purchases of $1,000.00 or less. The City Manager shall adopt operational procedures for making small purchases of $1,000.00 or less. Further, such operational procedures shall require the preparation and maintenance of written records adequate to document the competition obtained, properly account for the funds expended, and facilitate an audit of the small purchases made. 
(f)  Approval by City Council. Regardless of procurement method, all purchases exceeding $50,000.00 shall be approved by City Council. Once the purchase has been approved by the City Council, all expenditures made in accordance with the terms of the purchase are approved and shall require no further action by the City Council. 
(g)  Approval by City Manager. Regardless of procurement method, all purchases between $5,000.00 and $50,000.00 shall be approved by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(h)  Approval by Purchasing Manager. Regardless of procurement method, all purchases between $1,000.00 and $5,000.00 shall be approved by the Purchasing Manager. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-258. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Professional services are exempt from the provisions of this purchasing policy. The term "professional services" shall mean services rendered by accountants, engineers, architects, physicians, lawyers and other professions as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Real property, real estate brokerage and appraising, abstract of titles for real property, title insurance for real property and other related costs of acquisition of real property. 
(c)  Dues and membership fees. 
(d)  Public works construction contracts to the extent governed by O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. 
(e)  Advertisements and legal advertisements that are required by law to publicly advertise meetings or actions in the legal organ. 
(f)  Intangible repairs that are cost prohibitive to seek competitive quotations. 
(g)  Subscriptions. 
(h)  Utilities, where there is no reasonable basis for competitive procurement, for example electric power, water, and sewerage. 
(i)  Training, travel, lodging or meal expense covered by other City policies and regulations. 
(j)  Entertainment services for City-sponsored events. 
(k)  Proprietary maintenance and software agreements. 
(l)  Works of are or other creative/artistic endeavors that require a demonstrated skill or talent to include, but not limited to, artists, musicians, and writers. 
(m)  The procurement of employee benefits that are procured through a quotation and negotiating process conducted by an expert on behalf of the City (i.e., broker). 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-259. - Sole source procurement. 
Based upon evidence that a particular commodity or service may be obtained from only one source and no similar commodity or service available from a different source will adequately meet an acquiring department's requirements and specifications, the City Manager may decide that the commodity or service be purchased sole source or by brand name based upon supporting documentation from the requesting department. Supporting documentation will be reviewed by the Purchasing Department and findings will be presented to the City Manager. Requesting department shall present any sole source procurement over $50,000.00 for approval by the City Council in an officially called public meeting. A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public record and shall list each contractor's name, the amount and type of each contract, a listing of the items procured under each contract, and the identification number of each contract file. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-260. - Emergency procurements. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the City Manager may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of supplies, services, or construction items when there exists a threat to public health, welfare, safety, or to the soundness and integrity of public property or to the delivery of essential services and where the adverse effects of such emergency may worsen materially with the passage of time provided that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file and shall be submitted for approval to the City Council as a consent agenda item at the next meeting following the emergency procurement. As soon as practicable, a record of each emergency procurement shall be made and shall set forth the contractor's name, the amount and type of the contract, a listing of the items procured under the contract, and the identification number of the contract file. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-261. - Cooperative purchases. 
The City may participate in a cooperative purchase for commodities, supplies and services when determined that it is in the best interest of the City. The sponsoring entity, whether federal, state, local, or non-profit must have performed a competitive procurement process and entered into a contract that stipulates allowance for other governmental entities to purchase from the supplier at the same price and under the same terms and conditions as extended to itself. If such arrangement has not been made a part of the contract, written permission from the sponsoring entity and the awarded supplier must be obtained. Documentation to substantiate this decision will be maintained by the Purchasing Department. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-262. - Governmental and affiliated entity purchases. 
The City may purchase services and incidental commodities from other federal, state or local governments, associations and non-profit organizations when determined to be in the best interest of the City. Documentation to substantiate this decision will be maintained by the Purchasing Division. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-263. - Change orders and contract modifications. 
(a)  General provisions. Except as hereinafter provided, any change order or other modification of a contract term shall be approved by the City Council. 
(b)  City Manager authority. The City Manager or his/her designee shall have authority to approve all change orders to purchase orders and contracts up to an absolute value of $50,000.00. 
(c)  Purchasing Manager authority. The Purchasing Manager shall have authority to approve all change orders to purchase orders and contracts up to an absolute value of $5,000.00. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-264. - Standardization Committee. 
A Standardization Committee shall be established and be comprised of members (selected from user departments by the City Manager, Deputy City Manager and the Purchasing Manager) who shall serve for a two-year staggered term. The Committee shall meet periodically to review standardization of commodities, review products for a Qualified Products List, and review requests for exception to establish standards. The Committee will report to the City Manager to make recommendations on commodities to be presented to City Council for approval. The maximum length of a standardization shall be seven years. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-265. - Cancellation of invitations for bids or request for proposals. 
An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is for good cause and in the best interests of the City. The reasons therefor shall be made part of the contract file. Each solicitation issued by the City shall state that the solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in whole or in part for good cause when in the best interests of the City. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. The notice shall identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation and, where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete on any resolicitation or any future procurement of similar items. Reasons for rejection shall be provided upon request by unsuccessful bidders or offerors. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-266. - Vehicle purchases. 
Competitive procurement methods shall be used for all vehicle purchases. However, if the purchase of a specific type of vehicle is included as an approved line item in the vehicle replacement program and/or a new vehicle in the annual budget and the bid price for said vehicle does not exceed the budgeted amount, the City Manager shall be authorized to purchase said vehicle without seeking additional or specific approval of the City Council. For the purposes of this section, the term "vehicle" means automobiles, motorcycles, heavy equipment, heavy machinery, trailers and similar items. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Secs. 2-267—2-277. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCUREMENT FOR FEDERAL AID HIGHWAY PROGRAM FUNDING PROJECTS 

Sec. 2-278. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the City of Lawrenceville Policy for Competitive Negotiation Qualifications-based Selection for Projects Using Federal Aid Highway Program (FAHP) Funding. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-279. - General policy. 
(a)  Competitive negotiation. Except as provided in sections 2-280 and 2-281, the City shall use the competitive negotiation method for the procurement of engineering and design related services when FAHP funds are involved in the contract (as specified in 23 U.S.C. § 112(b)(2)(A)). The solicitation, evaluation, ranking, selection, and negotiation shall comply with the qualifications-based selection procurement procedures for architectural and engineering services codified under 40 U.S.C. §§ 1101—1104, commonly referred to as the Brooks Act. 
(b)  Application of competitive negotiation method procedures. In accordance with the requirements of the Brooks Act, the following procedures shall apply to the competitive negotiation procurement method: 
(1)  Solicitation. The solicitation process shall be by public announcement, public advertisement, or any other public forum or method that assures qualified in-State and out-of-State consultants are given a fair opportunity to be considered for award of the contract. Procurement procedures may involve a single step process with issuance of a request for proposal (RFP) to all interested consultants or a multiphase process with issuance of a request for statements or letters of interest or qualifications (RFQ) whereby responding consultants are ranked based on qualifications and request for proposals are then provided to three or more of the most highly qualified consultants. Minimum qualifications of consultants to perform services under general work categories or areas of expertise may also be assessed through a prequalification process whereby statements of qualifications are submitted on an annual basis. Regardless of any process utilized for prequalification of consultants or for an initial assessment of a consultant's qualifications under an RFQ, a RFP specific to the project, task, or service is required for evaluation of a consultant's specific technical approach and qualifications. 
(2)  Request for proposal (RFP). The RFP shall provide all information and requirements necessary for interested consultants to provide a response to the RFP and compete for the solicited services. The RFP shall: 
a.  Provide a clear, accurate, and detailed description of the scope of work, technical requirements, and qualifications of consultants necessary for the services to be rendered. The scope of work should detail the purpose and description of the project, services to be performed, deliverables to be provided, estimated schedule for performance of the work, and applicable standards, specifications, and policies; 
b.  Identify the requirements for any discussions that may be conducted with three or more of the most highly qualified consultants following submission and evaluation of proposals; 
c.  Identify evaluation factors including their relative weight of importance in accordance with subsection (c) of this section; 
d.  Specify the contract type and method(s) of payment to be utilized in accordance with 23 CFR 172.9; 
e.  Identify any special provisions or contract requirements associated with the solicited services; 
f.  Require that submission of any requested cost proposals or elements of cost be in a concealed format and separate from technical/qualifications proposals as these shall not be considered in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase; and 
g.  Provide a schedule of key dates for the procurement process and establish a submittal deadline for responses to the RFP which provides sufficient time for interested consultants to receive notice, prepare, and submit a proposal, which except in unusual circumstances shall be not less than 14 days from the date of issuance of the RFP. 
(3)  Evaluation factors. 
a.  Criteria used for evaluation, ranking, and selection of consultants to perform engineering and design related services must assess the demonstrated competence and qualifications for the type of professional services solicited. These qualifications-based factors may include, but are not limited to, technical approach (e.g., project understanding, innovative concepts or alternatives, quality control procedures), work experience, specialized expertise, professional licensure, staff capabilities, workload capacity, and past performance. 
b.  Price shall not be used as a factor in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase. All price or cost related items which include, but are not limited to, cost proposals, direct salaries/wage rates, indirect cost rates, and other direct costs are prohibited from being used as evaluation criteria. 
c.  In-state or local preference shall not be used as a factor in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase. State licensing laws are not preempted by this provision and professional licensure within a jurisdiction may be established as a requirement which attests to the minimum qualifications and competence of a consultant to perform the solicited services. 
d.  The following non-qualifications based evaluation criteria are permitted under the specified conditions and provided the combined total of these criteria do not exceed a nominal value of ten percent of the total evaluation criteria to maintain the integrity of a qualifications-based selection: 
1.  A local presence may be used as a nominal evaluation factor where appropriate. This criterion shall not be based on political or jurisdictional boundaries and may be applied on a project-by-project basis for contracts where a need has been established for a consultant to provide a local presence, a local presence will add value to the quality and efficiency of the project, and application of this criteria leaves an appropriate number of qualified consultants, given the nature and size of the project. If a consultant outside of the locality area indicates as part of a proposal that it will satisfy the criteria in some manner, such as establishing a local project office, that commitment shall be considered to have satisfied the local presence criteria. 
2.  The participation of qualified and certified Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) sub-consultants may be used as a nominal evaluation criterion where appropriate in accordance with 49 CFR Part 26 and the City of Lawrenceville's FHWA-approved DBE program. 
(4)  Evaluation, ranking, and selection. 
a.  Consultant proposals shall be evaluated by the City based on the criteria established and published within the public solicitation. 
b.  While the contract will be with the prime consultant, proposal evaluations shall consider the qualifications of the prime consultant and any sub-consultants identified within the proposal with respect to the scope of work and established criteria. 
c.  Following submission and evaluation of proposals, the City shall conduct interviews or other types of discussions determined three of the most highly qualified consultants to clarify the technical approach, qualifications, and capabilities provided in response to the RFP. Discussion requirements shall be specified within the RFP and should be based on the size and complexity of the project as defined in City written policies and procedures (as specified in 23 CFR 172.5(c)). Discussions may be written, by telephone, video conference, or by oral presentation/interview. Discussions following proposal submission are not required provided proposals contain sufficient information for evaluation of technical approach and qualifications to perform the specific project, task, or service with respect to established criteria. 
d.  From the proposal evaluation and any subsequent discussions which have been conducted, the City shall rank, in order of preference, at least three consultants determined most highly qualified to perform the solicited services based on the established and published criteria. 
e.  Notification must be provided to responding consultants of the final ranking of the three most highly qualified consultants. 
f.  The City shall retain acceptable documentation of the solicitation, proposal, evaluation, and selection of the consultant accordance with the provisions of 49 CFR 18.42. 
(5)  Negotiation. 
a.  Independent estimate. Prior to receipt or review of the most highly qualified consultant's cost proposal, the City shall prepare a detailed independent estimate with an appropriate breakdown of the work or labor hours, types or classifications of labor required, other direct costs, and consultant's fixed fee for the defined scope of work. The independent estimate shall serve as the basis for negotiation and ensuring the consultant services are obtained at a fair and reasonable cost. 
b.  Elements of contract costs (e.g., indirect cost rates, direct salary or wage rates, fixed fee, and other direct costs) shall be established separately in accordance with 23 CFR 172.11. 
c.  If concealed cost proposals were submitted in conjunction with technical/qualifications proposals, only the cost proposal of the consultant with which negotiations are initiated may be considered. Concealed cost proposals of consultants with which negotiations are not initiated should be returned to the respective consultant due to the confidential nature of this data (as specified in 23 U.S.C. 112(b)(2)(E)). 
d.  The City shall retain documentation of negotiation activities and resources used in the analysis of costs to establish elements of the contract in accordance with the provisions of 49 CFR 18.42. This documentation shall include the consultant cost certification and documentation supporting the acceptance of the indirect cost rate to be applied to the contract (as specified in 23 CFR 172.11(c)). 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-280. - Informal purchases. 
The informal purchase method involves procurement of engineering and design related services where an adequate number of qualified sources are reviewed and the total contract costs do not exceed the established informal purchase threshold. The City may use the State's small purchase procedures which reflect applicable State laws and regulations for the procurement of engineering and design related services provided the total contract costs do not exceed the Federal simplified acquisition threshold (as specified in 48 CFR 2.101). When a lower threshold for use of small purchase procedures is established in State law, regulation, or policy, the lower threshold shall apply to the use of FAHP funds. The following additional requirements shall apply to the small purchase procurement method: 
(1)  The scope of work, project phases, and contract requirements shall not be broken down into smaller components merely to permit the use of small purchase procedures. 
(2)  A minimum of three consultants are required to satisfy the adequate number of qualified sources reviewed. 
(3)  Contract costs may be negotiated in accordance with State small purchase procedures; however, the allow ability of costs shall be determined in accordance with the Federal cost principles. 
(4)  The full amount of any contract modification or amendment that would cause the total contract amount to exceed the established simplified acquisition threshold would be ineligible for Federal-aid funding. The FHWA may withdraw all Federal-aid from a contract if it is modified or amended above the applicable established simplified acquisition threshold. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-281. - Noncompetitive. 
The noncompetitive method involves procurement of engineering and design related services when it is not feasible to award the contract using competitive negotiation or small purchase procurement methods. The following requirements shall apply to the noncompetitive procurement method: 
(1)  The City may use their own noncompetitive procedures which reflect applicable State and local laws and regulations and conform to applicable Federal requirements. 
(2)  The City shall establish a process to determine when noncompetitive procedures will be used and shall submit justification to, and receive approval from, the FHWA before using this form of contracting. 
(3)  Circumstances under which a contract may be awarded by noncompetitive procedures are limited to the following: 
a.  The service is available only from a single source; 
b.  There is an emergency which will not permit the time necessary to conduct competitive negotiations; or 
c.  After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined to be inadequate. 
(4)  Contract costs may be negotiated in accordance with the City noncompetitive procedures; however, the allow ability of costs shall be determined in accordance with the Federal cost principles. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Sec. 2-282. - Additional procurement requirements. 
(a)  Common grant rule. 
(1)  The City must comply with procurement requirements established in State and local laws, regulations, policies, and procedures which are not addressed by or in conflict with applicable Federal laws and regulations (as specified in 49 CFR 18.36). 
(2)  When State and local procurement laws, regulations, policies, or procedures are in conflict with applicable Federal laws and regulations, the City of Lawrenceville must comply with Federal requirements to be eligible for Federal-aid reimbursement of the associated costs of the services incurred following FHWA authorization (as specified in 49 CFR 18.4). 
(b)  Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) program. 
(1)  The City shall give consideration to DBE consultants if required by the use of state and federal funds in the procurement of engineering and design related service contracts subject to 23 U.S.C. 112(b)(2) in accordance with 49 CFR 26. When DBE program participation goals cannot be met through race-neutral measures, additional DBE participation on engineering and design related services contracts may be achieved in accordance with the City of Lawrenceville's FHWA approved DBE program through either: 
a.  Use of an evaluation criterion in the qualifications-based selection of consultants (as specified in 23 CFR 172.7(a)(1)(iii)(D)); or 
b.  Establishment of a contract participation goal. 
(2)  The use of quotas or exclusive set-asides for DBE consultants is prohibited (as specified in 49 CFR 26.43). 
(c)  Suspension and debarment. The City must verify suspension and debarment actions and eligibility status of consultants and sub-consultants prior to entering into an agreement or contract in accordance with 49 CFR 18.35 and 2 CFR 180. 
( Ord. No. 2018-6, 5-7-2018 ) 
Secs. 2-283—2-298. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CDBG FUNDS 

Sec. 2-299. - Purchasing requirements. 
The City Manager shall ensure that the purchase of equipment, supplies and/or services relating to the expenditure of federal CDBG funds shall follow federal requirements in accordance with the Common Rule, 24 CFR Part 85 to the CDBG Entitlement Program. 
(Code 2005, § 7-101) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local licensing authority, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; local regulatory authority, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-49, 3-5-40 et seq., 3-6-40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Sale within City limits; license a privilege; severability. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may only be sold in the City of Lawrenceville under a license granted by the City Clerk upon the terms and conditions provided in this chapter. 
(b)  All licenses in this chapter shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this Code and State law. 
(c)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: 
"THIS LICENSE IS A PRIVILEGE SUBJECT TO BE REVOKED AND ANNULLED AND IS SUBJECT TO FURTHER ORDINANCES WHICH MAY BE ENACTED." 
(d)  Any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the State before any sales commence. Additionally, City licensees are required to abide by all applicable State regulations and laws. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage where the person does not have a license granted by the City to sell or possess for sale these alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. Violations of this section shall result in a fine of not less than $500.00 and/or up to 30 days in jail. 
(f)  Severability. Should any part, paragraph or portion of this chapter be declared invalid for any reasons by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter not so declared to be invalid, but all such remaining portions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect as if they were separately adopted. 
(Code 2005, § 34-101) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Art shop means a retail business located in the Downtown Overlay District devoted exclusively to providing art education limited to instruction in painting, sculpture and similar crafts. An art shop may also sell portraits, paintings, sculptures, art supplies, and similar crafts or display for viewing portraits, paintings, sculptures and similar art work. An art shop shall not allow any activities that would cause the business to be an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in section 12-401. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. Also included are beverages known as nonalcoholic beer, which is made by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or other products, and containing less than three percent, but more than 0.1 percent alcohol by volume. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Brewpub means a restaurant in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed subject to State law barrel production limitations for retail consumption on the premises and sold solely in draft form. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include a commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bills under club regulation shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Governing authority means the Mayor and City Council of the City of Lawrenceville. 
Growler means a reusable glass jug used to transport draft beer for off-premises consumption that is not to exceed 68 ounces and not less than 12 ounces and is filled with beer from a keg by a licensee or an employee of a licensee holding a license as a retail dealer of beer sold in original packages for consumption off the premises from the City or holding a license as a growler shop subject to the provisions of section 4-151. 
Hotel means any building or other structure providing sleeping accommodations for hire to the general public, transient, permanent or residential. Such hotels shall maintain a minimum of 50 rooms available for hire and have one or more public dining rooms with an adequate kitchen. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of any licensed establishment described in this chapter and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of a hotel pursuant to this definition. 
Indoor commercial recreational establishment. 
(1)  The term "indoor commercial recreational establishment" means and is limited to an establishment which: 
a.  Regularly serves prepared food, with a full-service kitchen (a full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the Gwinnett County health and fire departments), prepared to serve food every hour they are open and deriving at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreation activities; and 
b.  Wherein the sale of food and alcoholic beverages is incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises. 
(2)  The primary activity on the premises of the indoor commercial recreational establishment shall be family-oriented in nature, generally meaning a use which attracts a range of individuals from all age groups. Uses may specifically include, but are not limited to, dinner theaters, bowling centers, and other similar uses. Neither outdoor commercial recreational activities, nor concession stand sales of alcoholic beverages are permitted under this provision. Dance halls, nightclubs, taverns, billiard parlors, skating arenas, adult entertainment and/or sexually related entertainment activities, and similar uses are specifically excluded from this definition of indoor commercial recreational establishments. Furthermore, no indoor commercial recreational establishment shall offer alcoholic beverages for sale during the time it is sponsoring events which primarily attract persons under the lawful drinking age in the State. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the limitations set forth in this definition, indoor commercial recreational establishments are allowed to have dancing, provided that the dancing is limited to a dance floor area of five percent of the public floor space of the establishment or 200 square feet whichever area is smaller. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the limitations set forth in this definition, indoor commercial recreational establishments are allowed to have no more than two billiard tables in the establishment. 
Indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center means and is limited to publicly owned establishments which the sale of food and alcoholic beverages are incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises. The term "indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center" includes the City-owned Depot Building, the City-owned Oakes House, and the Historic Courthouse. 
Indoor special event facility means a privately owned commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Provides a gathering space for rental purposes where professional, live, musical entertainment may be performed on-site indoors; 
(2)  Has a full-service kitchen, consisting of a three-compartment pot sink, a hot food (i.e., warming) unit permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments where outside vendors can prepare catered food; 
(3)  Charges a rental fee for use of the event hall for special events; 
(4)  Does not allow sexually related adult entertainment to be performed in the event hall; 
(5)  Has at least 3,000 square feet of enclosed heated space; and 
(6)  Has an occupant capacity of at least 200 people. 
The primary activity on the premises of the indoor event hall shall be family-oriented in nature, generally meaning a use which attracts a range of individuals from all age groups. Uses may specifically include, but are not limited to, corporate events, wedding receptions, birthday parties, holiday parties, and other similar uses. Bingo parlors, dance halls, nightclubs, taverns, billiard parlors, video arcades, skating arenas, adult entertainment and/or sexually related entertainment activities, and similar uses are specifically excluded from this definition of indoor event halls. 
License means an authorization granted by the City to operate as a retail consumption dealer, retail package dealer or wholesale dealer. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or the person designated by the application and approved by the City Clerk or his designee to be responsible for the day to day operations of a licensed establishment to whom a license is issued or, in the case of closely held partnerships or corporations, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation. 
Liter means the metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term "manufacturer" also means, in the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; in the case of malt beverages, any brewer. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, growler or other original consumer container. Retail package alcoholic beverages shall include all alcoholic beverages in their original container, sold at retail to the final consumer, and not for resale. 
Performing arts facility means and is limited to an establishment: 
(1)  Which is located in the Downtown Overlay District; 
(2)  Which operates in a building owned by the City of Lawrenceville; 
(3)  Which has as its principal objective or business the presentation of live music, mainline dramatic arts, plays, theatre productions and stand-up comedy; and 
(4)  Which does not feature, show, allow, promote or advertise adult businesses as defined and regulated in chapter 12, including, but not limited to, adult dancing establishments, adult mini-motion picture theatres, adult motion picture theatres, adult motion picture arcades and erotic dance establishments. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
Pouring permit means an authorization granted by the City to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages in establishments licensed as a retail consumption dealer. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with: 
a.  A suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
b.  A sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent or employee, directly or indirectly, receiving in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Restaurant. 
(1)  The term "restaurant" means any public place selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full-service kitchen. A full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the Gwinnett County Health and Fire Departments. A restaurant will be prepared to serve food every hour they are open and will derive at least as much gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food as it derives from the sale of distilled spirits. A restaurant shall not be permitted to charge a cover charge or fee of any kind for entrance into the premises or into any part of the premises. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the limitations set forth in this definition, eating establishments are allowed to have dancing, provided that the dancing is limited to a dance floor area of five percent of the public floor space of the establishment or 200 square feet, whichever area is smaller. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the limitations set forth in this definition, eating establishments are allowed to have no more than two billiard tables in the establishment. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail package dealer means any person who sells unbroken packages, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Sports club means an association or corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State, organized and operated primarily to provide a location for the patrons thereof to engage in sporting events. To qualify for an alcoholic beverage consumption dealer's license, a sports club must have been actively in operation within the City at least two years prior to an application for license under this chapter. The two-year operational requirement shall not apply to golf club associations or golf club corporations where the selling or the serving of alcoholic beverages is to take place on the golf course premises. A sports club organized or operated primarily for serving of alcoholic beverages shall not qualify for licensing under this article, and accordingly shall not be permitted to serve alcoholic beverages at any time. Unless otherwise indicated, a sports club licensee shall comply with all other requirements imposed upon retail consumption dealers. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. For purposes of imposing excise taxes in accordance with article III herein, brewers shall be taxed as wholesalers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries, grapes, or rice either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Code 2005, § 34-102; Ord. No. 2764-001, § 34-102, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 2016-16, 6-6-2016 ) 
Secs. 4-3—4-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATION AND FEES 

Sec. 4-23. - License application, form and contents and advertising requirements. 
(a)  All persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the City Clerk. Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses must be issued. 
(b)  The application shall include, but not be limited to, the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names and residence address of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers; the names and address of the registered agent for service of process; the name and address of the manager; and the name of all shareholders holding more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish data, fingerprints, financial responsibility and other records as required by the City Clerk and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish data pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(d)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of the building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the City, applicable county regulations, the State Revenue Commissioner and the State. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the Building Inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are visible. Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building, or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. All premises for which an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passage ways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. 
(e)  Licensing qualifications. 
(1)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or to any person who is not lawfully admitted and lawfully residing in the United States. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all partners, officers and majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to all the partners owning at least ten percent of the partnership; or if the no partner owns ten percent then the general partner, managing partner or the partner with the greatest ownership will be licensed. 
(3)  No person shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the City Clerk or the Clerks' designee that such person, partners, partners in the firm, officers, and directors of the corporation and on-site managers have not been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, keeping a place of prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime within a period of ten years prior to the date of application or the applicant remains on parole or probation for a violation of such a crime or any felony. Completed sentences under the Georgia First Offender Act shall not apply to such consideration. A person's first time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a City or county ordinance shall not, by itself, make a person ineligible for an alcohol license. An applicant who is found to have falsified an application or any information therein shall be denied a permit. 
(4)  Any licensee who is convicted or pleads guilty or pleads no lo contender to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, keeping a place of prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime shall have the license immediately revoked and canceled. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any City employee involved in the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses under this article or elected City Official to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the City. 
(6)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any City license revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(7)  The City Clerk may decline to issue a license when any person having any ownership interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this section. 
(8)  All applicants for an alcoholic beverage license must be of good character and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of like good character. Corporate or firm applicants shall be of a good business reputation. 
(9)  A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(10)  The City Clerk may in the Clerk's discretion consider extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably upon the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If in the Clerk's judgment the circumstances are such that granting the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(f)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(g)  All licensees shall list in their application their home address, home telephone number and places of employment. Thereafter, if any person other than the one listed in the application as manager shall be employed as manager, the name, address and telephone numbers of the new Manager shall be filed with the City Clerk within three days of the date of such employment. 
(h)  Each application for license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of $300.00 to defray investigative and administrative cost. The Chief of Police shall have a complete search made of any police record of the applicant based on the information given in the application. Any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. 
(i)  Advertisement of intent to engage in business; signs posted. All applicants desirous of obtaining a license for the sale of alcohol shall give notice at their expense of the making of an application by advertisement at least twice a week for two consecutive weeks, said advertisement to begin no later than ten days following submission of the application required by this section, application; form; content; process; deposit. The advertisement shall be published in the newspaper in which the legal advertisements of the City are published. The advertisement referred to herein shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital in lower case and shall be at least a two-inch, one-column advertisement in size. Said notice shall contain a complete description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant and if a partnership, the names of the partners, whether limited or general, and if a corporation, the names of the officers and all stockholders having more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock therein, and the date the application was filed with the city clerk. The advertisement shall contain the following additional statement: 
"AN APPLICATION HAS BEEN FILED ON (date) WITH THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCEVILLE FOR A LICENSE TO OPERATE ____________ / ____________ / ____________ AT THE ABOVE LOCATION. A DECISION ON WHETHER OR NOT TO GRANT OR DENY SUCH A LICENSE WILL BE MADE BY THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCEVILLE NO LATER THAN THIRTY (30) DAYS FROM THE DATE THE FILED APPLICATION IS DETERMINED TO BE COMPLETE. MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC ARE INVITED TO NOTE ANY OBJECTIONS, IN WRITING, THAT THEY MAY HAVE TO THE GRANTING OF SUCH A LICENSE BY FILING SAID WRITTEN OBJECTIONS WITH THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCEVILLE." 
(1)  Tear sheets and a publisher's affidavit shall be furnished to the City by the applicant(s) prior to the applicant's application being considered complete. 
(2)  The applicant shall cause to be placed at their expense upon the location of the proposed business no later than ten days following submission of the application, a sign or signs stating the following: 
AN APPLICATION HAS BEEN FILED ON (date) WITH THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCEVILLE FOR A LICENSE TO SELL ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . A DECISION ON WHETHER OR NOT TO GRANT OR DENY SUCH A LICENSE WILL BE MADE BY THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCEVILLE NO LATER THAN THIRTY (30) DAYS FROM THE DATE THE FILED APPLICATION IS DETERMINED TO BE COMPLETE. MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC ARE INVITED TO NOTE ANY OBJECTIONS, IN WRITING, THAT THEY MAY HAVE TO THE GRANTING OF SUCH A LICENSE BY FILING SAID WRITTEN OBJECTIONS WITH THE CLERK OF THE CITY OF LAWRENCEVILLE." 
(3)  The sign or signs required by subsection (i)(2) of this section shall be constructed of wood or metal and shall be placed with the base of the sign not more than three feet from the ground and shall be not less than 48 inches by 48 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public property adjoining the proposed location. The statement above shall be printed or painted on the sign in the English language. Such signs shall be placed where they can be easily seen and the statement above easily read from all public properties adjoining the proposed location. Said sign shall not be required to comply with the requirements of article 10 of the zoning ordinance pertaining to signs. 
(4)  The advertising requirements of this section shall not be required for license renewals or in cases where the location of the proposed business has previously served as a location where alcoholic beverage sales have been licensed within five years of the date of the application for license. 
(Code 2005, § 34-103; Ord. No. 2011-XX, § 34-103, 6-2-2012; Ord. of 12-17-2014(01)) 
Sec. 4-24. - Withdrawal of application. 
Any license application made pursuant to this chapter may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the application is withdrawn before the license is issued, any sums deposited as license fees will be refunded. After issuance of the license, no refunds will be made. No refunds shall be made under any circumstances for investigative and administrative expenses required in this article. 
(Code 2005, § 34-104) 
Sec. 4-25. - Expiration; renewal of license. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this article shall expire on March 1 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their licenses shall file applications with the requisite fee with the City Clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed on or before January 31 of each year. Any renewal applications received after January 31 shall be subject to, in addition to the annual fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If the license application is received after March 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the application shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after March 1, investigative and administrative cost will be assessed. The establishment shall immediately stop selling alcohol and remove all alcoholic beverages offered for sale on the premises on March 2 of each year unless the establishment has applied for and received a renewal of its license. 
(b)  All licenses granted under this article shall be for a period of no more than one year and shall expire on March 1 of each year. The full license fee must be paid for a license application filed prior to September 1of the licensed year. One-half of a full license fee shall be paid for a license application filed after September 1 of the license year, except for applications for temporary or event licenses authorized under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, 10-7-2013; Ord. No. 2016-28, 11-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 4-26. - Automatic license forfeiture for non-use. 
Any holder of any license under this article who shall, for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued, cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized shall, after the three-month period, automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Code 2005, § 34-106) 
Sec. 4-27. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporation at the time of issuance of the license nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing his stock holdings to a total of ten percent or more of any class of stock. 
(c)  Except as provided in this section, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license pursuant to this article automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. 
(d)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used and a fine on the new ownership and the old ownership of not less than $1,000.00 and/or one year in jail. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the City for one year from the date of the violation. 
(e)  Should a licensee make application to the City Clerk for a transfer of location and should such a transfer of a location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the previous license shall be applied to the new location. Each applicant for a transfer of location shall pay a transfer fee in the amount of $300.00. 
(Code 2005, § 34-107) 
Sec. 4-28. - License fee scale. 
Before a license shall be granted, the applicant therefor shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the Mayor and Council regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the fees set forth in section 4-29. 
(Code 2005, § 34-108) 
Sec. 4-29. - License fees enumerated. 
License fees applicable to this article are set out as follows: 
(1)  Retail dealers of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises, $2,500.00 per year for first fixed bar. 
(2)  Retail dealers of beer to be consumed on the premises, $600.00 per year. 
(3)  Retail dealers of wine to be consumed on the premises, $600.00 per year. 
(4)  Retail dealers of beer and wine to be consumed on the premises, $1,200.00 per year. 
(5)  Retail dealers of beer sold in original packages for consumption off the premises, $600.00 per year. 
(6)  Retail dealers of wine sold in original packages for consumption off the premises, $600.00 per year. 
(7)  Retail dealers of beer and wine sold in original packages for consumption off the premises, $1,200.00 per year. 
(8)  Wholesale dealers in beer, whose principal place of business is in the City, $250.00 per year. 
(9)  Wholesale dealers in wine, whose principal place of business is in the City, $250.00 per year. 
(10)  Wholesale dealers in beer and wine, whose principal place of business is in the City, $500.00 per year. 
(11)  Any additional fixed bar at any previously licensed location for consumption of distilled spirits on the premises, $500.00 per year. 
(12)  Any movable bar at any previously licensed location for consumption of distilled spirits on the premises, $100.00 per year. 
(13)  Temporary license for nonprofit civic organizations, $50.00 per day, maximum five days per year. 
(14)  Nonprofit private club beer to be consumed on the premises, $250.00 per year. 
(15)  Nonprofit private club wine to be consumed on the premises, $250.00 per year. 
(16)  Nonprofit private club beer and wine to be consumed on the premises, $500.00 per year. 
(17)  Nonprofit private club distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises, $1,000.00 per year. 
(18)  Hotel-motel in-room service, $100.00 per year. 
(19)  Wholesale dealers in distilled spirits whose principal place of business is in the City, $1,000.00 per year. 
(20)  Retail dealers of distilled spirits, beer and wine by the drink to be consumed outdoors or in a public facility pursuant to a special use permit, $2,000.00 per event. 
(21)  Patio sales, $200.00 per year 
(22)  Catering license, $200.00 per year. 
(23)  Catering permit for out-of-jurisdiction catering licensee, $50.00 per event. 
(24)  Wine shop license, $2,500.00 per year. 
(25)  Performing arts facility license, $500.00 per year. 
(26)  Indoor special events facility permit, $2,000.00 per year. 
(27)  Art shop license, $500.00 per year. 
(28)  Brewpub license, $2,500.00 per year. 
(29)  Growler shop license, $500.00 per year. 
(30)  Brewer's license, $2,500.00 per year. 
(Code 2005, § 34-109; Ord. No. 2764-001, § 34-109, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 2016-16, 6-6-2016 ) 
Secs. 4-30—4-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALCOHOL EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to impose excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130; imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 

Sec. 4-47. - Per drink excise tax. 
(a)  Every purchaser of distilled spirits by the drink shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three percent of the retail price or charge for such drink. Such tax shall be collected by the licensee licensed under this article, and such licensee shall remit the same to the city on or before the 20th day of the succeeding month along with a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, excluding malt beverages. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales and shall be reported and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the City Clerk or his designee to the same extent as required of cash sales. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction equal to that rate authorized for deductions from State tax under part V of the Georgia Retailer's and Consumer's Sales and Use Tax Act, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, as now written or hereafter amended, provided that the tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. It shall be the duty of every such licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levied pursuant to this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable pursuant to this article, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due. It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three years. 
(b)  Excise taxes received in the Office of the City Clerk after the 20th day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. 
(c)  Any licensee who violates any provision of this article may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $300.00 for each offense and/or 30 days in the common jail of the County and the license of such location may be suspended or revoked. 
(Code 2005, § 34-150) 
Sec. 4-48. - Excise tax and bond requirement on wholesalers. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter ($0.65 cents per ounce) which shall be paid to the governing authority on all distilled spirits and wine sold by wholesalers to retailers in the City of Lawrenceville. Such tax shall be paid to the City Clerk or his designee by the wholesale distributor on all distilled spirits and wine sold to the licensees for the sale of distilled spirits and wine in the City of Lawrenceville as follows: each wholesaler selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits or wine to any licensees under this article shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each licensee on or before the tenth day of the month following. Excise taxes received in the Office of the City Clerk after the 20th day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. The $0.22 per liter ($0.65 cents per ounce) shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits and wine shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter or $0.0065 per ounce. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits or wine to a retail dealer without collecting said tax. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any distilled spirits or wine on which such tax has not been paid. Each wholesaler shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of the said tax. 
(b)  There is hereby levied an excise tax on all beer and malt beverages sold by wholesalers to retailers in the City of Lawrenceville at the rate of $0.05 per 12-ounce container and $6.00 for each container of tap or draft beer or malt beverage of 15½ gallons and in similar proportion for bottles, cans and containers of various sizes as follows: 

 
(c)  Collection of fees or taxes sums due. If any person shall fail to pay the sum due under this article, the City Clerk or designee shall issue an execution against the person so delinquent and his property for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. 
(Code 2005, § 34-151) 
Secs. 4-49—4-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-70. - Drinking in public; consumption of alcohol on City streets prohibited; limited in certain areas. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section or in a licensed establishment, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt, wine or other alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way or place in the City or within any public building. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any licensed establishment to dispense any alcoholic beverage in an open container for removal from the premises, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove from an alcoholic beverage establishment any open container of an alcoholic beverage or to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from any open container or to possess in any open container any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private, or within any public building within the City limits of Lawrenceville. 
(b)  Consumption of alcohol in an open container outside of a licensed establishment shall be allowed only in the locations specified below: 
(1)  Inside the Historic Courthouse Building by a licensed caterer as set forth in section 4-144; 
(2)  On the patio of a licensed establishment which meets all of the requirements and is specifically licensed for patio sales in accordance with section 4-146; 
(3)  (i)  This subsection shall apply to all events except those exempted by (ii) below. Outside in an area clearly marked for identification as an outdoor alcohol drinking area pursuant to a special use permit issued by Mayor and Council to allow consumption outside of a licensed establishment. Only establishments licensed and properly permitted by the State of Georgia shall be eligible for special use permit and license under this subsection. The license shall be granted for a maximum of three consecutive days and shall be governed by all of the other rules and regulations of the City as if the alcohol was being dispensed within an establishment licensed by the City for sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises. A permit fee of $1.00 per square foot or $2,000.00, whichever is greater, shall be charged per event payable at the time of issuance of the permit. The applicant shall be required to provide adequate security officers for the event as established by the Mayor and Council at the expense of the applicant. Security officers shall be off duty Police Officers or Sheriff's deputies from Gwinnett County or one of its municipalities. Special use permits issued pursuant to this subsection shall not require presentation to the Planning Commission nor a second reading prior to issuance. 
(ii)  This subsection shall apply only in the case of an event sponsored by the City. Outside in an area clearly marked for identification as an outdoor alcohol drinking area pursuant to a special use permit issued by the City Manager to allow consumption outside of a licensed establishment. Only establishments licensed and properly permitted by the State of Georgia shall be eligible for special use permit and license under this subsection. An application fee of $100.00 shall be submitted with the special event application. The license shall be granted for a maximum of three consecutive days and shall be governed by all of the other rules and regulations of the City as if the alcohol was being dispensed within an establishment licensed by the City for sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises; 
(4)  In an indoor special event facility pursuant to a special use alcohol permit issued by the Mayor and Council setting forth specific operational requirements and restrictions for the facility that control consumption at the facility. An annual permit fee of $2,000.00 shall be charged for a permit to authorize alcohol consumption and sales at an indoor special event facility. Alcohol may only be served at an indoor special events facility by a licensed caterer under the provisions set forth in section 4-144 or by the owner of the indoor special events facility event facility. 
(Code 2005, § 34-170; Ord. No. 2015-99 , 5-6-2015) 
Sec. 4-71. - Special use permit minimum requirements. 
(a)  The following are minimum special use permit requirements for the exemptions set forth in section 4-70(b)(3) and (4). 
(1)  The applicant shall be required to provide adequate security officers for the event as established by the Mayor and Council at the expense of the applicant. Security officers used to comply with this section shall be off-duty police officers or sheriff's deputies from Gwinnett County or one of its municipalities. 
(2)  A special use permit for an indoor special event facility shall only be granted to facilities in the downtown overlay district. 
(3)  A separate event administrative application and permit shall be required for any party leasing the indoor special event facility and contracting with a licensed caterer as provided by section 4-144. 
(b)  The following additional regulations shall apply to dispensing and drinking alcohol pursuant to the exceptions set forth in section 4-70(b)(3) and (4) and shall be made conditions of each special use permit issued for such exceptions: 
(1)  Two drink limit. Any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup or aluminum container, for removal from the premises; provided, however, that no establishment shall dispense to any person more than two such alcoholic beverages at a time and provided the alcohol is consumed in the area specified in the special use permit granted in section 4-70(b)(3) and (4). 
(2)  Size limitation. No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed or served pursuant to section 4-70(b)(3) and (4) shall exceed 12 fluid ounces in size; provided, however, that beer or a malt beverage may be dispensed or served in a container up to but not exceeding 24 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in possession within the defined area any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 12 fluid ounces in size, except for a container of beer or a malt beverage which shall not exceed 24 fluid ounces in size. 
(3)  Drinking from glass prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a glass container or to possess in a glass container any alcoholic beverage outside or in the defined area. 
(4)  Drinking outside the designated area . It shall be a violation of this article to take an alcoholic beverage served in the designated area outside of the designated area for any reason. 
(5)  Hours and days. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, distribute, or consume alcoholic beverages outside of the hours of sale provisions contained in this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-19, 8-1-2016 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-19 , adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 4-72. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear in an intoxicated condition on any public or private street or highway within the City of Lawrenceville or within the curtilage of any private residence not in the exclusive possession of the person so intoxicated or at any place of business open to the public or at any other place or public gathering or assembly or place accessible to or visible to all members of the community. Said intoxication may be caused by the excessive use of intoxicating wines, beers, liquors, or opiates, or narcotics or other dangerous or hazardous drugs, and must be made manifest by boisterousness, or by indecent condition or actions or by vulgar, profane, or unbecoming language, or loud and violent discourse of the person so intoxicated, and further, a person may be deemed intoxicated within the meaning of this article where his excessive use of intoxicants produces such a material change in his normal mental status that his behavior becomes unpredictable and uncontrolled and, as a result, either: 
(1)  Slight irritations, real or imaginary, cause outbursts of anger that find expression in acts of physical violence against another person, either police officers or citizens; or 
(2)  The accused becomes unable to exercise any care for his own safety. 
(Code 2005, § 34-172) 
Sec. 4-73. - Possession of alcoholic beverages by a minor. 
It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of 21 to possess alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceville. The Municipal Court of the City of Lawrenceville shall have jurisdiction to try and dispose of cases where a person is charged with the possession of alcoholic beverages. No person under the age of 21 years of age shall attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage or misrepresent his age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment not to exceed one year. 
(Code 2005, § 34-173) 
Sec. 4-74. - Registered agent. 
All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain with the City a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of Gwinnett County. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the City Clerk in such form as may be prescribed. 
(Code 2005, § 34-174) 
Sec. 4-75. - Distance from schools and churches. 
(a)  No license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be issued under this article where the place of business of the applicant is located within a distance of 150 feet of any church building, or within 300 feet of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. Any location licensed under this article may continue to operate any of the businesses described in this section in the event that any such school or church is, subsequent to the date of the granting of such license for such premises, located closer than the distances set forth in this section. 
(b)  No license permitting the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued for any proposed location which is: 
(1)  Within a distance of 200 feet of any private residence unless such residence is located in a commercially zoned (C-2, C-1, or H-C) district; 
(2)  Within a distance of 200 feet of any church building; 
(3)  Within a distance of 200 feet of any public library or branch thereof; 
(4)  Within a distance of 200 feet of a public park; 
(5)  Within a distance of 500 feet of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to State, County, City, or church or school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this State and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
(d)  As used in this section, the term "church building" shall mean the main structure used by any religious organization for the purpose of worship. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be measured in a straight line from the main entrance of the school or church building in question to the main entrance of the establishment for the sale of alcoholic beverages in question. 
(f)  As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibited in this section shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. 
(g)  No location which is currently licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be denied continued operation or denied any renewal of such license, nor shall any new owner or tenant of said location be denied a new license based upon the distance requirements of this section. 
(Code 2005, § 34-175) 
Sec. 4-76. - Display of license at place of business. 
The City alcoholic beverage license shall be kept plainly exposed to view to the public at the place of the business of the licensee at all times. 
(Code 2005, § 34-176) 
Sec. 4-77. - Advertising; location requirements; signs. 
As a condition of the privilege of having a license and permit pursuant to this article, the holder agrees not to use any outdoor advertising or signs to promote the sale of alcoholic beverages or the prices of such beverages. No advertising or signs shall be permitted to be physically attached to the windows of any such establishment. Any signs or advertising inside the permitted location shall be of a size and type that is directed to customers inside the facility. 
(Code 2005, § 34-177) 
Sec. 4-78. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. 
(a)  No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person other than a wholesaler licensed in accordance with State law. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this article; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. 
(b)  The City Clerk or his designee may request from time to time information concerning purchases and sales of alcoholic beverages from retailers and wholesalers. 
(Code 2005, § 34-178) 
Sec. 4-79. - Retail consumption dealers to store inventory only on premises. 
No retail consumption dealer licensed under this article shall keep any beer or wine or other alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. No retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to enter into any type of arrangement whereby distilled spirits ordered by a licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(Code 2005, § 34-179) 
Sec. 4-80. - Adding to contents prohibited. 
No one shall add to or permit the adding to any alcoholic beverage or refill any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's container in any manner. Notwithstanding the foregoing prohibition, retail package malt beverage licensees may fill and refill growlers with draft beer at a licensed location for retail package sales so long as the growler is not less than 32 ounces in volume and that said growler is sealed on premises with a tamper-proof plastic cap. 
(Code 2005, § 34-180) 
Sec. 4-81. - Licensees to maintain a copy of this article; employees to be familiar with terms. 
Each alcoholic beverage dealer licensed under this article shall make a current copy of this article available to employees in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms of this article; and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with the terms of this article. 
(Code 2005, § 34-181) 
Sec. 4-82. - Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets or convenience stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed under this article without written consent from the parents or guardian of the underage person. 
(Code 2005, § 34-182) 
Sec. 4-83. - Underage sales and sales to intoxicated persons prohibited. 
No holder or employee of the holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wines, malt beverages, or any other alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years. 
(2)  The prohibition in subsection (1) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages to a person when such person has furnished proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverages are being sold is 21 years of age or older. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a government agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, including, but not limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under an act to require the Department of Public Safety to issue identification cards to persons who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(3)  It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure that an underage person is not sold, served, or does not have in his possession alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. The term "identification," in this section, means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or ID card issued by a governmental entity. 
(4)  No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall allow any minors to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises of the establishment unless such minors are accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian; provided, however, that such minors shall be permitted in eating establishments, indoor commercial recreational establishments, or private clubs as defined in this chapter without being accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian; and provided further that this section shall not apply to minors who are employees under the terms of this article. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, who is of unsound mind, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee or his employees. 
(6)  The penalty for violation of this section by an individual shall be as follows: 
a.  For the first offense, a minimum fine of $250.00. 
b.  For the second offense and subsequent violations, a minimum fine of $500.00. 
c.  Any licensed establishment where three or more violations of this section, or O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, have occurred within any 36-month period shall be punished as follows: 
1.  For the third offense within any 36-month period, suspension of license for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
2.  For the fourth and any subsequent violation within any 36-month period, suspension of license for a period not to exceed one year. 
(Code 2005, § 34-183) 
Sec. 4-84. - Promotions and sales. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons. 
(2)  Deliver more than one alcoholic beverage to one person at a time. 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week, except at private functions not opened to the public. 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not opened to the public. 
(6)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, in any container which holds more than 32 fluid ounces (0.947 liters), except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(7)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. 
(8)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the price charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner so as to be in view of the paying public, and the schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person. 
(e)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as happy hour or similarly designated promotions. 
(f)  The police department shall have responsibility for the enforcement of this section. 
(g)  No licensee may require the purchase of any alcoholic beverage as a part of or prerequisite to the purchase of any other product or service. If alcoholic beverages are included as part of a package of other goods and/or services, the alcoholic beverages must be priced separately and all customers must be allowed to purchase the remaining goods and services without the alcoholic beverages at a price from which the full price of the alcoholic beverages has been deducted. 
(h)  Any person deemed guilty of violating this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or by imprisonment not to exceed one year in jail. Licensees may further be subject to revocation proceedings. 
(Code 2005, § 34-184) 
Sec. 4-85. - Sale on election days. 
(a)  The sale of wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing in this section shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(b)  All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby expressly repealed. 
(Code 2005, § 34-185) 
Sec. 4-86. - Bring your own bottle (brown bagging) prohibited. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring in his own alcoholic beverage (brown bag) in any establishment either licensed or unlicensed to serve alcoholic beverages; provided, however, that the establishments that meet the definition of a restaurant set forth in this chapter and that are licensed pursuant to this chapter as a retail dealer of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises, and/or a retail dealer of beer to be consumed on the premises, and/or a retail dealer of wine to be consumed on the premises may allow customers to bring in a bottle or bottles of wine and charge a corkage fee as a convenience charge for opening and serving the wine brought in by the customer. Facilities licensed as an art shop under this chapter may also allow customers to bring in a bottle or bottles of wine and/or beer subject to the specific provisions governing the operation of an art shop. 
(Ord. No. 2764-001, § 34-186, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 4-87. - Removing a partially consumed bottle of wine from a restaurant. 
A partially consumed bottle of wine purchased with a meal from a restaurant and resealed may be removed from the restaurant by a patron as permitted by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4 and Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 40-6-253(2). 
(Code 2005, § 34-187) 
Sec. 4-88. - Package sales not permitted. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit the package sale of distilled spirits or spirituous liquor. 
(Code 2005, § 34-188) 
Sec. 4-89. - Criminal gangs and criminal activity. 
The Mayor and Council shall have the right to revoke any license or permit issued under this chapter after a hearing if by a preponderance of the evidence it is established that the licensed establishment is participating in helping, fostering, harboring or encouraging the unlawful activities described in section 26-143 or any other criminal activity. 
(Code 2005, § 34-189) 
Secs. 4-90—4-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AUDITS, INSPECTION, PENALTIES AND REVOCATION/SUSPENSION OF LICENSE 

Sec. 4-107. - Records and audits of licensees. 
(a)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available to authorized City representatives for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements. 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees). 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets. 
(4)  Monthly State sales and use tax reports. 
(5)  Daily purchase receipts for liquor, beer and wine. 
(6)  Federal and State income tax returns. 
(b)  The City Clerk and the Lawrenceville Police Department are authorized to conduct an audit of the records and books of any licensee at any time to ensure compliance with this Chapter. The City Clerk or Police Department may designate a City employee or other designated person to perform the audits authorized in this section. 
(c)  The City Clerk, Lawrenceville Police Department or authorized designee conducting an audit shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit not less than 24 hours prior to the audit. 
(d)  A licensee who fails to cooperate with the audit authorized under this section shall be subject to revocation of his license. 
(e)  A licensee who is unable to produce the records required to be maintained by this section shall be subject to revocation of his license. 
(f)  A licensee who produces incomplete, erroneous, or fraudulent records shall be subject to revocation of his license. 
(Code 2005, § 34-190) 
Sec. 4-108. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the Police Department. 
In addition to the audit provisions set forth in section 4-107, sworn officers of the Police Department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverages ordinances of the City during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and State law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other City officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 2005, § 34-191) 
Sec. 4-109. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the City Clerk where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license or for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever the State shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the City license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The City Clerk shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease. 
(c)  Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to immediate license revocation or suspension. 
(d)  The City Clerk shall revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period. 
(e)  The City Clerk shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(f)  The City Clerk may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter at any time such knowledge becomes known to him. 
(g)  An act or omission of a licensee, owner of more than ten percent interest in the licensed establishment, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment willingly or knowingly performed which constitutes a violation of federal or State law or of any provision of this chapter will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of its license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when the City Clerk determines to his own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues; provided, however, in the case of an employee, the City Clerk must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or, under reasonable circumstances should have been known to, the licensee, were condoned by the licensee, or where the licensee has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(h)  Whenever it can be shown that a licensee under this chapter no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned, or whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the City, the license may be suspended or revoked. 
(i)  Wherever this article permits the City Clerk to suspend any license issued under this chapter but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised within the guidelines of this subsection. 
(1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such license. 
(2)  The following factors may be considered on any revocation or suspension as set out in this section: 
a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this chapter and those set by the City Clerk; 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing; 
c.  Impact of the offense on the community; 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by licensee; 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the licensee to take remedial or corrective steps. 
(Code 2005, § 34-192; Ord. No. 2764-001, § 34-192, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 4-110. - License revocation/suspension hearings. 
(a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as provided in this section. This provision does apply to pouring permits for employees. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of his order to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the City Clerk may have a review of a final action by appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the Office of the City Clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the City Clerk and, in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $500.00; except that the filing fee for appeals relating only to pouring permits for employees shall be $50.00. The City Clerk, at his discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it is determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing the appeal. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee by a majority vote. 
(c)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the City Clerk unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the City Clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. 
(d)  Before hearing an appeal, each member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall confirm on the record that he is not related to any owner of the licensed establishment in question in the appeal being considered and that he has no financial interest in the outcome of the appeal. Should any member be unable to truthfully make such confirmation, that member shall not serve on that appeal, and the case shall be heard by the remaining members of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(e)  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be authorized to affirm the recommendation of the City Clerk, reduce a proposed revocation to a suspension for a certain number of days certain, or to reduce the duration of a proposed suspension. 
(f)  The findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be forwarded to the City Clerk within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to notify the appellant of the action of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(g)  The findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; 
(2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole; or 
(3)  Unreasonable. 
(h)  The findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of the finding by certiorari to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County. 
(Code 2005, § 34-193) 
Sec. 4-111. - Notice. 
For the purpose of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by certified mail within three days after the date of deposit in the U.S. mail. 
(Code 2005, § 34-194) 
Sec. 4-112. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who violates any provisions of the sections in this article may, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each offense and/or one year in jail. 
(Code 2005, § 34-195) 
Secs. 4-113—4-137. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATION OF ALCOHOL SALES FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 4-138. - Retail sales of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. 
No beer or wine may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except pursuant to a license and under one of the following categories: 
(1)  In restaurants with a seating capacity of 50 people, excluding stools and counter seating, regularly serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen. A full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the Gwinnett County Health and Fire Departments. Such restaurant shall regularly serve food every hour it is open and derive at least as much gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food as it derives from the sale of beer and wine. 
(2)  In indoor commercial recreation establishments. 
(3)  In an indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center. 
(4)  In zoning districts where such restaurants are conforming uses or where such establishments are incident to a motel. 
(5)  In a performing arts facility where the facility meets the definition for a performing arts facility set forth in section 4-2 (establishment located in the Downtown Overlay District; operates in a building owned by the City of Lawrenceville, has its principal objective or business as the presentation of live music, mainline dramatic arts, plays, theatre productions and stand-up comedy; and does not feature, show, allow, promote or advertise adult businesses as defined and regulated in chapter 10 of this Code, including, but not limited to, adult dancing establishments, adult mini-motion picture theatres, adult motion picture theatres, adult motion picture arcades and erotic dance establishments); provided, however, that a performing arts facility license shall not authorize the licensee to serve or sell alcohol in any location other than the performing arts facility. 
a.  A business meeting the definition of a performing arts facility under this Code shall be eligible to apply for and be considered for an annual license to allow alcohol consumption on the premises from the City Clerk in the same manner as set forth in article II of this chapter. 
b.  A business granted a performing arts facility license for consumption of alcohol on the premises shall be required to obtain all required licenses from the State and to follow all State and local laws, ordinances and rules governing the consumption of alcohol on the premises. 
c.  Alcohol may also be sold and/or dispensed at a performing arts facility as defined in section 4-2 by a licensed caterer in the same manner set forth in section 4-144 without the need for the facility or the caterer to obtain a performing arts facility license. 
d.  In addition to the hours of sale requirements set out in section 4-139, alcohol may not be dispensed at a performing arts facility earlier than one hour before the start of a performance or later than one hour after the performance has ended. 
(6)  In a wine shop under the conditions set forth in section 4-147. 
(Code 2005, § 34-200) 
Sec. 4-139. - Hours of sale of beer/wine for consumption on the premises. 
(a)  Beer and/or wine shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:55 a.m. Monday through Saturday. It shall be unlawful for businesses holding a consumption on the premises license to fail to remove from its retail service area any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups, or any other containers used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages or to otherwise allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises one hour or more after the business is prohibited from selling, dispensing, or delivering alcoholic beverages to any customer, patron or guest of the business. 
(b)  No consumption on the premises license holder shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any beer/malt beverage or wine at any time in violation of State law, local ordinance or regulation, or special order of the Mayor and Council. 
(c)  The sale of beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in: 
(1)  Any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served; 
(2)  In any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging; and 
(3)  An indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center under the standards established by the required special use permit. 
(d)  Beer and/or wine may be sold for consumption on the premises from the hours of 12:00 midnight to 2:00 a.m. on any Monday which is New Year's Day, January 1 of any year. 
(Code 2005, § 34-201) 
Sec. 4-140. - Distilled spirits consumption on the premises. 
(a)  No distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except: 
(1)  In restaurants regularly serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen. A full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the Gwinnett County Health and Fire Departments. Such restaurant shall regularly serve food every hour it is open and derive at least as much gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food as it derives from the sale of distilled spirits. 
(2)  In indoor commercial recreation establishments. 
(3)  In an indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center. 
(4)  In zoning districts where such restaurants are conforming uses or where such establishments are incident to a motel. 
(5)  In a performing arts facility which holds a performing arts facility alcohol license and which meets all of the definitional requirements set forth in this chapter; provided, however, that a performing arts facility license shall not authorize the licensee to serve or sell alcohol in any location other than the performing arts facility. 
(b)  Any restaurant or indoor commercial recreational establishments where distilled spirits are to be consumed on the premises shall also meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Such establishments shall have a seating capacity of at least 50 people, excluding stools and counters; 
(2)  The establishment shall be used, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and meals are actually served; 
(3)  Such establishment shall serve two meals per day for at least six days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted with the serving of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises as incidental thereto. Eating establishments serving full course meals during an extended period of not less than six hours per day at least six days per week shall be deemed to be serving two meals per day. 
(Code 2005, § 34-202) 
Sec. 4-141. - Distilled spirits consumption on the premises hours and days of sale and additional restrictions. 
(a)  Distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption on the premises except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:55 a.m. Monday through Saturday. It shall be unlawful for businesses holding a consumption on the premises license to fail to remove from its retail service area any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups, or any other containers used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages or to otherwise allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises one hour or more after the business is prohibited from selling, dispensing, or delivering alcoholic beverages to any customer, patron or guest of the business. 
(b)  No consumption on the premises license holder shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any distilled spirits at any time in violation of State law, local ordinance or regulation, or special order of the Mayor and Council. 
(c)  The sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises is permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in: 
(1)  Any licensed restaurant which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served; 
(2)  Any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging; and 
(3)  An indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center under the standards established by the required special use permit. 
(d)  Distilled spirits may be sold for consumption on the premises from 12:00 midnight to 2:00 a.m. on any Monday which is New Year's Day, January 1 of any year. 
(e)  The only advertisement or sign indicating that distilled spirits may be consumed on the premises shall be a menu stating the name, brand or type of beverage served and the price per serving. No other sign may be displayed either within or without the eating establishment indicating that distilled spirits are sold or may be consumed on the premises. 
(f)  Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell any alcoholic beverage by the package or bottle. 
(Code 2005, § 34-203) 
Sec. 4-142. - No consumption outside premises. 
Except as allowed in sections 4-70 and 4-146, the following restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises with open alcoholic beverages, and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open beverages are sold and carried out. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the carrying out of wine or malt beverages for consumption at a publicly owned or privately owned golf course. 
(2)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 2005, § 34-204) 
Sec. 4-143. - Noise from establishments prohibited. 
Noise will not be allowed that can be heard outside the physical boundaries of establishments licensed under this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 34-205) 
Sec. 4-144. - Licensed caterers. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, a licensed caterer shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of a duly authorized catered event held at one of the following locations: 
(1)  Performing arts facilities as defined in this chapter; 
(2)  Indoor publicly owned civic and cultural centers as defined in this chapter (the City-owned Oakes House, and the Historic Courthouse); 
(3)  Indoor special event facilities as defined in this chapter; and 
(4)  An authorized outdoor event which has been granted a special use permit in accordance with section 4-70(b)(3). 
(b)  A licensed caterer authorized under this section must be a retail dealer licensed pursuant to State law and must possess the following licenses and permits: 
(1)  A license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises issued by the city or another licensing jurisdiction; 
(2)  An alcoholic beverage catering license issued by the City or another licensing jurisdiction; and 
(3)  An off-premises permit for the specific event being catered. 
(c)  All licensed alcoholic beverage caterers desiring to engage in activities permitted by this section shall make written application to the City Clerk for the appropriate off-premises permit. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the name, address and telephone number of the applicant; the date, address and time of the proposed catered event and the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's State license number. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. If an applicant has had his license to sell alcohol by the drink for consumption on the premises issued by another jurisdiction, the application shall be accompanied by an off-premises permit fee of $50.00. If the application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its approval, the license fee (without interest) shall be refunded. If an applicant has had his license to sell alcohol by the drink for consumption on the premises issued by the City, such off-premises permit fee is waived. However, such permit must still be obtained. 
(d)  The City Clerk shall have authority to prescribe forms for applications. Failure to furnish any requested data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(e)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an original or renewal application for an off-premises permit shall be cause for the denial or revocation thereof. 
(f)  If such off-premises permit is granted by the City Clerk, it shall be good only for the specific event at the specified address and time set forth in the application, not in excess of five days. 
(g)  Except as set forth in this section, an off-premises permit holder must comply with all other provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 34-206; Ord. No. 2016-30, 12-14-2016 ) 
Sec. 4-145. - Pouring permit required. 
(a)  No person shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or mix alcoholic beverages, or serve in any managerial position, by an establishment holding a license under this chapter until such person has applied for and received a permit from the City of Lawrenceville Police Department, indicating that the person is eligible and has been issued a pouring permit. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of host, bus boy, cook, or dishwasher. Poured alcoholic beverages shall be transported from the point of dispensing to the customer only by employees that possess a City of Lawrenceville pouring permit. 
(c)  No permit shall be processed until such time as a signed application has been filed with the Police Department, and a fee as established by the Mayor and Council has been paid. The application shall be made on forms approved by the Police Chief. 
(d)  The Police Chief or his designee shall conduct a background check on each applicant to determine whether the applicant is eligible to hold a permit. If it is found that the person is not eligible for a permit, the Police Chief or his designee shall notify the person, in writing, that he is not eligible to receive a permit, the cause of such denial and the right to appeal. 
(e)  No person shall be granted a pouring permit if the Police Chief or his designee determines that such person has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, keeping a place of prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual-related crime within a period of five years prior to the date of application or the applicant remains on parole or probation for a violation of such a crime or any felony. Completed sentences under the Georgia First Offender Act shall not apply to such consideration. A person's first time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a City or County ordinance shall not, by itself, make a person ineligible for an alcohol pouring permit. An applicant who is found to have falsified an application or any information therein shall be denied a permit. 
(f)  An alcohol pouring permit shall be issued for a period of one calendar year from the date of the original application. The alcohol pouring permit must be in the possession of the holder while the holder is working at the licensed establishment. This permit must be available for inspection by members of the Police Department or other City representatives. 
(g)  All permits issued through administrative error shall be terminated and seized by the Police Chief or his designee. 
(h)  Replacement permits may be issued upon paying one-half of the fees charged for an original permit. The original expiration date shall remain in force for any replacement permit. 
(i)  All permits issued under this chapter remain the property of the Police Department and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer or designee of the Police Department. 
(j)  No licensee shall allow any employee or manager required to hold a permit to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in his possession a current valid City pouring permit. For new employees, a receipt issued by the City Police Department may be used for a maximum of 30 days from the date of its issue. Licensees are required by this chapter to inspect and verify that each employee required to do so has in his possession a valid current alcohol pouring permit. 
(k)  The penalty for service of alcoholic beverages to a minor by an individual who holds an alcoholic beverage pouring permit shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, a minimum fine of $250.00; 
(2)  For the second offense and subsequent violations, a minimum fine of $500.00; 
(3)  Any individual holding an alcoholic beverage pouring permit where three or more violations of serving alcoholic beverages to a minor have occurred within any 36-month period shall be punished as follows: 
a.  For the third offense within any 36-month period, suspension of the alcoholic beverage pouring permit for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
b.  For the fourth and any subsequent violation within any 36-month period, suspension of the alcoholic beverage pouring permit for a period not to exceed one year. 
(Code 2005, § 34-207) 
Sec. 4-146. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales may be made by a licensed consumption on-premises establishment in a patio/open sales area type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the City Clerk. 
(b)  The requirement for approval is that the patio/open area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. 
(c)  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of 3.5 feet above ground level. It does not have to be solid nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. It must be submitted to and approved by the head of the City's Planning and Zoning Department. 
(d)  The only exit from this type area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through an approved fire exit, not for general public use unless an emergency exists. The fire exit shall be of the type that sounds an alarm so that the establishment will be alerted in the event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas of such hotel or motel, provided that such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this section, any licensed consumption on premises establishment permitted to sell alcoholic beverages in a patio/open sales area type environment which is located in the Courthouse Square—Sub Area, as defined in Attachment (4) of the zoning ordinance, shall not be required to provide public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. These establishments may allow direct access to the patio/open area from the street or an area located outside of the main licensed premises, provided that public ingress/egress is through one specified entrance and that the remainder of the patio/open area is enclosed as required by subsection (b) and subsection (c) as set forth above. The patio/open area shall be clearly separated from the public sidewalk or right of way, shall be under the exclusive control of the licensed establishment, and the licensed establishment shall monitor the customers in the patio/open area to prevent customers from leaving the patio/open area with an open drink. 
(Code 2005, § 34-208; Ord. No. 2016-28, 11-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 4-147. - Wine shops. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the City Clerk is authorized to issue a wine shop license to businesses: 
(1)  Located in the Downtown Overlay District; 
(2)  Which meet all other license application requirements set forth in this chapter; and 
(3)  Which operate primarily as a retail package dealer and earn a minimum of 70 percent of annual gross revenue from package sales of wine. 
(b)  A wine shop established under this section may: 
(1)  Sell and serve beer and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises except on Sundays; and 
(2)  Sell wine and beer by the package. 
(c)  Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a wine shop from serving food, provided that it meets all of the requirements for restaurants in this Code and is properly permitted by the City. 
(d)  All other existing wine shops currently operating under a special use permit shall be afforded the rights of a wine shop described in this section, though no other conditions of an existing special use permit shall be impacted. A change of ownership shall terminate any rights extended by a special use permit issue to a wine shop and a new owner shall be required to obtain a new special use permit to continue to operate a wine shop. 
(Code 2005, § 34-209) 
Sec. 4-148. - Private clubs. 
(a)  Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the City governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations of the City. 
(b)  Veteran organizations, fraternal organizations, and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the state income tax law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food as a condition of licensing for consumption on the premises. However, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. 
(c)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises at a private club except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:55 a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(d)  No private club consumption on the premises license holder shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages at any time in violation of State law, local ordinance or regulation, or special order of the Mayor and Council. It shall be unlawful for private clubs holding a consumption on the premises license to fail to remove from its service area any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups, or any other containers used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages or to otherwise allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises one hour or more after the club is prohibited from selling, dispensing, or delivering alcoholic beverages to any customer, patron or guest. 
(e)  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is permitted in a private club on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in: 
(1)  Any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served; 
(2)  Any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging; and 
(3)  An indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center under the standards established by the required special use permit. 
(f)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises at a private club from 12:00 midnight to 2:00 a.m. on any Monday which is New Year's Day, January 1 of any year. 
(Code 2005, § 34-210) 
Sec. 4-149. - Art shop. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the City Clerk is authorized to issue an art shop license to businesses: 
(1)  Located in the Downtown Overlay District; 
(2)  Which meet all other license application requirements set forth in this chapter; and 
(3)  Which operate as an art shop. 
(b)  An art shop established under this section may allow customers to bring in bottles of wine and beer to be consumed on the premises, except on Sundays. 
(1)  Any wine and/or beer served on the premises shall only be served by an employee of the art shop otherwise authorized to serve alcoholic beverages under this article. 
(2)  No customer of an art shop shall consume more than two six-ounce servings of wine or two 12-ounce servings of beer during a three-hour period or four six-ounce servings of wine or four 12-ounce servings of beer within a single business day. 
(3)  The serving of wine and/or beer in an art shop shall be subject to all of the provisions related to the service of other alcoholic beverages under this article, including, but not limited to, the prohibition of serving wine or beer to anyone under 21 years of age or to anyone intoxicated. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit an art shop from serving food, provided that it meets all of the requirements provided in this Code and is properly permitted by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2764-001, § 34-211, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 4-150. - Brewpub. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to own or operate a brewpub without first obtaining a brewpub license from the City Clerk pursuant to the same procedures as are set forth in this chapter, and each brewpub license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements. 
(b)  A brewpub license authorizes the holder of such license to: 
(1)  Manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 10,000 barrels of beer in a calendar year solely for retail on the premises and solely in draft form in an open container; 
(2)  Operate a restaurant that shall be the sole retail outlet for such beer. Such outlet may offer for sale any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are separately authorized for consumption on the premises by this chapter, including wine, distilled spirits, and malt beverages, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler for consumption on the premises only; and provided, further, that in addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brewpub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages from licensed wholesalers for consumption on the premises only; and 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, sell up to a maximum of 1,000 barrels annually of such beer to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution to retailers and retail consumption dealers. 
(c)  Possession of a brewpub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining another license authorized under this chapter permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for the same premises. 
(d)  A brewpub license does not authorize the holder of such license to sell alcoholic beverages at retail by package for consumption off the premises. 
(e)  A brewpub licensee shall not offer or permit any free sampling of beer by its customers on the premises. 
(f)  A brewpub licensee shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed as manufacturers, retailers, and, where applicable, wholesalers. 
(g)  A brewpub licensee shall measure all beer manufactured on the premises and otherwise comply with applicable regulations respecting excise and enforcement tax determination of such beer as required. 
(h)  Except as set forth in this section, a brewpub license holder shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2764-001, § 34-212, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 4-151. - Growler shop. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to own or operate a growler shop without first obtaining a growler shop license from the City Clerk pursuant to the same procedures as are set forth in this article, and each growler shop license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local requirements. 
(b)  A growler shop shall be located in the Downtown Overlay District and shall be engaged only in the sale of growlers. Growlers may not be sold at any establishment engaged in the sale of distilled spirits. 
(c)  The filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or other provisions of this article, provided that after the growler is filled the growler must be sealed on the licensed premises with a tamper-proof plastic cap and may not thereafter be opened or consumed on the premises. Licensees or employees of the growler shop may fill or refill growlers with draft beer at a growler shop as provided in this section in a growler not smaller than 12 ounces in volume and not to exceed 68 ounces in volume. 
(d)  A growler shop shall be authorized to sell samples of draft beer to patrons over the age of 21 years. Samples shall not exceed three ounces in volume nor shall any one individual be offered more than four samples within a 24-hour period. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a growler shop from serving food or other non-alcoholic products, provided that it meets all of the requirements provided in this Code and is properly permitted by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2764-001, § 34-213, 8-6-2012) 
Secs. 4-152—4-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE 

Sec. 4-171. - Type of retail establishment where permitted. 
No beer or wine shall be sold at retail package except in the following establishments: 
(1)  In retail establishments devoted principally to the retail sale of groceries and food products and which are located in zoning districts in which food establishments are permitted as a conforming use; 
(2)  In retail establishments devoted principally to the retail sale of fish bait and fishing equipment and which are located in zoning districts in which retail sale of fish bait and fishing equipment are a permitted use; 
(3)  In a licensed wine shop as set forth in section 4-147; or 
(4)  In a licensed beer growler establishment where beer and malt beverages are sold. 
(Code 2005, § 34-250) 
Sec. 4-172. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  No retail license holder holding a license under this article for sale of beer/malt beverages, wine, or both, shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any beer/malt beverage or wine except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(b)  No retail license holder shall furnish, sell, or offer for sale any beer/malt beverage or wine at any time in violation of State law, local ordinance or regulation, or special order of the Mayor and Council. 
(Code 2005, § 34-251) 
Sec. 4-173. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices. 
Retailers shall indicate plainly by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed the prices of all beer and wine exposed or offered for sale. 
(Code 2005, § 34-252) 
Sec. 4-174. - Quantity sale requirements. 
Single cans or bottles or other containers of alcoholic beverages may be sold. 
(Code 2005, § 34-253) 
Secs. 4-175—4-201. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WHOLESALERS 

Sec. 4-202. - License required. 
Any person, firm or corporation designed to sell at wholesale any beer or wine in the incorporated area of the City shall make application to the City Clerk for a license to do so, which application shall be in writing on the forms authorized and prescribed by the City Clerk. No beer or wine shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the City except by a duly licensed wholesaler in licensed vehicles. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the vehicles. 
(Code 2005, § 34-300) 
Secs. 4-203—4-227. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - HOTEL-MOTEL IN-ROOM SERVICE 

Sec. 4-228. - License. 
(a)  The term "in-room service" means the provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel-motel guestroom which contains beer and/or wine only, which is provided upon written request of the guest and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of the beer and/or wine contained therein is final at the time requested except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. 
(b)  Any hotel-motel that acquires this in-room service shall also be required to obtain a consumption on the premises license and meet all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  No hotel-motel shall be authorized to provide in-room service until it has been issued a special license to do so. A license fee of $100.00 shall be imposed to provide only beer and/or wine by in-room service. 
(d)  The sale of beer and/or wine by in-room service shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations relative to the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages, except as provided otherwise in this article. 
(e)  Keys for in-room service shall only be sold to guests between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday. 
(Code 2005, § 34-350) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MECHANICAL/COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND AMUSEMENT GAME ROOMS 

Sec. 6-19. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. §16-12-20(2), are prohibited in the City, and the ownership, use, or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to State law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a) through (k). 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 1, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-20. - Gambling places prohibited. 
Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(3), are prohibited in the City, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to State law. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 2, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement game room means any location, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b), (c) or (d), where one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are operated that permit non-cash redemption, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(1)(A), (B), (C), or a combination thereof. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) and any applicable regulations of the State of Georgia. 
(1)  Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
a.  Pinball machines; 
b.  Console machines; 
c.  Video games; 
d.  Crane machines; 
e.  Claw machines; 
f.  Pusher machines; 
g.  Bowling machines; 
h.  Novelty arcade games; 
i.  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
j.  Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
k.  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
l.  Basketball machines; 
m.  Shuffleboard machines; 
n.  Kiddie ride games; 
o.  Skee-Ball &reg; machines; 
p.  Air hockey machines; 
q.  Roll down machines; 
r.  Trivia machines; 
s.  Laser games; 
t.  Simulator games; 
u.  Virtual reality machines; 
v.  Maze games; 
w.  Racing games; 
x.  Coin-operated pool table or coin-operated billiard table, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1(3); and 
y.  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. 
(2)  The term "coin-operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
a.  Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; 
b.  Vending machines which, for payment of money, dispense products or services; 
c.  Gas and electric meters; 
d.  Pay telephones; 
e.  Pay toilets; 
f.  Cigarette vending machines; 
g.  Coin-operated vending machines; 
h.  Coin-operated scales; 
i.  Coin-operated gumball machines; 
j.  Coin-operated parking meters; 
k.  Coin-operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
l.  Coin-operated massage beds; and 
m.  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
Location means a business within the City that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the City relating to occupation taxes and business licenses. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 3, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-22. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room without first having obtained a license and without first having paid the applicable occupation tax required under this article. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 4, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-23. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the City shall be made to the City Clerk upon a form to be supplied by the City Clerk for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and age of the applicant and the date of the application; 
(2)  Address or place where the bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other businesses operated at that place or places. 
(3)  Name and address of the owner of the machines and a copy of the owner's master license; 
(4)  Name and address of any other business owned or operated by the applicant within the corporate limits of the City; 
(5)  List of any other licenses or permits from the City held by the applicant. 
(b)  Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the City Official or employee shall provide the licensee with a copy of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The City shall not require a fee for licensure or registration of an amusement game room. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupation taxes in accordance with chapters 10 and 34. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 5, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-24. - Occupation tax required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room without first having completed the occupation tax certificate form, paid the required occupational tax and without first having obtained the license required under this article. A copy of said certificate/license shall be prominently displayed within the business location at all times. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 6, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-25. - Distance. 
Every amusement game room in the City shall comply with the proximity provision for businesses licensed to sell alcohol, set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 7, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-26. - Number of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines at a location. 
No amusement game room in the City shall offer to the public more than six bona fide coin-operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2), or both at the same location. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 8, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-27. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin-operated amusement machines and from business. 
Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by City Officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. Income from the amusement games shall not constitute more than 50 percent of the income from the location. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the 50 percent of income requirement. The licensee shall forward to the City Clerk a copy of each monthly report required in this section on a quarterly basis. Said reports for the preceding three months shall be received by the City Clerk no later than 25th day of April, July, October, and January of the following year. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 9, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-28. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or similar words: 
"GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE." 
(b)  Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the City conspicuously and permanently. 
(c)  The owner or possessor of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine shall inform each business owner or operator of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. Additionally, the owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 10, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-29. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the City only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-78. In addition, the business owner where the machines are available for play by the public must pay a location license fee in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71(a.1) and (b). The City Clerk shall notify the Georgia Lottery Corporation of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71 or 50-27-78. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 11, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-30. - Penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
(a)  In addition to penalties set out in the O.C.G.A. provisions for failure to comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a) through (i), the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after a hearing before the Mayor and Council, may be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Minimum penalty . Suspension for not less than 15 days of the owner's or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the City for not less than 15 days. 
(2)  Maximum penalty . Permanent revocation of the owner's or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the City for not more than one year. 
(b)  Penalties for violation of the provisions of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in the Municipal Court of the City are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum penalty . Fine not less than $100.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Maximum penalty . Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. 
Sec. 6-31. - Fines and penalties imposed by Judge. 
The fines listed in the penalties for violation of this article may be imposed by the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City. Suspension or revocation of the owner's or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the City may be imposed by the Mayor and Council after a hearing. 
Sec. 6-32. - Violation of an order suspending/revoking license punishable by fine and/or imprisonment. 
Offering one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machine games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for the offering of any amusement game at the location is punishable, after conviction in the Municipal Court of the City, by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 12, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-33. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin-operated machines in violation of law or ordinance. 
(a)  The Municipal Court of the City is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing such bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine. 
(1)  Minimum penalty . Fine not less than $100.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Maximum penalty . Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. 
(b)  The Municipal Court shall have authority to place any person sentenced under this section on probation for the payment of fines for a period up to one year. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 13, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-34. - Operating regulations. 
All businesses operating as an amusement center under this article shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited . All machines shall, at all times, be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)  Inspection. The Police Chief or his designee shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such machines are operated or set up for operating, and shall inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(3)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(4)  Loitering. As used in this section, the term "loitering" means remaining idle in essentially one location and includes the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licensed to operate an amusement center to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated under this section in such a manner as to: 
a.  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
b.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. 
(5)  Shirt and shoes required. All proprietors shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their premises. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 14, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-35. - Revocation of license. 
In the event that it comes to the attention of the Mayor and Council that an amusement center has created a nuisance to the surrounding community or the operator or proprietor has violated any provision of this section, the following procedure will be followed: 
(1)  The City Clerk shall issue a notice of objection which shall include the address of the location and the specific reasons why the amusement center in question is alleged to be a nuisance or alleged to be in violation of any provision of this section. The City Clerk will then notify the proprietor that a notice of objection has been filed and will set a date for a hearing before the Mayor and Council. Extensions and necessary investigations will be granted and conducted at the discretion of the City Clerk. 
(2)  At the time of the hearing, any resident, the operator, the proprietor and the City Clerk or other witnesses may be heard. Thereafter, the Mayor and Council shall issue a notice of decision which will call for the dismissal of the objection, removal of the machines or such other remedy as they deem appropriate under the circumstances that are consistent with the purpose of this section. 
(3)  The decision of the Mayor and Council shall be in writing, shall state the reasons for their decision and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(4)  The decision of the Mayor and Council shall be binding upon the proprietor and operator of the amusement center under consideration, subject to appeal to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County by a writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 15, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-36. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. 
(a)  Licenses required in this article are nontransferable. All businesses that have bona fide coin-operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current license issued by the City. 
(b)  The issued license shall not be transferred to another owner at the same site within the City. A new owner or proprietor must first obtain a new license if they are going to operate in the same or different location in the City. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 16, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 6-37. - Enforcing officer. 
The Police Chief or his designee is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and shall execute all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. AI-2013-165, § 17, 6-3-2013) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Adoption of Gwinnett County Animal Control Ordinance. 
The City Council adopts and incorporates by reference the Animal Control Ordinance within the Gwinnett County Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10 , Articles 1 and 2, as may be amended from time to time. For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing animals, including dangerous dogs, the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City. 
( Ord. No. 2015-39 , § 7(a), 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 8-2. - Modifications of terms. 
The aforementioned County Code provisions incorporated by referenced in section 8-1 shall be considered amended in any manner necessary to change the wording to express the intent of adoption and incorporation. "City of Lawrenceville, Georgia" shall replace references to "Gwinnett County." "Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia" shall replace "Board of Commissioners" where appropriate. 
Secs. 8-3—8-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PIT BULLS 

Sec. 8-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation, organization or department owning, possessing, harboring or having the care or custody, whether temporarily or permanently, of a pit bull. 
Pit bull means any pit bull terrier, which shall be defined as any American pit bull terrier or Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog, or any mixed breed of dog which contains, as an identifiable element of its breeding the breed of American pit bull terrier or Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire terrier as to be identifiable as partially of the breed of American pit bull terrier or Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire bull terrier. 
(Code 2005, § 30-109(a)) 
Sec. 8-24. - Regulation of pit bulls. 
(a)  No person shall harbor, keep or maintain within the City limits any pit bull unless the pit bull is currently registered and licensed by the City of Lawrenceville Police Department. Owners shall register these dogs and comply with all the requirements of this article. This prohibition shall not be applied to animals being transported through the City limits where the animal enters and leaves the City within a one-hour period of time. 
(b)  A pup born to a female pit bull shall be licensed and registered pursuant to this article. The owner shall have six months from the birth of the dog to register the animal with the City of Lawrenceville Police Department. 
(c)  Any person having knowledge which he believes constitutes probable cause to believe that another is harboring, keeping or maintaining a pit bull which was not registered with and licensed by the City on or before October 1, 2003, shall file with the Lawrenceville Police Department a sworn affidavit setting forth the basis on which they believe the animal to be a pit bull, the name and address of the owner of the dog and a description of the dog. The Police Department shall, upon receipt of such affidavit, determine: 
(1)  If the dog was licensed on or before October 1, 2003; and 
(2)  If the dog is currently registered as a pit bull pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  If the dog was not registered and licensed with the City, or not currently registered pursuant to the provisions of this article, the City Police Department shall serve notice upon the owner of the alleged pit bull, including the requirement that the owner shall bring said alleged pit bull to the City of Lawrenceville Police Department or such other location within the City as directed by the City of Lawrenceville Police Department for inspection to determine whether this dog is a pit bull by definition as set forth in this article. The determination whether the dog is a pit bull shall be made by a licensed veterinarian designated from time to time by the Police Chief as the official veterinarian of the City. 
(e)  If the owner desires to challenge the determination, the owner may file an appeal to the Municipal Court within five days of the determination asking for a review of the determination by the veterinarian. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall conduct a full de novo hearing on the issue and shall issue a final determination. In the event the dog is determined to be a pit bull as set forth by definition in this article, the City Police Department shall cite the owner of the alleged pit bull in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 2005, § 30-109(a), (c)) 
Sec. 8-25. - Registration. 
(a)  All owners of pit bulls shall annually, on or before April 15 of each year, register their dog, provide a current color photograph of the dog to the City of Lawrenceville Police Department and pay a registration fee of $50.00 per dog. The tag and bright red collar are to give notice that the animal is properly registered and that it is a potentially dangerous animal. 
(b)  An owner of a pit bull who fails to register the dog is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100.00 or more than $250.00 per day. 
(c)  An owner of a pit bull who registers but neglects to have the tag and red collar worn by the dog at all times is subject to a forfeiture of not less than $25.00 or more than $150.00 per day. 
(d)  A collar may be removed from a pit bull for grooming or purposes of other care when the dog is secured indoors or in an approved pen. 
(Code 2005, § 30-109(f)) 
Sec. 8-26. - Requirements of pit bull dogs. 
(a)  While on the owner's property, a pit bull must be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure must have a minimum dimension of five feet by ten feet and must have secure sides and a secure top. Such pen or structure shall prevent the dog from being within 25 feet from the boundary line of the property, and shall be maintained in the rear yard of the property as defined by the City of Lawrenceville's Zoning Ordinance. If it has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two feet. The enclosure must also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
(b)  The owner or keeper shall display a sign on his premises facing out from all sides of the premises warning that there is a potentially dangerous dog on the property. This sign should be visible and capable of being read from a public highway or thoroughfare or within 20 feet of its placement. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a symbol warning children who cannot read of the presence of a dangerous dog. 
(c)  A pit bull may be off the owner's premises if it is muzzled and restrained by an approved lead or chain not exceeding three feet in length and is under the control of an adult, able-bodied person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any person or animal. 
(d)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to animals owned by law enforcement agencies and used for law enforcement purposes. 
(Code 2005, § 30-109(g)) 
Sec. 8-27. - Apprehension and impoundment. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of such persons, as from time to time may be designated by resolution of the City Council, to apprehend any unlicensed pit bulls. The City Police Department shall, whenever possible, see that such dogs are transferred to the designated City veterinarian at the earliest possible date, where the dogs may be taken care of and reclaimed by the owner under the rules and regulations of said veterinarian. When the dog is impounded by the City before being transferred to a kennel, the owner reclaiming the dog shall be required to pay $50.00 to the City. All costs of housing the dog shall be the obligation of the owner and must be paid before the dog will be released. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the City Police Department and such other persons, as from time to time may be designated by resolution of the City Council, to apprehend, any pit bulls running at large. Any pit bulls found running at large shall be impounded and may be returned to its owner only upon proof of registration of the pit bull. A police officer may shoot a dog if the dog attacks the officer or approaches the officer in a menacing fashion so that the officer believes that the dog is about to attack. 
(c)  In any event, when a pit bull is impounded by the City, the City shall give notice to the owner of the impoundment and advise the owner whether and under what circumstances the dog may be redeemed. The owner of any animal impounded, confined or destroyed pursuant to the terms of this article shall be responsible for all costs of such confinement, impoundment or destruction. 
(Code 2005, § 30-109(h)) 
Sec. 8-28. - Removal of pit bull pending litigation. 
Whenever any person is charged with harboring a pit bull as defined in this article, that person shall, to the satisfaction of the Court, remove said dog from the City until the trial of the citation. If the owner fails to remove the dog within 48 hours of the service of the citation, the City Police Department shall impound the dog until the trial on the citation. If the dog is determined, by plea or trial, to be an unregistered pit bull provided by this article, it shall not be returned to, or kept in, the City. Any dog returned to or kept in the City after being determined to be a pit bull constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Code 2005, § 30-109(i)) 
Sec. 8-29. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or by imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. This article shall not be deemed to be violated unless the alleged violator knew, or should have known, that, after a reasonable inquiry, the dog, which is the subject matter of the alleged violation, is an unregistered pit bull dog under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation of this article occurs or continues. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates this article shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care, and expert testimony fees necessitated by enforcement of this article. 
(Code 2005, § 30-109(j)) 
Sec. 8-30. - Repealer. 
This article is adopted in addition to the provisions that have adopted the Gwinnett County Animal Control Ordinance. It is the intent that this article be interpreted consistently with the Gwinnett County Animal Control Ordinance, and that no section of the Gwinnett County Animal Control Ordinance is being repealed by the adoption of these additional regulations. 
(Code 2005, § 30-109(l)) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Title. 
The title of this chapter shall be the "City of Lawrenceville Property Maintenance Ordinance" and may be cited hereinafter as "this chapter." 
(Code 2005, § 17-101) 
Sec. 10-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum requirements and standards for premises and structures in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, order and general welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(Code 2005, § 17-102) 
Sec. 10-3. - Scope. 
This chapter shall apply to all existing structures and premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for existing structures and premises. 
(Code 2005, § 17-103) 
Sec. 10-4. - Interchangeability. 
Words stated in the present tense include the future. Words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. Words stated in the singular number include the plural and the plural singular. 
(Code 2005, § 17-104) 
Sec. 10-5. - Definitions. 
Terms not defined in this section shall have their meaning as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, the Development Regulations, and the Construction Code, or in the absence of such definition, terms shall have their common dictionary definition. Whenever the terms "dwelling unit," "premises," "building," "rooming house," "rooming unit," or "story" are stated in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the term "or any part thereof." The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
Bathroom means a room containing plumbing fixtures, including a bathtub or shower. 
Bedroom means any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
Closing means causing a property to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Title 16, Chapter 13, Article 2, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Exterior property means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Floor area means the area of a given room as measured from wall face to wall face, or in the case where an obstruction (cabinet, appliance, etc.), the face of that obstruction. 
Garbage means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Habitable space means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
Interested party means the property owner, those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the Title Standards of the State Bar of Georgia, those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9, and any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the County Courthouse or by the Clerk of the Court. The term "interested parties" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected, and persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Junk vehicle means any vehicle, automobile, truck, van, trailer of any or type, or contrivance or part thereof which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, stripped, partially stripped, inoperative, abandoned, discarded, or kept parked, stored or maintained on any premises or public right-of-way without a current license plate and/or decal displayed on the vehicle. 
Maintenance means the act of keeping property, structures or vegetation in a proper condition so as to prevent their decline, failure or uncontrolled growth. 
Occupant means any individual living or sleeping in a building or utilizing the space within a building. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the State of Georgia or Gwinnett County as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures thereon. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the Municipality, County, or State relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the County or Municipality. 
Public officer means any person listed in section 10-119. 
Repair means altering or improving a property so as to bring any dwelling, building, or structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and/or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create unsanitary and unsafe conditions which are an endangerment to the public health or safety in or about any property. 
Rubbish/trash means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, including paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches or trunks, yard trimmings, tin, cans, metals, bricks, lumber, concrete, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material. 
Toilet room means a room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
Weeds means all rank vegetative growth, including, but not limited to, kudzu, poison ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, plants of obnoxious odors, other similar unsightly vegetative growths and any invasive exotic plant species. The term "weeds" shall not include cultivated flowers, fruits and vegetables, and gardens. 
Wooded lot means a lot or portion of a lot to be left in its natural state. A wooded lot is not meant to be manicured and usually devoid of grass. 
Yard trimmings means all leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping or maintenance activities. 
(Code 2005, § 17-105; Ord. No. 2015-40 , 11-2-2015; Ord. No. 2017-3, 2-6-2017 ) 
Secs. 10-6—10-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY 

Sec. 10-29. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  The building of fences and walls and growing of hedges may be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard, except for the front yard. In the front yard, only a decorative fence not exceeding four feet in height may be constructed. A decorative fence shall not be made of chainlink, wire or similar unattractive materials. A fence or hedge in the front yard shall not be built along the sides or front edge of any front yard in a way that obstructs the view of persons entering or exiting from any driveway or street. 
(b)  Fences and walls shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition, in good repair, and free from loose or rotting materials. If painted, the paint on such fences and walls shall be maintained without excess wear as evidenced by peeling, chipping, or flaking. Fences and walls shall be kept clean of visible signs of mold, mildew or algae growths. 
(Code 2005, § 17-201) 
Sec. 10-30. - Grass, weeds, and uncultivated vegetation. 
Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation in excess of 12 inches in height. All weeds shall be maintained per this section but shall also be contained so as not to encroach on adjacent properties. Property owners of developed property shall be required to maintain the right-of-way from the property line to the street curb in this same manner. This regulation is not to be applied to undeveloped property or to portions of developed property where the intent is to leave the property in its natural state, nor to allow landscape islands or other designed areas to return to a natural state due to a lack of maintenance. However; the following shall apply to undeveloped properties and portions of developed property where the intent is to leave the property in its natural state: 
(1)  Grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation shall be maintained to a height of less than 12 inches along the right-of-way frontage at a minimum distance of 20 feet interior to the property. 
(2)  Grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation shall be maintained to a height of less than 12 inches along the side and rear property lines at a minimum distance of 20 feet interior to the property when undeveloped property abuts an adjacent developed property to minimize encroachment of undesirable vegetation. 
(3)  Exceptions to subsections (1) and (2) above are required stream and zoning buffers however vegetation within buffers shall be maintained so that it does not encroach onto other properties. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3, 2-6-2017 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-3 , adopted Feb. 6, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2005, § 17-202. 
Sec. 10-31. - Vehicles. 
Capitalized terms in subsections 1—4 of this section shall have the same meanings given in Article VI of the City of Lawrenceville Zoning Code 2005. 
(1)  Residential lots may have a maximum of two business vehicles, provided that any ladders must be removed from the business vehicles while parked at the residence. 
(2)  Commercial vehicles are prohibited in all residential zoning districts. 
(3)  Residential lots may have a maximum of two recreational vehicle(s) provided that no such recreational vehicle exceeds a length of 45 feet and that each is stored or parked completely within a garage or carport, or in the side or rear yard on a driveway or parking area constructed of concrete, asphalt, grasscrete, or other impervious surface at least as wide and long as the vehicle. Any parking area shall be directly adjacent to a paved driveway. The recreational vehicle may be connected to an outlet but may not be occupied. The setback for a recreational vehicle shall be five feet on the side yard and ten feet in the rear yard. A recreational vehicle may not be parked or stored where it would constitute a clear and demonstrable vehicular traffic hazard or be a threat to the public health or safety. 
(4)  Residential lots may have watercraft, provided that each watercraft be 30 feet or less in length, must be stored or parked completely within a garage or carport, or in the side or rear yard on a driveway or parking area constructed of concrete, asphalt, grasscrete, or other impervious surface at least as wide and long as the watercraft. Any parking area shall be directly adjacent to a paved driveway. The setback for watercraft shall be five feet on the side yard and ten feet in the rear yard. Watercraft may not be parked or stored where it would constitute a clear and demonstrable vehicular traffic hazard or be a threat to public health or safety. 
(5)  Junk vehicles shall not be kept, permitted, parked, stored or maintained on any premise or public street right-of-way. Junk vehicles found to be on any public street shall be subject to immediate removal to an impound facility by an officer of the Lawrenceville Police Department. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Junk vehicles, which are kept within a fully enclosed building on property in residential zoning districts provided the owner or occupant of the property is in the process of reconditioning the junk vehicle for personal use; 
b.  Junk vehicles which are kept on property which is properly zoned to allow for such vehicles in accordance with all requirements for the storage of such vehicles. 
( Ord. No. 2015-40 , 11-2-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-40 , adopted Nov. 2, 2015, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2005, § 17-203. 
Sec. 10-32. - Open or outdoor storage. 
The term "outdoor storage" means the storage, outside of a fully enclosed lawful structure, of items, equipment, materials, supplies, merchandise, vending machines or similar items. Outdoor storage is prohibited except for grills, basketball goals, toys, lawn equipment and other like equipment in good operating order that are actually used as a part of, and strictly for the residential purposes of the owner. All lawn equipment shall be stored in the rear or side yard. Basketball goals shall be maintained in good repair and positioned in such a way that those using the goal are not located within the right-of-way. No permanent structures, including, but not limited to, basketball goals, satellite dishes and other permanently anchored structures, shall be constructed within the right-of-way. This section is not intended to, and shall not be interpreted to, prohibit the construction of mailboxes, driveways, walkways, lamp posts, decorative columns, or landscaping within the right-of-way, provided that such structures are located behind the curb line and do not create a traffic hazard. 
(Code 2005, § 17-204; Ord. of 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 10-33. - Trees. 
(a)  Hazardous trees. Dead, dying, damaged or diseased trees shall not be allowed to exist or to be maintained on any premises which are hazardous to persons on adjacent property or to adjacent property. 
(b)  Tree stumps . Tree stumps greater than 12 inches in height above ground level shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises. Exceptions include: 
(1)  Property covered by a valid land-disturbing permit. 
(2)  Undeveloped property and portions of developed property where the intent is to leave the property in its natural state. 
(c)  Tree debris. Felled trees, slash, removed tree limbs, or other portions of any tree shall not be permitted or maintained on the ground on any premises. Exceptions include: 
(1)  Property covered by a valid land-disturbing permit; 
(2)  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three feet; and 
(3)  Undeveloped property and portions of developed property where the intent is to leave the property in its natural state. 
(Code 2005, § 17-205) 
Sec. 10-34. - Swimming pools. 
In addition to any State laws, County ordinances, or health codes which govern the maintenance of residential swimming pools within the City of Lawrenceville, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  All residential swimming pools, when uncovered, shall be maintained in such a manner that the water in the pool is kept clear and free of algae. The bottom of the pool, at its deepest point, shall be visible at all times. 
(2)  When not covered, the filtration system must be operational either continuously or at set intervals as controlled by an electronic timing device to prevent water from becoming stagnant. 
(3)  When covered, the cover shall remain securely affixed and must remain in good repair. Accumulated leaves and tree debris must be removed to ensure the pool cover is visible and to prevent damage or breach of the cover. 
(4)  Stagnant water located within swimming pools or on swimming pool covers conducive to the breeding and harboring of mosquitoes or other insects shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises. 
(Code 2005, § 17-206; Ord. of 9-12-2011) 
Secs. 10-35—10-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDINGS 

Sec. 10-57. - Exterior surface treatment. 
All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, siding, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, window shutters, gutters, and other similar exterior surfaces and trim shall be maintained in good repair. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall have a protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding or masonry joints shall be maintained weather-resistant and watertight. All exterior surfaces shall be kept clean of visible signs of mold, mildew or algae growth. 
(Code 2005, § 17-301) 
Sec. 10-58. - Exterior walls. 
Exterior walls of buildings shall be maintained free from holes, breaks, or loose or rotting materials, and shall be maintained weatherproof and properly surface-coated as needed to prevent deterioration. 
(Code 2005, § 17-302; Ord. of 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 10-59. - Roofs. 
Roofs of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound, in a safe condition and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the interior portions of a building. Roofs and gutters shall be kept free of excessive accumulations of leaves, pine straw, or other debris. 
(Code 2005, § 17-303; Ord. of 9-12-2011) 
Sec. 10-60. - Exterior stairways, decks, porches, and balconies. 
Exterior stairways, decks, porches and balconies, and all appurtenances attached thereto, of buildings shall be maintained so that they are in good repair. 
(Code 2005, § 17-304) 
Sec. 10-61. - Windows. 
Windows of buildings shall be fully supplied and maintained with glass window panes or with a substitute approved by the Director of the Department of Planning, Zoning and Inspections, which are without open cracks or holes. Screens, if provided, shall be securely fastened to the window or window frame. Exceptions include a commercial business that has closed may board up the windows for security for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(Code 2005, § 17-305) 
Sec. 10-62. - Exterior doors and frames. 
Exterior doors of buildings shall be maintained so that they fit reasonably well within their frames so as to substantially prevent rain and wind from entering the building. Exterior door jambs, stops, headers and moldings shall be securely attached to the structure and maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration. Additionally, exterior doors shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in proper working condition. 
(Code 2005, § 17-306) 
Sec. 10-63. - Decorative features. 
Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Code 2005, § 17-307) 
Sec. 10-64. - Accessory use buildings. 
Under no circumstances shall accessory use buildings be constructed or repaired in whole or in part with tarp, or any tarp-like material, vinyl, plastic or PVC. 
(Code 2005, § 17-308) 
Secs. 10-65—10-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 10-87. - Overcrowding. 
(a)  Dwelling units. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more persons than permitted by area requirements set forth in the following table and elsewhere in this section: 

 
1 Living room and dining room spaces may be combined if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living/dining room. 
(b)  Sleeping areas. 
(1)  Area for sleeping purposes. Every person occupying a dwelling unit shall have a sleeping area of no less than 80 square feet of floor area. 
(2)  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens, dining rooms, living rooms, bathrooms, hallways, unfinished basements, garages, and non-heated spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes and may not be used in the calculation of required sleeping space. Furthermore, partial spaces in separate rooms may not be combined to arrive at the required 80 square feet of floor area per occupant. 
(c)  Efficiency units . An efficiency unit is permissible if it meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen area to include a sink, cooking appliance, and refrigeration unit each with at least 30 inches of front clearance; 
(2)  The unit shall include a separate bathroom containing a toilet, sink, and bathtub or shower; 
(3)  The unit shall have no more than three occupants; and 
(4)  The unit shall have a floor area of 220 square feet for up to two occupants and 320 feet for three occupants. These required floor areas are exclusive of the required kitchen and bathroom spaces listed above. 
(d)  Short-term occupancy. This section shall not apply to short-term occupancy which shall not last longer than one week. However, the week limitation may be extended at the discretion of the Police Chief in cases of displacement due to natural or man-made disaster. 
(Code 2005, § 17-401; Ord. No. 2015-33 , 9-9-2015) 
Secs. 10-88—10-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DUTIES OF PROPERTY OWNERS, ENFORCEMENT, UNLAWFUL ACTS, NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND EMERGENCY NUISANCE PROCEDURE 

Sec. 10-118. - Duties of property owner. 
It is the duty of the owner of every property located within the City limits to: 
(1)  Construct and maintain such property in conformance with all applicable codes in force within the City limits, and any such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any property in violation of such codes or ordinances; and 
(2)  Keep such property reasonably clean and free of any materials or conditions which create a health or safety hazard either on such property or to surrounding persons or properties. 
(Code 2005, § 17-501) 
Sec. 10-119. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by the Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning, by the Director's duly authorized representative, or by the City of Lawrenceville Police Department. 
(Code 2005, § 17-502) 
Sec. 10-120. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with, or in violation of, this article. 
(Code 2005, § 17-503) 
Sec. 10-121. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Enforcement shall begin with a written notice of violation provided to the owner, occupant, or party in interest. The notice shall contain a deadline of no less than three and not more than 30 days for compliance, which may be extended by the City. The notice may be delivered personally, sent by first class mail or posted on the property. If the violation continues past the deadline, the City may issue a citation or take such other legal action authorized under this Code. If the owner, occupant or party in interest has received a notice of violation of any provision of this chapter within the preceding 24-month period, no additional notice of violation under this section shall be required before issuing a citation for any subsequent alleged violation of this chapter. 
(b)  In all cases in which the City institutes a complaint pursuant to this Code, a copy of the complaint shall be conspicuously posted at the subject property within three business days of the filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. Furthermore, a copy of the complaint shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  If each owner and party in interest is a resident of the County, service shall be either personal or by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, shall be perfected at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, and a return of service, filed with the Clerk of Court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(2)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this State but resides outside of the County, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in County tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(3)  Nonresidents of this State, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the Sheriff's advertisements appear in such County once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(Code 2005, § 17-504; Ord. No. 2931-001, § 17-504, 10-1-2012) 
Sec. 10-122. - Penalties. 
(a)  Fine and/or sentence . Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the City and shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day, by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed six months in jail, or both a fine and imprisonment or work alternate. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Powers of the Court. The Court shall have the power and authority to order the violation corrected in compliance with this article, and the Court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(c)  Lien imposition . If, after 30 days from the date of the Municipal Court-imposed fine, any person or entity has not paid said fine in full, the City of Lawrenceville shall have the authority to file a lien on the property in violation for the amount of the imposed fine and shall record it with the Gwinnett County Clerk's Office. 
(d)  Other legal remedies . 
(1)  In any case in which a violation of this article has occurred, the City, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(2)  Where a determination is made that the property is in violation of this chapter, and any other codes and laws enforced by the City of Lawrenceville, and all reasonable efforts and means to obtain compliance having been exhausted, the City of Lawrenceville is authorized to effect such compliance at public expense. The cost of effectuating compliance shall constitute a lien upon the property and said lien shall be recorded by the City of Lawrenceville with the Gwinnett County Clerk's Office. 
(Code 2005, § 17-505) 
Sec. 10-123. - Emergency nuisance procedure. 
(a)  Determination . Whenever a request is filed with a public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the City, charging that any building, dwelling, structure, or property: 
(1)  Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, including, but not limited to, defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; uncleanliness, including the accumulation of grass, weeds, trash, junk, or filth, and the violation of any standard set out in this chapter; 
the public officer with whom the request is filed shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific property to determine if such conditions exist under applicable codes. The public officer shall have the authority to enter upon premises to conduct an inspection, provided that such entry is made with the least possible inconvenience to the person in possession. If such an inspection is necessary, the public officer shall endeavor to obtain the permission of the owner to conduct such inspection. If permission is withheld, the public officer may seek the assistance of the City Attorney's Office to obtain an inspection warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The public officer may determine that the property is being used in the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency. 
(b)  Judicial complaint and summons . If the public officer's investigation or inspection confirms that any property meets one or more of the three enumerated standards from subsection (a) of this section, the public officer may file in the Municipal Court a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which the nuisance complained of exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such property pursuant to section 10-122(c). The complaint shall: 
(1)  Identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; 
(2)  Identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and 
(3)  Contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(c)  Notice of violation . Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served in the following manner: At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(1)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the Sheriff's advertisements appear in such County once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(2)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court in the County in which the property, dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(3)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this subsection on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. 
(4)  Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(d)  Time of hearing . The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the Municipal Court at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held no sooner than 15 days and no later than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the Municipal Court. 
(e)  Right to be heard . The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(f)  Order . 
(1)  If, after such notice and hearing, the Court determines that the property in question meets one or more of the standards enumerated in subsection (a) of this section so as to constitute a public nuisance, the Court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order which does one of the following: 
a.  If the repair of the said property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to its present value, the order shall require the owner, within a specified time not to exceed 30 days, to repair such property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to effect a closing of any structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
b.  If the repair of the said property in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value thereof, the order shall require the owner, within a specified time not to exceed 30 days, to demolish and remove the noncompliant dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, in cases in which the nuisance complained of is a dwelling, building, or structure of any kind, the Court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the Court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. Title 43, Chapter 39A, qualified building contractors with a current business license to do work in the County, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations. 
(g)  Remedies of public officer in the event of noncompliance with order. 
(1)  The order entered under subsection (e) of this section shall further provide that, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, demolish, or close the property within the specified time, the public officer may cause such property to be repaired, demolished, or closed. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer is also authorized to file a motion for attachment for contempt against the owner with the Court which issued the order as an alternate or additional remedy. 
(2)  If the public officer chooses to have the work done as ordered on any dwelling building or structure, he shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words, including the Spanish translation: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(h)  Salvage . If the public officer has a structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. Neither the public officer nor the County shall have any liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(i)  Appellate procedure . Where the abatement action does not commence in the Superior Court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a property shall be by direct appeal to the Superior Court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(j)  Alternate remedies. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to limit or impair the authority of public officers or other County employees under existing and future ordinances to issue citations for violations of State minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, and life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and to seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this section. The issuance of a citation for a violation of any such codes shall not be required as a prerequisite to issuing a complaint in rem under this section. 
(Code 2005, § 17-506) 
Sec. 10-124. - Recoupment and collection of costs; lien rights. 
(a)  Lien for costs . The order issued pursuant to section 10-123(f) shall provide that the amount of all costs associated with the abatement action shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of abatement and/or demolition, reasonable attorneys' fees and all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the Municipal Tax Collector or City Revenue Officer, restoration to grade of the real property should it be demolished, and title examination costs. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 10-121(b)(1). The Clerk of Superior Court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the County and enter the lien for costs of abatement on the general execution docket. Such lien should cross-reference the order and include the original caption and case number from the nuisance abatement action. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid in full. 
(b)  Enforcement of lien . 
(1)  Upon a final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer shall transmit to the Municipal Tax Collector or City Revenue Officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Tax Collector or City Revenue Officer to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The Municipal Tax Collector or City Revenue Officer shall remit the amount collected to the general fund of the City. 
(2)  Enforcement of liens may be initiated at any time following receipt by the Municipal Tax Collector or City Revenue Officer of the final determination of costs. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(3)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the County and the Tax Commissioner in the enforcement of the lien. Redemption of the property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(c)  Waiver of lien . The City Council may waive and release any such lien imposed on property of the owner for costs incurred by the City up to the time of the entry of the order and any additional costs incurred subsequent thereto in attempting to bring the property into compliance by entering into a contract with the owner in which the owner agrees to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrates the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Code 2005, § 17-507) 
Secs. 10-125—10-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VACANT, FORECLOSED AND DELINQUENT PROPERTY REGISTRATION SYSTEM 

Sec. 10-147. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Lawrenceville Vacant, Foreclosed and Delinquent Property Ordinance" and may be cited hereinafter as "this article." 
(Ord. No. 2763-001, § 17-601, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 10-148. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish minimum requirements and standards for registration of vacant, foreclosed and/or delinquent property in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, order and general welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(b)  The Council finds that: 
(1)  There is a need to establish a registration system for vacant, foreclosed and delinquent property in order to protect property values for all property owners and to encourage proper upkeep and maintenance of such properties. 
(2)  Due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of vacant, foreclosed and delinquent properties, the property values and quality of life of neighboring properties are negatively impacted. 
(3)  Improperly maintained and secured properties can become a hazard to the health and safety of neighboring properties. 
(4)  Difficulties often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of vacant, foreclosed and delinquent property. This registration system will require owners and agents to provide the city with official information for contacting the party responsible for bringing the property into compliance with applicable provisions of State and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2763-001, § 17-602, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 10-149. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in this State at which he is authorized to accept inquires, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant, foreclosed, or delinquent real property owner. 
Delinquent real property means any improved or unimproved real property on which there have been repeated violations of this Code that remain uncorrected for at least 90 days. 
Director means the Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning or his designee. 
Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property for which a land-disturbance permit has been issued and is held pursuant to a judicial or non-judicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, deed to secure debt, or other security instrument securing debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor. 
Street address means the street or route address and does not mean or include a post office box. 
Vacant real property. 
(1)  The term "vacant real property" means real property that: 
a.  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least 60 days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past 60 days; or 
b.  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
(2)  The term "vacant real property" does not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. 
(Ord. No. 2763-001, § 17-603, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 10-150. - Registration required. 
(a)  The owner of any vacant, foreclosed, or delinquent real property shall maintain an agent for said property in the State of Georgia and shall register the property and the name of the agent with the Director within 14 days of the property becoming vacant, foreclosed, or delinquent. 
(b)  The registration shall utilize a copy of the form developed by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, as may be amended. Generally, this form shall include the following information: 
(1)  The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address. 
(2)  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address. 
(3)  The real property's street address and tax parcel number. 
(4)  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner and the recording information, including deed book and page numbers, at such time as the recording information becomes available, of said instrument. 
(c)  If the property is acquired by foreclosure under power of sale or through a deed in lieu of foreclosure, the owner may file a copy of the deed transferring ownership of the property in lieu of submitting a registration of the required form in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The deed contains the information specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  The deed is filed with the Clerk of Superior Court within 60 days of the transfer. 
(3)  The filing date stamp or a receipt showing payment of the required filing fee with the Superior Court is provided along with a copy of the entire deed. 
(4)  A filing in this manner shall be exempt from the registration fee required in subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  All information required in subsection (b) or (c) of this section shall be kept up to date, and therefore, any change to that information shall be updated through a revised filing with the Director within 30 days of the change in such information. 
(e)  At the time of registration under this article, the owner shall pay an administrative fee as may be established from time to time. 
(f)  The submittals required by this article shall be submitted in paper format until such time as the Director develops a method for electronic submissions. If the Director develops a system for electronic registration under this article, the Director shall determine whether to continue to accept registrations in paper format. 
(g)  Except for the forms created by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, the Director shall create the forms necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. The owner shall be required to utilize the forms created by the Director. 
(Code 2005, § 17-604) 
Sec. 10-151. - Removal from registry. 
The owner of a property may apply to have the property removed from registration by providing an application and proof that the property is occupied and that all pertinent utility accounts have been established and are being utilized. The City shall either grant or deny the application for removal from the registration list within 30 days of the date of receipt of the application by the City. If no action is taken by the City within 30 days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 2763-001, § 17-605, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 10-152. - Penalties. 
Any person found to have violated any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2763-001, § 17-606, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 10-153. - Appeal of decision of Department of Planning and Zoning. 
(a)  Any decision of the Director required by this article shall be subject to appeal and review by the Municipal Court of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(b)  Any decision required to be made by the Director by this article shall be in writing, and a copy shall be provided to the owner of the property. 
(c)  Any appeal taken under this article shall be in writing and shall be filed within 30 days of the decision in question with the Clerk of Court of the Municipal Court of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the written appeal, the Clerk of Court shall notify the Director of the appeal, and the Director shall, within ten days, transmit all papers constituting the record to the Clerk of Court. The Clerk of Court shall schedule a hearing on the appeal. 
(e)  The Municipal Court's review shall be limited to determining whether the decision of the Director constitutes an abuse of its discretion in its application and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2763-001, § 17-607, 8-6-2012) 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Applications. 
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or law of this Municipality shall submit an application for such license to the City Clerk, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Form of application . Each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the City Clerk. 
(2)  Contents of application . Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and home address of the applicant, if an individual, or home address if a corporation or partnership; 
b.  Place where the proposed business is to be located; 
c.  Kind of business to be carried on; 
d.  Name and home address of the owner or president, if a corporation; 
e.  Such additional information which the City Clerk or City Council may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Verification . Each application shall be sworn to by the applicant, if an individual, or by a partner, if a partnership, or by an officer, if a corporation. 
(4)  Payment of fee . 
a.  Fee required. Each application shall be accompanied by the amount of the fee chargeable for such license. 
b.  Issuance of receipts. The City Clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a license, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application, nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  False statements . False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of such license. 
(6)  Eligibility . In order to receive a professional or commercial license issued by the City, each applicant must submit a sworn affidavit attesting to the affiant's immigration status. The status of applicants who swear by affidavit to be a qualified alien or nonimmigrant under the federal Immigration and Nationality Act will also be verified through the Systematic Alien Verification of Entitlement (SAVE) Program. 
(Code 2005, § 32-101; Ord. of 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 12-2. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  Review by Clerk . The City Clerk shall be designated the Reviewing Officer for review of an application for a license. The City Clerk shall have within 48 hours of the time of the receipt of the application to either grant or deny the license. If the application is denied, the applicant shall have ten days to appeal this decision to the City Council at the next regularly scheduled public meeting. 
(b)  Clerk discretion . The granting of a business license under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a privilege only, and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in such business. 
(Code 2005, § 32-102) 
Sec. 12-3. - Display of license. 
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the City to keep his license posted in a conspicuous place on the premises used for such business at all times. 
(Code 2005, § 32-103) 
Sec. 12-4. - Inspections. 
(a)  Search of premises . Whenever inspections of the premises used for, or in connection with, the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violation thereof, it shall by the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the City who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested. 
(b)  Testing of material . Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee of the Municipality whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the City requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis. 
(c)  Refusal to allow inspection . In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the City Manager, or City Clerk if so designated, may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of a licensed business in the City who refuses to permit any officer or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection, or take an adequate sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection, provided that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the City, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample. 
(Code 2005, § 32-104) 
Sec. 12-5. - Termination and renewal of license. 
(a)  Termination. All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the calendar year of the City when no provision to the contrary is made. 
(b)  Invoice for renewal. Each licensee shall be invoiced by November 1 for the next year's license fee and fees shall be due by December 31 each year. 
(c)  Moving or closing. If a permitted business moves outside City limits or closes, the applicant shall notify the city in writing of this change within ten business days. 
(Code 2005, § 32-105) 
Sec. 12-6. - Revocation, suspension, etc. 
The City Council, after affording the licensee notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceeding, may, if it finds this chapter to have been violated by the licensee, his agent, or employee, revoke such license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the City Council may deem necessary. 
(Code 2005, § 32-106) 
Sec. 12-7. - Change of location. 
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed business or occupation may be changed, provided that ten days notice thereof is given to the City Clerk, and provided that all building and zoning requirements are complied with. 
(Code 2005, § 32-107) 
Sec. 12-8. - Transfer of license. 
All licenses shall be personal to the licensee to whom issued and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 2005, § 32-108) 
Sec. 12-9. - Duplicate license. 
A duplicate license shall be issued by the City Clerk to replace a previously issued license which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing of a sworn affidavit attesting to such fact, and the payment of a fee of $10.00 to the City Clerk. 
(Code 2005, § 32-109) 
Sec. 12-10. - Branch offices. 
For the purposes of this chapter, each branch, establishment or location wherein a representative of the owner is employed and is authorized to transact business for such owner shall be deemed a separate place of business for which a separate license shall be required, provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch offices. 
(Code 2005, § 32-110) 
Sec. 12-11. - Due dates; late fees. 
(a)  Except for insurance companies, a late fee of $25.00 shall be assessed for payments not received by December 31 preceding the calendar year for which the business license applies. If any such fee is not paid by January 31 of the calendar year for which the business license applies, the business license shall be terminated for nonpayment of the fee. 
(b)  Each insurance company shall pay the requisite business license fee by June 30 of the calendar year for which the license applies. Insurance companies shall be ineligible to renew their business licenses for the following calendar year unless and until the business license fee for the previous calendar year is paid in full. 
(Code 2005, § 32-111) 
Sec. 12-12. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall conduct a business or occupation without having obtained a license therefor or paid the required occupation tax as required by this chapter, or who shall violate any other provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and cost, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, any and all of such penalties to be imposed in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court. 
(Code 2005, § 32-112) 
Secs. 12-13—12-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESSES REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 12-43—12-72. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSURANCE BUSINESSES 

Sec. 12-73. - License and fee. 
(a)  License required . Each person, agency, firm or company doing an insurance business within the municipal corporate limits shall be required to obtain a license from the City Clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Fee established . In order to obtain a license, each person, agency, firm or company doing an insurance business shall pay to the City the annual license fee as provided under section 34-2. 
(Code 2005, § 32-201; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Secs. 12-74—12-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 12-105. - License and fee. 
(a)  License required. All contractors of whatever nature shall be required to obtain a license from the City Clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Fee established. The annual license fee shall be $50.00. 
(Code 2005, § 32-202) 
Secs. 12-106—12-123. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUB-CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 12-124. - License and fee. 
(a)  License required. All sub-contractors of whatever nature shall be required to obtain a license from the City Clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Fee established. The annual license fee shall be $37.50. 
(Code 2005, § 32-203) 
Secs. 12-125—12-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - USED CAR DEALERS 

Sec. 12-147. - License required. 
Any used car or used motor vehicle dealer, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-47-1, who does business within this Municipality shall be required to obtain a license from the City Clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 32-204(1)) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of used motor vehicle dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-13. 
Sec. 12-148. - Fee established. 
The annual business license fee for each used car or used motor vehicle dealer doing business in the City shall be $75.00. 
(Code 2005, § 32-204(2)) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of used motor vehicle dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-13. 
Sec. 12-149. - Review of application. 
No action on any application for a license under this division shall be taken by the City Council until the Police Chief has reviewed such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the City Clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 32-204(3)) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of used motor vehicle dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-13. 
Sec. 12-150. - Restriction on issuance. 
No license under this division shall be issued to any applicant who has not been licensed by the State Board of Registration of Used Car Dealers. 
(Code 2005, § 32-204(4)) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of used motor vehicle dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-13. 
Sec. 12-151. - Records. 
Each used car dealer or used motor vehicle dealer licensed under this division shall keep a record of all motor vehicles offered for sale, exchange, or disposal to the public, which record shall show the make of said motor vehicle, the year of its manufacture, its serial number, and its engine number, and which record shall always be kept available, for the Police Chief, the presence in his place of business of any motor vehicle on which the serial or engine number has been defaced or altered. 
(Code 2005, § 32-204(5)) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of used motor vehicle dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-13. 
Sec. 12-152. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to make inspections from time to time for the purpose of seeing that the records required in this division are being kept. 
(Code 2005, § 32-204(6)) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of used motor vehicle dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-13. 
Sec. 12-153. - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this division shall be deemed to apply to any individual making an isolated sale of his own vehicle. 
(Code 2005, § 32-204(7)) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of used motor vehicle dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-13. 
Secs. 12-154—12-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS 

Sec. 12-176. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct or operate a circus, carnival or public exhibition without having first obtained a license from the City Clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 32-205(1)) 
Sec. 12-177. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carnival means and includes amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduction of games of skill, food-dispensing facilities and sideshows. 
Public exhibition means and includes circuses, menageries, sideshows, and other similar itinerant amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged. 
(Code 2005, § 32-205(2)) 
Sec. 12-178. - Fees established. 
(a)  The business license fee imposed on circuses, carnivals or public exhibitions operating within the City limits shall be as follows: 

 
(b)  Any event shall not exceed 14 days without reapplying for an additional permit and paying an additional fee. 
(Code 2005, § 32-205(3)) 
Sec. 12-179. - Conditions of issuance. 
No license under this division shall be issued until the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The operator and sponsor of the circus, carnival or public exhibition have each assumed full responsibility for maintaining order and for keeping the site clean and free of trash, papers and other debris and have placed trash containers in adequate number and in convenient locations for the use of the public; 
(2)  All rides have been inspected for mechanical, structural, electrical and other hazards by the appropriate officers and employees of the City, and adequate safeguards have been placed to protect both operators and the general public from inadvertently coming into contact with moving parts, belts, motor gears, electrical switches, and other possible or potential hazards; and 
(3)  The applicant has placed on file with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance indicating that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damages arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in connection with such carnival or exhibition. Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 for each person and $300,000.00 for each accident. 
(Code 2005, § 32-205(4)) 
Sec. 12-180. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the Police Chief and the Fire Chief to see that proper inspections and patrols are made of the premises used for the activities licensed in this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-205(5)) 
Secs. 12-181—12-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 

Sec. 12-200. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means: 
(1)  Any owner or pawnbroker who, in the performance of his duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into contact with members of the public; 
(2)  Any person working for an owner or pawnbroker; or 
(3)  Any person who is employed on a part-time or full-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop. 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the power of sale on default. 
Pawnbroker means any person, whether an owner or not, who works in a pawnshop on a regular basis and in a managerial capacity whereby he has charge of the business or daily operations of the pawnshop, and whose business or occupation it is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, or exchange, any goods, wares, or merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
(Code 2005, § 32-208(1); Ord. of 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 12-201. - Hours of operation. 
The hours during which pawnbrokers may conduct business shall be from no earlier than 7:00 a.m. to no later than 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 2005, § 32-208(2); Ord. of 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 12-202. - Pawn license required; supplementary to business license or occupational tax. 
All persons, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall first file an application with the City of Lawrenceville Police Department for an annual pawn license to conduct such business. The issuance of said pawn license shall be a requirement in addition to a business license or occupational tax certificate required by the Planning and Zoning Department of the City of Lawrenceville, and no business license or occupational tax certificate shall issue prior to the applicant successfully receiving a pawn license from the Lawrenceville Police Department. 
(1)  Form of application . The application for a pawn license shall be completed on a form prescribed by the Police Chief or his designee. At minimum, the application shall include the physical address at which the business is proposed to be operated, and the full name, address, phone number, date of birth, photograph and social security number of pawnbrokers and managerial employees of the business. Additionally, the permit shall list the owner of the business. In the event the business is owned by a partnership or corporation, the partners or officers and registered agent shall be listed. 
(2)  License fee; separate license required for each physical location . The completed form must be accompanied by an application and license fee of $100.00. In the event an owner has more than one physical business location, each location will be required to obtain a separate permit. The application fee is nonrefundable in the event the applicant, for any reason, is not issued a license, business license, or occupational tax certificate. 
(3)  Background check required . Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Police Chief or his designee shall conduct a background check on the applicant. A pawn license may not be issued where the applicant has been convicted, plead guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(4)  Falsified applications . No license shall be issued if it is found that the applicant falsified, concealed or misrepresented any material fact in the application. 
(5)  Denial of license; appeal process. If an application for a pawn license is denied for any reason, the applicant will be notified in writing of such denial and the reason for the denial. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Police Department to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the City Clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the Police Department and, in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $100.00. 
(6)  Renewal . Owners are required to renew the license upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee of $100.00. 
(7)  Replacement license. In the event a license is lost or destroyed, a replacement license may be issued for the unexpired term of the initial license. 
(8)  Display of license . Operators of pawn businesses shall conspicuously display the license at all times while the business is in operation. 
(9)  License issued in error; license the property of the City . Any pawn license issued through administrative oversight or error may be terminated and seized by the Police Chief or his designee. All pawn licenses remain the property of the City of Lawrenceville. Upon notice by the Lawrenceville Police Department, the holder of a pawn license must surrender said license. 
(10)  Suspension or revocation of license; appeal. A license may be denied, suspended or revoked by the Police Chief or his designee for falsifying an application, violation of this section or if the applicant has otherwise become ineligible to hold a license under this section. The license holder or applicant may appeal the decision of the Police Chief to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Code 2005, § 32-208(3); Ord. of 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 12-203. - Work permits required of employees. 
No person shall be employed by a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has obtained a work permit from the Lawrenceville Police Department. 
(1)  Form of application; fee required . An application for a work permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the Police Chief or his designee. Such application form shall include, at a minimum, the applicant's name, date of birth, and social security number. The applicant must also provide positive identification (only official government-issued pictured identification accepted, e.g., driver's license, passport, military card, or State-issued identification card) at the time of application. 
(2)  Fee for permit . The completed permit application form must be accompanied by an application and permit fee of $100.00. The application fee is nonrefundable. 
(3)  Background check required . Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Police Chief or his designee shall conduct a background check on the applicant. A permit may not be issued where the applicant has been convicted, plead guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(4)  Falsified applications. No permit shall be issued if it is found that the applicant falsified, concealed or misrepresented any material fact in the application. 
(5)  Denial of permit; appeal process . If an application for a work permit is denied for any reason, the applicant will be notified in writing of such denial and the reason for the denial. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Police Department to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the City Clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the Police Department and, in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $50.00. 
(6)  Renewal . Permit holders are required to renew the permit upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee of $50.00. 
(7)  Replacement permit . In the event a permit is lost or destroyed, a replacement permit may be issued for the unexpired term of the initial license upon the payment of a permit replacement fee of $20.00. 
(8)  Permit in possession while working; inspection by Police Department. Permit holders must have a valid permit on their person at all times while working within a pawn establishment. The permit shall be displayed upon the request of a Lawrenceville Police Officer. 
(9)  Permits issued in error; permits the property of the City . Any work permit issued through administrative oversight or error may be terminated and seized by the Police Chief or his designee. All permits remain the property of the City of Lawrenceville. Upon notice by the Lawrenceville Police Department, the holder of a permit must surrender said permit. 
(10)  Suspension or revocation of permit; appeal . A permit may be denied, suspended or revoked by the Police Chief or his designee for falsifying an application, violation of this section, or if the applicant has otherwise become ineligible to hold a permit under this section. The permit holder or applicant may appeal the decision of the Police Chief to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Code 2005, § 32-208(5); Ord. of 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 12-204. - Records of pawn transactions; required information; method of transmittal. 
Engaging in the business of pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling used or previously owned merchandise, furniture, machinery, appliances, utensils, firearms, gold, silver, coins, precious metals, jewelry and precious stones within the City limits of Lawrenceville is hereby declared to be affected with the public interest due to the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. In the public interest, and as set forth in this division, all pawnbroker and pawnshop operators shall document all transactions as required by this division. A transaction number will be assigned to every transaction to document the transaction. 
(1)  Identification of persons pledging items . Employees of pawnshops shall require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a transaction. For purposes of this section, proper identifications shall consist of a government-issued identification document such as a driver's license, State identification card, military identification card or passport. 
(2)  Required documentation of identifying data . Employees of pawnshops shall document the name, address, telephone number, race, gender, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, social security number, and identifying number from the presented identification of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property along with the date and time of the transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(3)  Photographs required . Employees of pawnshops shall photograph all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property. Such photograph will be made with a digital camera or web camera. Such photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnshop transaction number. Additionally, photographs shall be made of the items being pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or sold. The photographs shall be appended to the record of the pawn transaction in a manner prescribed by the Police Chief or his designee. 
(4)  Fingerprint and signature required . Employees of pawnshops shall obtain from all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property the fingerprint of the right hand index finger. The fingerprint shall be appended to the record of the pawn transaction in a manner prescribed by the Police Chief or his designee. The subject shall also sign the pawn transaction. In the event the indicated finger is missing, the next finger available on the right hand will be used and the finger used will be noted on the pawn transaction record. If the right hand is amputated, congenitally deformed, or otherwise unavailable due to medical condition, the left hand may be used and noted on the record. If neither hand is available due to medical condition, amputation or congenital deformity, that fact will be noted on the transaction record. Fingerprints and the information required in this section shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property. 
(5)  Accurate property descriptions required . Employees of pawnshops shall document an accurate description of all items pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or sold to the pawnshop. Such description shall include, at a minimum and to the extent possible, manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones (if jewelry), and any identifying names, marks, numbers or engravings. 
(6)  Tags required . Each item received by a pawnshop as a pledge, trade, pawn, exchange, or purchase shall be tagged with the pawnshop transaction number. Such tag must remain attached to the item until the item is disposed of by sale, trade or other lawful means. 
(7)  Wholesale purchases excluded . The requirements of this section shall not apply to property purchased from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sale; however, the pawnshop employees shall maintain purchasing records for property exempted under this subsection while the property remains in inventory. 
(8)  Special requirements for new or unused goods. Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging may not be accepted by a pawnbroker unless the customer can supply a copy of the original sales receipt or other proof of purchase. Pawnshops shall retain a copy of such receipt or proof of purchase on file while the item is in inventory. 
(9)  Entry of transactions for electronic transmittal . Each pawnshop shall enter each transaction into the electronic automated reporting system as it occurs. In the event the electronic transmittal system is unavailable, pawnshops shall make records in paper form as prescribed by the Police Chief or his designee. Such paper forms shall include all information otherwise required. Pawnshops shall keep a supply of paper forms available at all times. 
(10)  Automated reporting system; mandatory use . The Police Chief or his designee shall select and designate an automated electronic reporting system for use by pawnshops to record and transmit pawn transactions. The pawnshop will be assessed a fee for each transaction entered into the system. This fee may be assessed to the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property. Said fee will be collected by the Police Chief or his designee, which may be a third-party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Code 2005, § 32-208(6); Ord. of 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 12-205. - Retention of property; storage; police holds. 
(a)  All property received through any pawnshop transaction shall be held for at least 30 days before being disposed of by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise, except when property is redeemed as per a pawn transaction contract. 
(b)  All property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or sold to the pawnshop shall be held and maintained on the premises of the licenses pawnshop that completed the transaction, or, if impractical, at such other location as may have been previously approved in writing by the Police Chief or his designee. No off-site locations will be approved which are outside of the City limits of Lawrenceville. 
(c)  The Lawrenceville Police Department shall have the authority to place property that is the subject of a law enforcement investigation on police hold. In that event, the Police Department shall notify the pawnshop of the need for the police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Such notification may be made verbally; however, written notice shall be provided within 24 hours of the verbal hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnshop to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from the police hold or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Code 2005, § 32-208(7); Ord. of 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 12-206. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his agents or employees, to receive in pawn, from minors, goods of any character or description. A minor, for the purpose of this division, is an individual under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 2005, § 32-208(11); Ord. of 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 12-207. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The Lawrenceville Police Department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this division. Sworn officers of the Lawrenceville City Police Department and civilian employees designated by the Police Chief shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this section during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this division and State law. 
(Code 2005, § 32-208(12); Ord. of 3-1-2010) 
Sec. 12-208. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, company, corporation or other entity who violates any provision of this division may be subject to arrest or summoned to appear in the Lawrenceville Municipal Court and, upon conviction or other finding of guilt, be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or six months imprisonment, or both. 
(Code 2005, § 32-208(13); Ord. of 3-1-2010) 
Secs. 12-209—12-239. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - TEMPORARY OUTDOOR ACTIVITY 

Sec. 12-240. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct or operate a temporary outdoor activity except as allowed under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-209(1); Ord. of 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 12-241. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Goods and merchandise means tangible or movable personal property, other than money. 
Temporary means for a period of not to exceed 20 consecutive days. A second permit for a temporary outdoor activity on the same property may not be applied for or renewed within six months from the date of any prior approval of a temporary outdoor activity. 
Temporary outdoor activity means for-profit activities involving the temporary outside sale of goods and merchandise in association with an existing business located on the premises as the principal use of the premises. The term "temporary outdoor activity" includes the sale of farm produce, carnivals, or sale of Christmas trees or Halloween pumpkins from property which is vacant or which contains a separate and distinct primary use, such activities continuing for a period not exceeding 20 consecutive days, except Christmas tree sales shall be allowed between November 1 and December 31 and pumpkin sales shall be permitted from September 15 and October 31. Temporary outdoor activities shall occur in non-enclosed areas. 
Temporary outdoor activity permit means written authorization by the Director of Planning, Zoning, and Inspections, or his designee, for the applicant to engage in temporary outdoor activities at a specific, fixed location meeting all the requirements of this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-209(2); Ord. of 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 12-242. - Conditions of issuance. 
No license under this section shall be issued until the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  Peddling goods and merchandise not customarily sold on a day-to-day basis in the business which constitutes the principal use of the premises is prohibited. 
(2)  Mobile food services and the preparation of food on site shall not be permitted as temporary outdoor activities. 
(3)  No display shall be erected or installed, nor shall any temporary outdoor activity take place, within 50 feet of a City, County or State right-of-way. 
(4)  Temporary outdoor activities shall be permitted only within the City's BG, HSB, and BGC Zoning Districts. 
(5)  No temporary structure or covering shall be erected as a part of a temporary outdoor activity. Display tables may be used. Exemptions to this requirement are made for Christmas tree and Halloween pumpkin sales lots. 
(6)  No operator, employee, or representative of the operator of a temporary outdoor activity shall solicit directly from the motoring public. 
(7)  Temporary outdoor activities shall be permitted only on property where such activities shall not disrupt controlled vehicular ingress and egress or occupy required off-street parking spaces. 
(8)  No more than one temporary outdoor activity shall be permitted simultaneously on a parcel. 
(9)  Temporary outdoor activities shall be conducted on a paved surface and not on grassed or landscaped areas. Exemptions to this requirement are Christmas tree and Halloween pumpkin sales lots. 
(10)  No evidence of the temporary activity shall remain on a parcel of property for more than 12 consecutive hours of any calendar day. Exemptions to this requirement are Christmas tree and Halloween pumpkin sales lots. 
(11)  Charitable or nonprofit events for which sale proceeds benefit charitable organizations are not regulated by this article. Furthermore, the Lawrenceville Tourism and Trade Association (LTTA) is specifically exempt from the requirements of this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-209(3); Ord. of 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 12-243. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the Police Chief or his designate to see that all conditions under this division are met. 
(Code 2005, § 32-209(4); Ord. of 2-6-2006) 
Secs. 12-244—12-264. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - FINANCE COMPANIES 

Sec. 12-265. - License and fee. 
(a)  License required. All finance companies shall be required to obtain a license from the City Clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Fee established. The annual license fee is $125.00. 
(Code 2005, § 32-210) 
Secs. 12-266—12-293. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - HANDWRITING ANALYSTS AND FORTUNE TELLERS 

Sec. 12-294. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice handwriting analysis or fortune telling in the City unless that person holds a valid unexpired and unrevoked license to engage in the practice of handwriting analysis or fortune telling issued by the City. For the purpose of this division, the term "handwriting analysis" means the interpretation of human experience based upon an examination of handwriting or other inscription done by hand for fee, gift or donation; and the term "fortune telling" means the prediction of the future for a fee, gift or donation. 
(Code 2005, § 32-212(a)) 
Sec. 12-295. - Fee established. 
The annual business license fee for each handwriting analyst or fortune teller shall be $100.00. 
(Code 2005, § 32-212(b)) 
Sec. 12-296. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fortune telling means the prediction of the future for a fee, gift or donation. 
Handwriting analysis means the interpretation of human experience based upon an examination of handwriting or other inscription done by hand for fee, gift or donation. 
(Code 2005, § 32-212(a)) 
Sec. 12-297. - Application. 
Any person desiring to practice handwriting analysis or fortune telling in the City shall make application for a permit to the Bureau of Police Services on forms to be prepared and approved by the City Manager or his designee. The applicant shall meet the following requirements prior to being licensed to practice handwriting analysis or fortune telling in the City: 
(1)  Be 18 years of age or more; 
(2)  Not have been convicted of a crime of any grade or any ordinance violation involving the following categories of criminal conduct: larceny, embezzlement, fraudulent conveyance; perjury and/or false swearing, or subrogation or either, gambling, deceitful means, artful practices, lottery, felonies or other group I crimes, as defined in the Uniform Crime Reporting Manual, Federal Bureau of Investigation, United States Department of Justice which are reasonably related to the activities regulated in this division, within three years of the date of the application; 
(3)  Allow fingerprints to be made by the Bureau of Police Services at the time of application; and 
(4)  Furnish the Bureau two photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size 2½ inches by 2¾ inches. 
(Code 2005, § 32-212(c)) 
Sec. 12-298. - Revocation and suspension of permit. 
Any person failing to comply with any provision of this division, or such other laws and regulations as may be passed by the Council for the conduct of the business of handwriting analysis or fortune telling, shall be subject to having his license to conduct the business revoked or suspended upon appropriate notice of hearing. 
(Code 2005, § 32-212(d)) 
Sec. 12-299. - Location of business. 
Pursuant to the City Zoning Ordinance, any person performing the services of a handwriting analyst or fortune teller may maintain such a business only in the HSB Zoning Classification. 
(Code 2005, § 32-212(e)) 
Secs. 12-300—12-316. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - MASSAGE THERAPISTS 

Sec. 12-317. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide for local licensing and regulation of massage therapy businesses, pursuant to the authority to regulate for the general health, safety and welfare as provided in the Charter Section 1.13(41) and O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9(b)(17) and 43-24A-1 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to this division is a privilege, not a right. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(1); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-318. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, enacted by and defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. as amended. 
Board means the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy, enacted by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-4. 
For hire means a reasonable expectation that the person to whom the massage is provided, or some third person on his behalf, will pay money, give other consideration, or provide any gratuity therefor. 
Licensed massage therapist means a person who holds a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended State license in the practice of massage therapy issued by the Board pursuant to the Act. 
Massage therapy means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term "massage therapy" includes complementary methods, including, without limitation, the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands. The term "massage therapy" also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. The term "massage therapy" does not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities (O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-3). 
Massage therapy business means a business with a location in the City at which any person engages in or offers massage therapy, regardless of the name of the business or the words used to describe the business through signage or advertisement or in filings with the Secretary of State. Massage therapy businesses are subject to regulation by a local government, pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 43-24A-22(a) and 48-13-9(b)(17), as amended. 
Massage therapist, masseuse, masseur, massage practitioner, or person practicing massage means a person who performs or engages in the practice of massage. 
Sexual or genital area means the genitals, pubic area, anus, perineum of any person, or the vulva or breast of a female. 
State license means a license to practice massage therapy issued by the Board, pursuant to the Act. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(2); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-319. - Requirements and application. 
(a)  Requirements . 
(1)  State license. No person other than a licensed massage therapist shall perform or offer to perform massage in a massage therapy business within the City. 
(2)  Conditions of issuance. No license shall be issued to any massage therapy business within the City under this division unless every person who performs or offers to perform massage on its premises is a licensed massage therapist, and it shall be unlawful to operate as a massage therapy business unless all such persons are and remain licensed massage therapists. The City license of a massage therapy business that fails to meet this requirement is subject to revocation. 
(3)  City license. No person shall operate a massage therapy business without a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended license from the City, pursuant to this division. 
(4)  Conviction of a crime. No license under this division shall be issued or renewed to any person who himself or who has a co-owner, partner or manager who has been convicted or shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere for any felony within ten years, or two misdemeanors within five years, other than traffic violations, immediately prior to the filing of the application. The term "conviction" includes an adjudication of guilty or plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. Licenses granted to persons who fail to meet this requirement at any time shall be subject to revocation. 
(5)  Age of licensee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be issued a license to operate a massage therapy business. 
(6)  Personal residency; agent. All applicants for licenses under this division and all actual owners of therapy businesses for which licenses are sought shall be bona fide residents of the City or Gwinnett County at the time of the filing of the applications and shall remain bona fide residents of the City or Gwinnett County during all times that the licenses and renewals thereof are in effect, or shall name one or more residents in the City or Gwinnett County as the agent or representative of the licensee, who shall be responsible for any matter relating to such license and who, at all such times, shall be a bona fide resident of the City or Gwinnett County and shall be granted the express authority to accept service of process on behalf of the business. If any such person shall cease to be a resident of the City or Gwinnett County, another person shall immediately be appointed, in writing, in his place, and written notice shall be given the City Clerk, stating the name and address of the new agent. 
(7)  Corporate residency; agent. All applications for licenses under this division by a corporation or other business entity shall name in the application one or more residents in the City or Gwinnet County as the agent and representative of the corporation to receive all communications, notices, services of process, or other papers or documents on behalf of the corporation in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation, or other action with respect to any license issued pursuant to this division. The application shall give the mailing address of the person, and the mailing to any such person at such address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. If any such person shall cease to be a resident of the City or Gwinnett County, another person shall immediately be appointed, in writing, in his place, and written notice shall be given the City Clerk, stating the name and address of the new agent. 
(8)  Annual regulatory license fee and occupational tax certificate required. An annual regulatory license fee and occupational tax certificate shall be required for each person, firm, corporation or other entity operating a massage establishment. The annual regulatory license fee shall be $1,500.00 per massage therapy business and shall be in addition to occupation taxes. 
(b)  Application for license. 
(1)  To operate a massage therapy business within the boundaries of the City, the applicant must first make application to the City Clerk on a form provided by the City Clerk or his designee, and submit a criminal background check of the applicant along with any co-owners, partners and non-massage therapists who will act as a manager at the business. The applicant, after having fully and truthfully completed such form and paying the prescribed fees, and having received a license, shall maintain and operate such business pursuant to the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State. 
(2)  As part of the license process with the City Clerk, each applicant shall provide a true and correct copy or original of the State license for each and every massage practitioner, performing or anticipated to perform massage at its location, for inspection and copying. The applicant shall also supply a set of fingerprints taken by the Lawrenceville Police Department or other approved location for each licensed massage therapist employed by the applicant and two forms of photo identification. Failure of any massage therapy business to provide State licenses or fingerprints of its employees shall automatically result in the denial of the issuance of a City license to the applicant. 
(3)  After the City license has been issued, the licensee shall, in person, furnish to the City Clerk a true and correct copy or original of the State license, fingerprints taken by the Lawrenceville Police Department or other approved location and two forms of photo identification for each new massage practitioner at the licensee's massage therapy business prior to such person's commencing to perform or offering to perform massage at such massage therapy business. When any massage practitioner discontinues performing massage at a massage therapy business, the licensee shall make the departure known in writing to the City Clerk within 30 days of such departure. 
(4)  Each applicant for a license shall make his affidavit before the City Clerk, on a form provided by the Clerk, upon oath, swearing or affirming that all persons practicing massage on the premises of his massage therapy business are licensed massage therapists and that all requirements of this division for a license have been met. 
(5)  Each application under this division shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  A list of services to be provided. 
b.  The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted. 
c.  The name and residence of each applicant and any agent as required by this division. 
d.  Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
e.  Copy of two forms of photo identification for each applicant, such as driver's license or official identification card. 
f.  The name and a copy of the State license of each massage therapist that will be employed by the applicant. 
g.  Copy of two forms of photo identification for each massage therapist that will be employed by the applicant. 
h.  A list of any and all criminal convictions of the applicant other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of conviction, description of the offense and the court where the conviction was received. 
i.  Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicants for the permit. 
j.  Any other State-required affidavits or forms, including local benefit receipt affidavits. 
k.  Applicants must be at least 18 years of age, employ one (which may include himself) or more massage therapists licensed in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, and if a corporation, is an officer of the corporation which is organized and authorized to do business pursuant to the laws of the State. The applicant, in order to operate a massage establishment, must be the owner of the premises wherein the business will be conducted or the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the certificate. 
l.  A set of fingerprints taken by the Lawrenceville Police Department or other approved location for each massage therapist employed by the applicant. 
m.  A set of fingerprints taken by the Lawrenceville Police Department or other approved location for each owner, partner, and manager of each massage business. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(3); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014; Ord. No. 2014-24, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 12-320. - Distance regulation. 
(a)  Following the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived, there shall be no more than three massage therapy businesses per 10,000 persons living within the City limits based on the most current United States Census and calculated on a pro-rata basis. Further, there shall be a 150-foot buffer from any massage therapy business to any residentially zoned property from the front door of the structure where massage business occurs to the nearest parcel boundary line of any residentially zoned property as measured by a straight line on the ground. 
(b)  No application for a massage therapy business license shall be granted unless the business is permitted in the zoning district where operation of the business is proposed. 
(c)  Upon application for a massage license and/or occupation tax placard, the applicant will provide to the City Clerk a survey showing the distances to each residentially zoned property within a 150-foot radius of the massage business. 
(d)  The City Council recognizes that upon the adoption and effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, there appear to be active massage therapy businesses with physical facilities in existence in the City limits. Without waiving any illegality of such physically existing structures based on zoning or other laws and without de facto or specifically granting any "grandfathered," "vested," or "legal non-conforming" (as those terms are defined in State Zoning Law) status by virtue of adoption of this purely regulatory section, it is the intention of the City Council to allow the continued operation of the existing massage therapy businesses, provided that the same otherwise comply with all other applicable laws and regulations of the City and State. 
(e)  Any licensed massage therapy businesses legally operating prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be exempt from the distance and population cap regulations of this division until the licensee of such massage therapy business or a new licensee to whom the license is legally transferred as provided for by section 12-331 no longer holds a valid massage therapy license from the City of Lawrenceville. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(4); Ord. No. 2014-24, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 12-321. - License renewal. 
Licenses for massage therapy businesses may be renewed on a calendar year basis, provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this division and the requirements of the Act. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(5); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-322. - Registry. 
A registry shall be kept of all persons practicing massage on the premises of such massage therapy business, which shall be available for inspection by an authorized agent of the City, including, but not limited to, the City Clerk, the authorized designee of the City Clerk and City Police Officers. The registry required by this section shall be made available for inspection during normal hours of business and must provide the following information: 
(1)  Legal name and any other names the massage practitioner has been or is known as or by; 
(2)  Current address, including street and city; 
(3)  State or country of birth; 
(4)  Date of birth; 
(5)  Number and expiration date of State license; 
(6)  Position with the massage therapy business or business entity; and 
(7)  Two copies of photo identification for the massage therapist. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(6); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-323. - Posting licenses and rates. 
(a)  Each massage therapy business shall post a legible copy of its license obtained pursuant to this division, along with copies of the State license of each massage therapist operating on the premises of such therapy business, in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep such licenses there at all times. 
(b)  Price rates for all massage therapy services shall be prominently posted in the reception area or other conspicuous location available for all prospective customers. No service shall be allowed or permitted that is not prominently posted with its fees in such location. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(7); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-324. - Record of patrons receiving services. 
Each massage therapy business shall maintain a list of patrons who received massage therapy services at the business. The list shall include the patron's name, address, telephone number and time and date of service. Entries required under this section shall be maintained for one year. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(8); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-325. - Escort service and adult entertainment prohibited. 
No massage therapy business shall act as an escort or dating service or conduct any adult business as that term is defined in section 12-401. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(9); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-326. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, given, dispensed, provided, consumed, or caused or allowed to be sold, served, given, dispensed, provided, consumed by or to any person on the premises of a massage therapy business or kept thereon. The term "alcoholic beverages" means and includes all types and kinds of alcohol, as defined in chapter 4. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(10); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-327. - Hours of operation; inspection; right of entry. 
(a)  Massage therapy businesses shall be open for business only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., inclusive. 
(b)  Any business holding a license issued under this division shall, at any time that the premises are open for business, be open to inspection by an officer of the Police Department or a duly authorized agent of the City Clerk. It shall be unlawful for any person holding a massage facility business license or an employee of such licensee to refuse such inspection officer immediate access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner; such refusal or hindrance on the part of any license holder or employee shall be grounds for the immediate revocation or suspension of a massage facility license. 
(c)  As a condition of maintaining a massage business license issued under this division, at any time that the premises are open for business the massage therapy business will require massage therapists in their employment to submit to reasonable verification efforts by authorized City Officials to confirm the identity of the massage therapist and to confirm State certification. Verification methods may include, but are not limited to, a review of photo identification and/or fingerprinting of the massage therapist. 
(1)  The refusal of any massage therapist to submit to reasonable verification efforts as provided in this section shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the massage therapy business license, but shall not result in any citation or adverse consequence for the massage therapist. 
(2)  The scope of any investigation performed under this subsection should be limited to verification of the identity and State certification of a massage therapist and should only take place in common areas open to the public during normal business hours. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(11); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-328. - Name; place of business; sale, transfer, or change of location. 
No person or business entity granted a location license pursuant to this division shall operate the business under a name not specified in the license nor conduct business at any location or place not specified in the license. No license shall be transferable. Upon the sale or relocation of a massage therapy business, the license thereof shall be null and void. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(12); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-329. - Restrictions on presence of minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a massage therapy business to permit persons under 18 years of age to enter any area or room where massage therapy is performed unless such minor is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other adult with lawful custody or control of the minor or has a written prescription from a physician, surgeon, osteopath, or podiatrist who has a valid current license, issued pursuant to State law. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(13); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-330. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  Clean and sanitary condition. Every portion of the premises of, and all equipment and supplies of, the massage therapy business shall be kept clean and shall be operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  Attire of employees. It shall be the responsibility of the massage therapy business, licensed under this division to ensure that any employees involved in any way with massage therapy services or who will be present during massage therapy services are dressed in clean, opaque attire that does not expose to view any sexual or genital areas and covers all areas from the top of the breast line to an area no higher than four inches above the knee line. 
(c)  Laundry . All sheets and towels provided to patrons in massage facilities shall be clean and laundered after each use and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(d)  Locked doors . It shall be prohibited for any massage facility business to lock main entrance doors to the business or any doors to rooms where massage therapy is being performed while the business is open. 
(e)  Unlawful to massage sexual areas. It is unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to place his hands upon, to touch with any part of his body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital area, as defined by this division, of any person or to act in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify the lust or passions of sexual desires. 
(f)  Conduct on premises. All persons holding a massage facility business license shall at all times be responsible for the conduct of business on the licensed premises, and for any act or conduct of any massage therapist utilizing the facility which constitutes a violation of the provisions in this division. Any violation of City, State or federal laws committed on the licensed premises by any such holder of a massage facility business license or employee of the facility that affects the eligibility or suitability of such person to hold a license, may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the City license. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(14); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-331. - Restriction upon transfers. 
(a)  Licenses issued under this division shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided for in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of any person owning a license, or any interest greater than ten percent therein, the license may, with the approval of the City Clerk and subject to the terms of this division, be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or the lawful heirs of the deceased person, if such heirs make application and meet all of the other qualifications contained in this section. The license of such deceased person shall be held by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete execution of his estate and dispose of the license or his interest therein, but in no event to exceed eight months. In the event of the bankruptcy or in the event that any applicant shall have a receiver appointed by any court of competent jurisdiction, such license shall be transferable to such receiver or trustee in bankruptcy for such period of time as may be granted by the City Clerk for the proper liquidation of such assets and stock and goods. 
(c)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership and to assign his interest in such partnership to one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership, unless all provisions of this division are fully complied with, and then only upon the approval of the City Clerk. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock to persons who held more than ten percent of any class of stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license. 
(d)  A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee himself will directly receive none of the additional capital investment. Under this section, an additional partner or new stockholder must be approved by the City Clerk. This subsection only applies to corporations when the new stockholder obtains ten percent or more of the common stock or financial interest in the business entity. 
(e)  Should a transfer of the license be approved, there shall be no prorated return of any license fee and the new licensee shall meet all requirements for a new license to be issued under this division, except payment of license fees. 
(f)  Except as provided in this section, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall be cause for immediate suspension of any license issued under this division pending a revocation hearing as provided for under this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(15); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-332. - Revocation, suspensions, violations and penalties. 
(a)  Revocation and suspension. Upon notice, the City Clerk may, for good cause, revoke or suspend or place on probation the license of any massage therapy business: 
(1)  That commits or allows any violations of the provisions of this division; 
(2)  That allows any massage therapist, working on the massage therapy business's premises, to commit or offer to commit a sexual crime under O.C.G.A. Title 16, Chapter 6; 
(3)  That allows any person to perform or offer massage on the premises who is not a licensed massage therapist; 
(4)  Where the applicant for the massage therapy business's City license gave false information on the application, in his affidavit, or in the massage therapy business's registry as required in this division, or fails to update information related to the license to the City Clerk as required by this division; or 
(5)  Where the licensee fails at any time to meet the requirements for licensure under this section. 
(b)  Violation; penalty. In addition to revocation or suspension of the massage therapy license, any person who violates any provision of this division may, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-8. Each day during which said offenses occur shall constitute a separate offense, as shall each separate act constitute a violation. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(16); Ord. No. 2014-24, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 12-333. - Notice of intent to deny, revoke or suspend license. 
(a)  Whenever, in the opinion of the City Clerk, there is cause to deny an initial application or renewal, or to revoke or suspend the license of a massage therapy business, a written notice of intention to revoke or suspend shall be furnished to the holder thereof. Such written notice shall list the grounds upon which revocation or suspension is sought and shall set forth the licensee's appeal rights. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, within three days after the date of deposit in the U.S. mail. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(17); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 12-334. - Appeal hearings. 
(a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as provided in this section. 
(b)  The City Clerk or his designee shall provide written notice of the decision to deny, revoke or suspend a massage therapy business license. Any applicant or licensee adversely affected by the decision of the City Clerk may have a review thereof by appeal to the Mayor and Council or their designated hearing officer. 
(c)  Appeals shall be made by written petition filed in the Office of the City Clerk within 15 days of the final decision or action of the City Clerk. 
(d)  In order to defray administrative costs, all appeals under this section must be accompanied by a filing fee of $500.00. 
(e)  A hearing shall be conducted before the Zoning Board of Appeals or their designated hearing officer on each properly filed appeal within 30 days of the filing of the appeal with the Office of the City Clerk, unless a continuance is agreed upon by the appellant and the City Clerk. 
(f)  The appellant at such a hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. All testimony shall be sworn. 
(g)  The City Clerk shall bear the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence standard. The determination and findings by the City Clerk shall not be set aside unless the Mayor and Council or their designated hearing officer finds them to be: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinance; 
(2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole; or 
(3)  Unreasonable. 
(h)  The written findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals or their designated hearing officer shall be forwarded to the City Clerk after conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to notify the appellant of the decision. 
(i)  The findings and decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals or their designated hearing officer shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said findings by certiorari to the Superior Court of the County. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(18); Ord. No. 2014-24, 8-4-2014) 
Sec. 12-335. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The requirements of this division shall have no application to or effect upon the following persons acting within the scope of their professions: 
(1)  Medical doctors and osteopaths, chiropractors, physical and occupational therapists, podiatrists, acupuncturists, registered or licensed practical nurses. 
(2)  Cosmetologists duly licensed to practice in this State pursuant to State law, except that this exemption shall apply solely to massaging the head, neck, face, scalp, hair, hands or feet of the patron. 
(3)  Employees of duly licensed nursing and convalescent homes and hospitals; 
(4)  Athletic directors or trainers who are affiliated with an accredited educational institution or a bona fide sports team and whose work is limited to athletic team members. 
(b)  Massage therapists licensed by the State may perform massage therapy services in the home of a client, provided that the massage therapy business the therapist is associated with is properly licensed under this division and complies with section 12-319 (application) and section 12-321 (renewal). Massage therapy businesses providing client home services shall not be subject to the provisions of this division regulating the physical locations where massage therapy shall be performed, but shall comply section 12-330(e) (prohibiting massage of sexual or genital area, or to act in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify the lust or passions or sexual desires); section 12-327(a) (regulating hours of operation) and section 12-325 (prohibiting escort services and adult entertainment). 
(c)  Requirements for licensure under the Act shall not apply to persons excluded from State licensure pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-19, acting within the scope of their professions. 
(Code 2005, § 32-213(19); Ord. No. 2014-11, 4-7-2014) 
Secs. 12-336—12-358. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 12-359. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined elsewhere in this Code, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. 
Limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for luxury limousines, with an extended wheel base, and a designed seating capacity of no less than five and no more than nine passengers behind the operator of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be allowed to operate as both a taxicab and a limousine. 
Open stand means locations on the streets of the City of Lawrenceville, including the locations on the premises of public transit stations that may be used by any taxicab on a nonexclusive, first come, first served basis, and not by private vehicles or other public conveyances. 
Paratransit service means a service provided for individuals with disabilities who are unable to utilize fixed route services. 
Stretcher service means a service providing non-emergency transport by stretcher from licensed nursing home facilities to licensed hospitals, clinics, doctor offices, hospice facilities, or home health care, or from licensed hospitals, clinics, doctor offices, hospice facilities, or home health care to licensed nursing homes. 
Taxicab means any vehicle operated as transportation for hire that picks up passengers or markets services within the City of Lawrenceville, excluding vehicles operating on a designated route, limousines, animal-drawn conveyances, paratransit service, stretcher service, transit service operated by a government entity, or emergency transport vehicles operated by any government entity or licensed medical service. 
Taxicab business means an entity with its primary business being the operation of motor vehicles used to transport passengers for a fee or fare. 
Taximeter means an instrument or device attached to a motor vehicle and designed to measure the distance traveled by such vehicle, or an instrument or device attached to a motor vehicle and designed to compute and indicate the fare or fee to be charged to the passenger. 
Vehicle for hire means a limousine, taxicab or other motorized passenger-carrying vehicle that is used to transport passengers for a fee. Vehicles regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission, and passenger vans with a capacity of 15 or more passengers, shall not be considered a vehicle for hire. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(1); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-360. - Doing business defined. 
Any person shall be deemed doing business in the City of Lawrenceville under this division if such person is transporting passengers in the City and accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the vehicle is used or by contract for the use of any motor vehicle or other vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers. Any person shall also be deemed as doing business in the City under this division if such person has established a business relationship with independent contractors or operates vehicles for hire on such person's own behalf for the purpose of transporting passengers in the City. An exception to doing business in the City of Lawrenceville shall arise if a person is transporting a passenger from another jurisdiction, where they are fully licensed and permitted, into the jurisdiction of the City. The permit for the vehicle from the originating jurisdiction shall be displayed as required under sections 12-368 and 12-372. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(2); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-361. - Compliance; zoning. 
No person shall conduct the business of operating vehicles for hire in the City of Lawrenceville without first meeting the requirements of this division. Vehicle for hire businesses shall meet all applicable zoning, development, and building code requirements for the use of land and structures located within the City of Lawrenceville. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(3); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-362. - Occupational tax certificate holder's responsibilities for violations. 
Occupational tax certificate holders are responsible for violations of this division by their employees, lessees, sub-contractors, and independent contractors, including drivers and dispatchers. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(4); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-363. - Notice. 
For the purposes of this division, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by mail within three days after the date of deposit in the U.S. mail. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(5); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-364. - Hearings. 
(a)  Decisions of the business license office that adversely affect or aggrieve any occupational tax certificate applicant or holder under this division may, within five business days, be appealed to the City Clerk. Decisions of the Police Department that adversely affect or aggrieve any workers permit applicant or holder may, within five business days, be appealed to the Police Chief or his designated representative. Any applicant or occupation tax certificate holder who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final decision of the City Clerk or any applicant or permit holder who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final decision of the Police Chief or his designated representative may request an appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the business license office along with a $50.00 appeal fee and within 15 days after the final decision. 
(b)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing the written petition, unless a continuance of such hearing is agreed to by the appellant and the City Clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. 
(c)  The findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be forwarded to the City Clerk after the conclusion of the hearing. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to notify the appellant of the action of the review board. 
(d)  The findings of the zoning board of appeals shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; 
(2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole; or 
(3)  Unreasonable. 
(e)  The findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said finding by certiorari to the Superior Court of the City of Lawrenceville. An aggrieved party shall have all other remedies provided by law or at equity to all ordinances. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(6); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-365. - Audits. 
Each business and individual operating under the provisions of this division shall be subject to audit upon reasonable notice by the City Clerk. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(7); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-366. - Occupational tax certificates. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, entity, partnership, or corporation to operate a taxicab within the City of Lawrenceville unless such person, entity, partnership or corporation shall have complied with and continues to comply with the regulations, rules, restrictions and conditions set forth in this division. The City of Lawrenceville maintains the right, within its discretion, to grant or deny any application for license or permit for the privilege of engaging in the taxicab business. An exception to doing business in the City of Lawrenceville shall arise if a person is transporting a passenger from another jurisdiction, where they are fully licensed and permitted, into the jurisdiction of the City. The permit for the vehicle from the originating jurisdiction shall be displayed as required under sections 12-368 and 12-372. 
(1)  An applicant for an occupational tax certificate is required to provide information showing its qualifications on a form provided by the City Clerk. 
(2)  Applicants must be approved by the City Clerk or designee, and such clearance shall include a background of the applicant. 
(3)  No occupational tax certificate shall be issued to any business owning or leasing less than one vehicle. The applicant must provide the issuing authority with a list of all vehicles to be used in furtherance of the business to include the VIN and State registration (tag) number of each vehicle and a copy of the applicable insurance certificate or policy. 
(4)  If the applicant is not a sole proprietor or individual then all partners, officers or managers of the legal entity shall be required to comply with the provisions of this division. 
(5)  All applicants must: 
a.  Be at least 21 years of age; 
b.  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service; 
c.  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five years previous to the date of application, for the violation of any of the following offenses of the State of Georgia, of any other state, or of the United States: any felony; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; criminal solicitation to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection; attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection; any misdemeanor crime of violence or theft, any misdemeanor crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs or any crime involving moral turpitude. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant from applying for an occupational tax certificate; 
d.  Provide a verifiable dispatch location staffed by business agents or employees and have a published telephone number; 
e.  File applications for the initial inspection of the taxicabs, with a list of all drivers that will be scheduled for driver permitting, indicating whether drivers are business employees or contract drivers. A copy of each contract driver's insurance coverage must be included in the application; 
f.  Provide a copy of the applicant's rate schedule and the daily hours of operation; 
g.  Provide the name, address and telephone number of a responsible individual residing in Gwinnett County who will be the registered agent for the purpose of service of process or receipt of citations; and 
h.  Pay a $50.00, nonrefundable, occupational tax certificate application fee. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(9); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-367. - Insurance. 
Before an occupational tax certificate is granted or renewed for operating a taxicab business in the City, the applicant shall file with the business license office a certificate or policy of insurance issued by a responsible insurer, covering all vehicles to be operated as taxicabs by the license applicant or employees. 
(1)  All businesses applying for an occupational tax certificate pursuant to the provisions of this division shall provide with their application, and shall maintain for the duration of the certificate, a certificate of insurance showing proof of motor vehicle insurance covering public liability and property damage issued by a State-approved insurer. Such insurance shall insure passengers and third persons against personal injury and property damage in amounts specified by this section. 
(2)  All businesses applying for an occupation tax certificate pursuant to the provisions of this division shall provide with their application, general liability coverage and automobile comprehensive coverage on all vehicles owned or leased by the business in a minimum amount of $300,000.00. The insurance coverage shall be provided by a State-approved insurer having a rating of at least B(vii). 
(3)  Additionally, all occupational tax certificate holders must provide the Police Chief or his designee with an annual certificate of insurance showing the existence of such policies of insurance as required by this division. The annual certificate of insurance must be provided to the Police Chief or his designee 30 days prior to the expiration of any such insurance. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(10); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-368. - Work permits generally. 
Prior to any person operating a vehicle as a taxicab, he must obtain a permit to operate a taxicab from the Police Department. Nothing in this section shall give rise to a right to obtain a permit to operate a taxicab, as the City maintains the right to refuse any application for permit for cause. The possession of such a permit shall not override any State or federal requirements for vehicle operation. 
(1)  No person shall drive a taxicab without a valid work permit issued pursuant to the requirements of this division. Each applicant shall complete a form designated by the Police Chief, provide a current and valid Georgia driver's license, a $50.00 processing fee, and a driver's history from the State covering at least seven years prior to the date of application. If the applicant lived in a state other than Georgia within the seven-year period, a driver's history report from the other state must also be included with the application. No business shall employ, including independent contractors, any driver who has not first met the requirements of this division and been issued a valid work permit as authorized by this article. 
(2)  No work permit shall be issued to any person who is not employed by or represented by an approved business. All work permits shall expire on the drivers' birthday and shall be renewed annually. A work permit shall only be good for one business which it was obtained for. If a driver works for more than one cab business, he must have a work permit for each and every business the driver works for. 
(3)  The permit shall take a form designated by the Police Chief. In any event, the permit must include a photograph of the holder of the permit, the name of the permit holder, the expiration date and a unique permit number. 
(4)  Any taxicab operator must display the permit in the taxicab at all times while operating the vehicle. The operator's permit number must also be affixed to the rear of the vehicle at all times while the vehicle is being operated. Work permits must be posted on the dash or sun visor of the vehicle being driven so that it is visible from the passenger area. The permit must be displayed to a police officer upon request. Failure to display a work permit or have a permit number on the vehicle shall subject the operator to a fine of no more than $150.00, six months of imprisonment, or both. Any person found to be operating a taxicab with another person's permit number displayed shall be subject to a fine of no more than $150.00, six months of imprisonment, or both. The Police Chief or the Municipal Court may administratively suspend or revoke the displayed permit. The company owning the taxicab shall be subject to an administrative fine of $500.00. Businesses under this division are responsible for checking to ensure that each driver has a current work permit in the driver's possession and posted on the dash or sun visor of the vehicle being operated along with a visible permit number displayed on the rear of the vehicle. 
(5)  No request for a work permit will be processed unless the permit applicant presents a letter on business stationery to the Police Department from a current occupational tax certificate holder requesting issuance of a work permit to the named individual. The work permit applicant will further furnish information requested on a form to be provided by the Police Department and submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation. Work permit applicants must meet the following requirements: 
a.  Be at least 21 years of age. 
b.  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
c.  Possess a current valid state driver's license. Such license must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-58 and 40-5-64. 
d.  Exhibit a proficiency with the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers and obey lawful orders of police and others in lawful authority. 
e.  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five years previous to the date of application, or for the violation of any of the following offenses of the State, of any other state or of the United States: any felony; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; child molestation; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempts to commit any of these offenses; any crime of violence or theft; any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs or moral turpitude. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
f.  Have not been convicted of four or more moving traffic violations, or one or more mandatory suspensions as defined by Georgia law, within the 12-month period preceding the date of application or renewal of the application. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
(6)  Drivers are responsible for reporting any change in qualifications or other licensing or permitting information previously supplied to the Police Department within ten days of the change. 
(7)  Any Lawrenceville Police Officer who issues a citation to an operator of a taxicab shall include the taxicab permit number in the remarks section of the citation. Upon adjudication of a case in Municipal Court, the Court Administrator shall make notification to the Police Chief of the disposition of the case. 
(8)  Any vehicle purporting to be a taxicab operating within the City of Lawrenceville shall be in compliance with all of the provisions of this division or shall be deemed to be in violation of this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(11); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-369. - Proration of license, permit, or inspection fees; fees nonrefundable. 
Fees required by this division are nonrefundable and are not prorated. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(12); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-370. - Transfer and term of work permits and occupation tax certificates. 
No work permit or occupation tax certificate required by this division are transferable; and they shall expire annually as provided in this division. If not renewed in compliance with this division, all work permits and occupation tax certificates shall expire annually and be of no further force and effect. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(13); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-371. - Suspension or revocation of occupation tax certificate or work permit. 
(a)  Suspension . For reasons set forth in this subsection, an occupation tax certificate or a work permit issued under this division may be suspended until these conditions no longer exist: 
(1)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a work permit. 
(2)  Violation of any part of this division. 
(3)  For work permits only: have been convicted of four or more moving traffic violations, or one or more mandatory suspensions as defined by Georgia law, within the 12-month period preceding the date of application or renewal of the application. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
(4)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse, or allowing a vehicle to operate without the maintenance required by this division. 
(b)  Suspension for six months. For reasons set forth in this subsection, an occupation tax certificate or a work permit issued under this division may be suspended for six months: 
(1)  Willful failure to comply with this division. 
(2)  Refusing to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, sex or sexual orientation. The term "sexual orientation" means the state of being heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual. Operators shall not refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. 
(c)  Revocation. An occupation tax certificate or a work permit issued under this division may be revoked where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information, or omits information requested in the application. 
(d)  Revocation upon violation. An occupation tax certificate or work permit may be revoked for a violation of this division if any occupation tax certificate holder, employee, or independent contractor of a occupation tax certificate holder is found to have violated this division on three or more occasions in a 12-month period. 
(e)  Other remedies. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the occupation tax certificate holder may also be cited for violating the provisions of this division, and such citations shall be prosecuted in accordance with the requirements of this division in the Municipal Court of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(f)  Requirements in addition to other laws. The requirements of this division shall be in addition to all other taxing, and regulatory provisions of local, State or federal law and shall not authorize violations of any other applicable laws. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(14); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-372. - Vehicle ownership, condition and equipment; inspection and maintenance of vehicles. 
(a)  Ownership. All vehicles used as a taxicab shall be owned or leased by the holder of the occupation tax certificate for operating a taxicab business. An owned vehicle shall be a vehicle titled in the name of the holder of the occupation tax certificate. A leased vehicle shall be a vehicle on which a valid commercial lease in the name of the holder of the occupation tax certificate exists and for which insurance has been issued in the name of the holder of the occupation tax certificate. 
(b)  Vehicle style and age . Any vehicle used as a taxicab shall be either a four-door sedan or passenger van, and such vehicle may be no more than eight years old as determined by the model year of the vehicle. 
(c)  Maintenance. Drivers and businesses are responsible for maintaining each vehicle for hire in a clean and mechanically safe condition. The interior and exterior shall meet the requirements set out under inspection requirements outlined in this section. 
(d)  Markings, inspection and maintenance records required. Drivers are not to drive and businesses are not to allow drivers to operate a vehicle without the required markings, inspection and maintenance records. Required markings shall include the name of the business painted or affixed by decal to the outside right and left front doors and the schedule of rates, including minimum fares, painted or affixed by decal to the outside right and left rear doors. Magnetic signs, or non-permanent signs or markings, shall be prohibited. 
(e)  Inspection of vehicles . Prior to being placed in service for use as a taxicab, and annually thereafter, the vehicle must be inspected by an approved ASE or Master ASE Mechanic at the occupational tax certificate holder's expense and approved for use by the Police Department. The ASE or Master ASE Mechanic conducting the inspection shall be approved by and complete an inspection form as prescribed by the Police Chief. A list of approved ASE or Master ASE Mechanics qualified to perform an inspection under the division will be made available at the Police Department. The original inspection form shall be retained by the Police Department and a copy shall be provided to the owner. A copy of the inspection form shall be kept in the vehicle at all times when being operated, and the inspection form shall be presented to a police officer upon request. Any attempt by the occupational tax certificate holder to fraudulently obtain the required inspection will result in being disqualified from operating such a business in the City of Lawrenceville and may result in the loss of the current occupation tax certificate. The occupational tax certificate holder shall bring proof of the inspection to the City of Lawrenceville Police Department and upon payment of a $50.00 processing fee an inspection sticker shall be affixed to the left side of the rear window. The requirements that each vehicle must meet are as follows: 
(1)  Exterior inspection shall ensure that headlights, taillights, brake lights, directional signal lights, license plate lights, windshield wipers, all vehicle glass, window cranks or electric windows, doors and door locks, trunk lid, trunk, hood, door handles, exhaust system, bumpers, fenders, body, tires and other vehicle parts are in good condition and functioning properly. There shall be no tears or rust holes in the vehicle body and no loose pieces hanging from the vehicle body. There shall be no unrepaired body damage or any body condition which would create a safety problem or interfere with the operation of the vehicle. 
(2)  Interior inspection shall include the rearview mirror, steering wheel, foot brakes, parking brakes, air conditioning and heating systems to ensure each item is in good operating condition. The upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels and the trunk compartment shall be inspected to ensure there are no tears, that they are clean and have no offensive odors and that the trunk has sufficient space for passenger luggage. 
(3)  The vehicle shall have a spare tire, a jack, and reflective safety triangles. 
(4)  Vehicles shall be subject to random inspections by a police officer at any time. Vehicles found to be substandard shall be removed from service immediately and shall not return to service until the vehicle has become compliant and has been re-inspected and approved by the Police Department for use. 
(f)  Proof of license and insurance. The inspection sticker is proof that the business met the license and insurance requirements at the time of license issuance and that the vehicle passed the last vehicle inspection. Each vehicle driver must have in the vehicle proof of current insurance coverage. Any business or vehicle letting insurance coverage lapse shall have the inspection stickers removed by the Police Department and the business license and/or occupation tax certificate suspended or revoked. Business operations shall not be resumed until proof of insurance is provided to the business license office or the Police Department, the business license and occupation tax certificate reinstated and the vehicles re-inspected and new inspection stickers issued by the Police Department. 
(g)  Inspection and proper maintenance required for operation. No business shall use any vehicle that has not been inspected and properly maintained as required by this article. 
(h)  Stickers not transferable. Inspection stickers are not transferable from vehicle to vehicle and are nonrefundable if the vehicle is wrecked or taken out of service for any reason. The Police Department must be notified within ten days of any vehicle being taken out of service; stickers from vehicles taken out of service must be turned in to the Police Department. Stickers for replacement vehicles or additional vehicles are issued under the same procedures as original inspection stickers. 
(i)  Expiration. Inspection stickers shall expire on the date the Georgia motor vehicle license tag expires. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(15); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-373. - Miscellaneous requirements and regulations. 
(a)  All drivers shall maintain in each vehicle a suitable map or street guide of the metropolitan Atlanta and Gwinnett area. 
(b)  All drivers shall make a reasonable search of their vehicle immediately following each trip, and upon discovery of any personal property left by a passenger in the vehicle, shall immediately notify the dispatcher so that the dispatcher can attempt to locate the owner to return the property. If the owner cannot be located within 24 hours, the dispatcher shall forward the property to the Police Department. 
(c)  All drivers shall take the most direct route to a passenger's destination unless otherwise authorized or directed by the passenger. 
(d)  No driver shall refuse to accept a passenger, unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. All employees and independent contractors of companies pursuant to this article shall be courteous and respectful to members of the public. 
(e)  No driver shall refuse to accept a passenger solely on the basis of that passenger's race, color, gender, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, age or disability. 
(f)  All drivers shall provide receipts upon request of a passenger, showing the amount of fare paid, the name of the business, the work permit number of the driver, the number of passengers, and origin and termination location of the trip. 
(g)  No driver shall refuse to transport a blind or disabled person or that person's guide or service dog. No driver shall charge any extra fee for the guide or service dog to accompany said blind or disabled person. 
(h)  All drivers shall practice good personal hygiene, and wear proper dress while operating taxicab. Proper dress shall mean shoes (not sandals), ankle-length pants, and a shirt or blouse with sleeves and a collar. Hats must be of the baseball style or a chauffeur's cap. Clothing must be clean and not visibly soiled. 
(i)  A driver, while carrying passengers, shall not play the radio or smoke if objected to by a passenger. 
(j)  Occupation tax certificate holders are responsible for ensuring that any driver who is affiliated in any way with such business complies with the requirements of this division. In addition to being cited for a violation of this division, violation of this section may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the occupational tax certificate issued pursuant to this division. 
(k)  Failure of a driver to comply with this article shall result in the issuance of a citation and/or the driver's arrest and the impoundment of the taxicab. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(16); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-374. - Trip sheets or logs. 
Drivers must maintain daily trip sheets or logs, including the number of passengers, the time, place of entry, the destination of each passenger, the amount charged and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire. Trip sheets must be maintained in the vehicle for 48 hours and, thereafter, transferred to and maintained at the business premises for a period of time not less than five years. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(17); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-375. - Call jumping. 
Businesses under this division shall not participate in nor allow their drivers to practice call jumping or the act of intercepting a passenger who has requested service from another business. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(19); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-376. - Schedule of fares. 
(a)  The owner of a taxicab service shall either use a meter to calculate fees or provide a rate quote to the passenger prior to departing. If the service utilizes a meter, the rates and method of computation must be posted and plainly visible to passengers in the taxicab. The driver of a taxicab utilizing a meter to calculate fees must use the most direct route available from departure to destination. 
(b)  Taximeters, if utilized, shall be calibrated by the permitted taxicab driver or taxicab business to calculate the fares in accordance with the posted fare schedule. The occupation tax certificate holder shall install lead and wire seals to the taximeter once it is calibrated so that no adjustments, alterations or replacements may be made to the taximeter that affects in any way its accuracy or indications. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(22); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-377. - Enforcement. 
The City of Lawrenceville Police Department shall be responsible for the enforcement of this division. The Police Department is authorized to inspect taxis anytime without a warrant to ensure compliance with this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(23); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Sec. 12-378. - Penalty. 
Except where otherwise stated, any person who violates any provision of this division may be subject to arrest or summoned to appear in the City of Lawrenceville Municipal Court and, upon conviction or other finding of guilt, may be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or six months imprisonment, or both. 
(Code 2005, § 32-214(24); Ord. of 7-9-2007; Ord. of 11-20-2007; Ord. of 7-11-2011) 
Secs. 12-379—12-399. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 12-400. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments. The City considered specific evidence of the undesirable secondary effects of sexually explicit businesses when it enacted the provisions of this section. Before adopting the ordinance from which this article is derived, the City considered and reviewed an extensive report prepared by the City of Austin, Texas, concerning adult-oriented businesses in that city and considered the increased criminal activity around such adult entertainment establishments and the expenditure of additional funds for law enforcement to combat such criminal activity. The City also reviewed studies prepared in Garden Grove, California; Seattle, Washington; and Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot amount to prohibition; otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this division represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods and property values through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(b)  It is the finding of the Mayor and Council that public nudity, either partial or total, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in establishments offering live nude entertainment or adult entertainment, whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
(c)  Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described in this section. The Mayor and Council find it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in City of Lawrenceville as well. 
(d)  Furthermore, it is the finding of the Mayor and Council that other forms of adult entertainment, including, but not limited to, adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in surrounding communities. 
(e)  The Mayor and Council find that the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments upon the City of Lawrenceville are similar whether the adult entertainment establishment features live nude dancing or sells video tapes depicting sexual activities. In addition, the experiences of other cities and counties with adult bookstores have shown that a substantial amount of activity at the bookstore involves booths which an individual may enter, view videos depicting sexual activity, and sexually interact with a bookstore patron in an adjoining booth through a hole strategically placed in the wall of adjoining booths. 
(f)  The Mayor and Council therefore find that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's daycare facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the Mayor and Council find that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment. The Mayor and Council find that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions and further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, the ordinance from which this division is derived is hereby adopted. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(1)) 
Sec. 12-401. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means either: 
(1)  Each of those enterprises defined in this article; 
(2)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this division, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section. The term "adult entertainer" includes employees as well as independent contractors. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment includes the following types of business: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale of service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas; 
(2)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities, as defined in this section; 
(3)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors, or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in this section; 
(4)  Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as those terms are defined in this section, or having a segment or section comprising more than ten square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales for the sale or rental of such material; 
(5)  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein; 
(6)  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined in this section. 
The term "adult entertainment establishment" does not include traditional or live theater (mainstream theater) which means a theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution or similar establishment which regularly features live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Children's day care facility means a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this division, the term "children's day care facility" includes, but is not limited to, the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," or "pre-school." 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction service means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character . A person is of good moral character according to this division if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The City may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 20 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
Premises means the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult entertainment is performed. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Specified anatomical areas includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttocks; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernably turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(2)) 
Sec. 12-402. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this division. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers and performers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers and performers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer or a performer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this division. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on Christmas Day. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this division. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment licensed under this division shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. The term "full lighting" means illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
(o)  If any portion or subsection of this section or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(3)) 
Sec. 12-403. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(4)) 
Sec. 12-404. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the City of Lawrenceville any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this division without a permit so to do. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(5)) 
Sec. 12-405. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau, adult business, adult video store, or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(6)) 
Sec. 12-406. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(7)) 
Sec. 12-407. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment, adult video store, or other adult business. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(8)) 
Sec. 12-408. - Location. 
(a)  No adult business or use restricted under this division shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined under this division is located; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 150 feet of road frontage; 
(6)  Within any zoning classification other than the HSB or HM district with a special use permit pursuant to Article VII, Section 7.11 or Section 7.13 of the City's Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by straight line measurement from the property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(9)) 
Sec. 12-409. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications . Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this division. Any employee, who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee, shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment . Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the Licensing Officer of his intended employment on forms supplied by the Licensing Officer and shall receive approval of such employment from the Licensing Officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the Licensing Officer requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular City of Lawrenceville or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the Licensing Officer for a hearing. The decision of the Licensing Officer, after hearing, may be appealed to the City Council, which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the Licensing Officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license . Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the City of Lawrenceville, laws and regulations of the State of Georgia, or the rules and regulations of the City shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(d)  Independent contractors . For the purpose of this division, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(10)) 
Sec. 12-410. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the City Administrator or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid to the City Clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The City Clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the City Administrator at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(11)) 
Sec. 12-411. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the County Clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the Police Department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified in this section as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The City shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any; 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a Municipal Code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The Licensing Officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business regulated under this division; 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(12)) 
Sec. 12-412. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the City of Lawrenceville and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the City Council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the information described in section 12-411. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(13)) 
Sec. 12-413. - Application; investigation. 
The City shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the Council may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this State, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this City or any other city located in or out of this State prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities, as defined in this division, openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required in this division commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted under this division; 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this division or any other ordinance or regulation of the City of Lawrenceville, the State of Georgia or the United States; 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the City to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Lawrenceville or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(14)) 
Sec. 12-414. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this division shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed, in whole or in part, by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the State of Georgia or the City of Lawrenceville. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the City, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc ., 427 U.S. 50, 81. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(15)) 
Sec. 12-415. - Permit. 
(a)  Refusal; appeal. If the City, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this division, it shall notify the City Clerk of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the Mayor and Council. 
(b)  Renewal. Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittee continues to meet the requirements set out in this division. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(c)  Nontransferable . No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the City, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(16)—(18)) 
Sec. 12-416. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the City Council, has been deposited with the City and approval has been obtained from the City Administrator and the Zoning Department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(19)) 
Sec. 12-417. - Appeal—Procedure. 
(a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the City Clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the Council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the Council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular Council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for Council action. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(20)) 
Sec. 12-418. - Same—Council determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the Council agenda, the Council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the City Clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a Hearing Officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The Hearing Officer may or may not be a City employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The City Clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a Hearing Officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(21)) 
Sec. 12-419. - City Council hearing. 
Whenever the City Clerk has scheduled an appeal before the City Council, at the time and date set therefor, the Council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from City staff. The City Council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the City Council shall be final. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(22)) 
Sec. 12-420. - Powers of Hearing Officer. 
The Hearing Officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this division may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(23)) 
Sec. 12-421. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The City Council and the Hearing Officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this division. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(24)) 
Sec. 12-422. - Hearing Officer—Report. 
(a)  The Hearing Officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the Council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the City Clerk, with additional copies furnished the City Administrator and Police Chief. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall place the Hearing Officer's report on the agenda of the next regular Council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(25)) 
Sec. 12-423. - Same—Action by Council. 
The Council may adopt or reject the Hearing Officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the Council does not adopt the Hearing Officer's recommendation, it may decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the Hearing Officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(26)) 
Sec. 12-424. - Denial; procedure. 
Within 30 days of actual receipt of an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the City Clerk shall either approve or deny the application. In no event shall the decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be held without decision for more than 30 days after actual receipt of the application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than 30 days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The City Clerk shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the City Clerk of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than 30 days following actual receipt of the application. The City Clerk shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the City Clerk denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five business days of such denial. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the City, its officials, employees or agents, may seek review of such decision by filing an application for a writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Gwinnett County, Georgia. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(27)) 
Sec. 12-425. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this division shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued under this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(28)) 
Sec. 12-426. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this division shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The City may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this division, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this division. In addition, violation of the provisions of this division shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted under this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(29)) 
Sec. 12-427. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(30)) 
Sec. 12-428. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the Licensing Officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(31)) 
Sec. 12-429. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the Licensing Officer on his finding of a violation of this division resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the Licensing Officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the Licensing Officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the Licensing Officer. The Licensing Officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe," as the case may be. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(32)) 
Sec. 12-430. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(33)) 
Sec. 12-431. - Automatic license forfeiture for non-use. 
Any holder of any license under this division who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized shall, after the said three-month period, automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(34)) 
Sec. 12-432. - Miscellaneous. 
Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or unlawful sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this division shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or unlawful sexual activity. 
(Code 2005, § 32-215(35)) 
Secs. 12-433—12-462. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - ANIMAL-DRAWN CARRIAGES 

Sec. 12-463. - Licensing of animal-drawn carriage companies; headquarters. 
(a)  License required . 
(1)  No person, firm or corporation shall operate a business involving the use of one or more animal-drawn carriage on the streets of the City unless a license for such business has first been granted by the City in accordance with the provisions of this division. The license shall be effective only for the calendar year stated in the license, unless suspended or revoked sooner, as provided by this division. 
(2)  Application for the license shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk and shall provide such information as is required for other business license applications, and such additional information as may be necessary to define completely the business operation. Renewal of the license shall be required prior to January 31 of each year. 
(b)  Fixed place of business required . Each animal-drawn carriage company, as a condition for holding a license under the provisions of this section, shall establish and maintain a fixed headquarters on private property for the operation of the company's business: The headquarters, to conform to the ordinances of the City, shall provide adequate off-street parking space for all animal-drawn carriages not in service on the streets. The company headquarters shall not be moved except by the approved transfer of the company's license to another location. 
(c)  Operating regulations . In addition to the license requirements imposed in subsection (a) of this section, no license shall be issued to any carriage operator unless the operator complies with the following operating regulations: 
(1)  A licensed veterinarian shall certify, after due and proper inspection, the good health of each draft animal before it is placed into service. A minimum of two such health inspections shall be required for each animal each calendar year. 
(2)  No single animal shall pull a carriage holding more than ten people, including the driver. 
(3)  Unless written approval is given by a licensed veterinarian, no animal having open sores or wounds or any disease or ailment shall be permitted to be in service on the streets of the City. 
(4)  Each draft animal shall have its hooves properly trimmed and shod for street surfaces. 
(5)  Each animal shall be groomed daily and not have fungus, dandruff, or a dirty coat. 
(6)  Harnesses shall be properly fitted, maintained, and oiled so that no irritating material will come in direct contact with the animal. 
(7)  No driver may use more than a light touch of the whip upon any animal, and no driver or other person may forcefully strike an animal, or make movements or noise intended to frighten or harm an animal. 
(8)  No driver shall permit an animal to pull a carriage at a speed faster than a slow trot, except in emergency situations. 
(9)  No animal shall be subject to any condition or treatment, whether in service or out of service, which will impair the good health and physical condition of that animal. 
(10)  Adequate water shall be provided in stables and stalls at all times while any draft animal is present. 
(11)  Ventilation adequate to ensure the health and comfort of animals shall be provided in stable and stall areas. 
(12)  Bedding in stalls and stables shall be kept at least six inches deep and shall not show wetness under the pressure of any draft animal's hooves. 
(13)  Adequate and leak-free roofing is required for any stable or stall area in which animals are housed. 
(14)  Each individual draft animal shall have a stall large enough for the animal to safely turn around, but in no case shall any individual animal be kept in a stall less than 120 square feet in area. Ceilings in stalls and stables must be at least nine feet from the bedding and flooring. 
(15)  Food shall be kept free of contamination. 
(d)  Inspection of operating facilities and practices. The City shall be empowered to inspect all stables, stalls and operating facilities of any carriage company without notice, and to examine the operating practices of any carriage company to ensure continuous compliance with this division. 
(e)  Refusal or failure to comply with division. Any applicant who refuses or fails to comply with the requirements of this division shall not be issued a business license until proof of compliance is presented by the applicant and certified by the City. The foregoing licensing requirements shall be ongoing as requirements for continuous operation. 
(f)  Temporary suspension of license. The City Clerk may temporarily suspend any carriage company license for violation of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(1)) 
Sec. 12-464. - Insurance. 
(a)  Indemnity for benefit of City . Any animal-drawn carriage company operating under this division shall hold the City of Lawrenceville, its officers, agents, servants and employees, harmless against any and all liability, loss, damages or expense which may accrue to the City by reason of negligence, default or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company under this division. Nothing in this division shall be construed or interpreted to make the City of Lawrenceville, its officers, agents, servants or employees liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any animal-drawn carriage company, its servants, agents, drivers or other employees, during the operation by the company of an animal-drawn carriage business or service, either in respect to injury to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
(b)  Insurance for benefit of passengers . Any animal-drawn carriage company desiring a license to do business shall give and maintain a policy of indemnity from an insurance company authorized to do business in Georgia. The minimum coverage shall be $150,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, $500,000.00 for injury to more than one person, which are sustained in the same accident, and $25,000.00 for property damage resulting from one accident. The indemnity insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property caused by the negligence of an animal-drawn carriage company, its servants or agents. 
(c)  Blanket policy . Any company or person operating an animal-drawn carriage in the City shall give a separate policy of indemnity insurance for each separate animal-drawn carriage for hire, except where such company or person actually owns or holds legal title to more than one animal-drawn carriage, in which event such company or person may give one policy of indemnity insurance covering all the animal-drawn carriages actually owned. This latter provision, however, shall not apply to any group of persons separately owning animal-drawn carriages who may be jointly operating or doing business under a licensed animal-drawn carriage name. 
(d)  Notice when voided . Before any policy of insurance required by this division is voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice thereof shall be given, in writing, to the City Clerk at least 30 days before the same shall take effect. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(2)) 
Sec. 12-465. - Removal from service for violations. 
(a)  Upon discovery of a violation of any provision in this division relating to animal-drawn vehicles for hire, the City may issue an order to the person responsible for the violation requiring the removal of the subject animal from service. 
(b)  No animal which has been removed from service for violation of this section shall be returned to service until the animal has been inspected by the Gwinnett County Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (S.P.C.A.) and approved for return to service in writing. 
(c)  Any person who refuses to comply with the order of the S.P.C.A. or who complies with the order and returns the subject animal to service before being inspected and approved by the S.P.C.A. shall be guilty of the offense of refusing to obey an order the of the S.P.C.A and subject to citation to the Municipal Court for violation of this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(3)) 
Sec. 12-466. - Animal working conditions. 
(a)  No animal shall be worked under any of the following conditions, and any owner allowed to let the conditions exist will be found in violation of this division: 
(1)  If the animal pulls any combined weight, including passengers and driver, in excess of two times the animals' body weight. No animal or combination of animals shall pull any vehicle which is occupied by a number of persons which exceeds such vehicle's normal safe seating capacity; 
(2)  If the animal works more than ten hours in any 24-hour period without at least one 20-minute rest break or two ten-minute rest breaks per hours; 
(3)  If the animal pulling a vehicle for hire is moving at a speed faster than a slow trot; 
(4)  If the animal works more than 50 hours in any seven-day period; or if the animal works more than five consecutive days; 
(5)  If the animal is worked with equipment, other than normal blinders, which causes an impairment of vision; or 
(6)  If the animal is subjected to any condition or treatment which will impair the good health and physical condition of the animal. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, working hours of animals shall include time spent on rest breaks and all the time animals are available for hire, and the term "slow trot" means a speed of five to 15 miles per hour. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(4)) 
Sec. 12-467. - Use of harness. 
(a)  No animal will be worked without a padded saddle or bit that is approved by the Gwinnett County S.P.C.A. 
(b)  The harness must be oiled and cleaned so as to be soft at all times. 
(c)  The harness will be properly fitted and maintained, and kept free of makeshift material, such as wire, sisal rope, and hazardous rusty chain. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(5)) 
Sec. 12-468. - Vehicles for hire pulled by animals. 
(a)  Vehicles for hire pulled by animals must be properly lubricated and wheels must spin freely. 
(b)  Vehicles used for the purposes as outlined above shall conform to the following vehicle specifications: 
(1)  The wheel base shall be equal to or less than 14 feet. 
(2)  The total overall length of the vehicle shall be equal to or less than 28 feet. 
(3)  The maximum overall width of the vehicle shall be equal to or less than 78 inches. 
(4)  The tires shall be rubber or other resilient material. Metal tires or wheels are prohibited. 
(5)  The vehicle right turn radii shall not be greater than 12 feet for the right rear wheel and 24 feet for the left front wheel. 
(6)  The vehicle shall be drawn by no more than two animals, except at parades and at special events approved by the City. 
(7)  Vehicles shall be equipped with one red light on each outer extremity of the rear of the vehicle body and mounted between two and five feet above the road surface. Similarly mounted yellow lights shall be mounted on the front of the vehicle body. Each light shall be no less than four inches in diameter. Vehicles shall also be equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(6)) 
Sec. 12-469. - Use of whips. 
No driver may whip an animal with more than a light touch by a light whip approved by the Gwinnett County S.P.C.A. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(7)) 
Sec. 12-470. - Diapers. 
(a)  No animal shall pull a vehicle for hire unless such animal is wearing a diaper. Diapers must be properly fitted and constructed of a sturdy material to ensure comfort to the animal and complete waste disposal. 
(b)  Should a diaper fail for any reason, manure and urine shall be immediately treated with a chemical deodorizing solution, and manure must be removed immediately from the street by the carriage operator. Each carriage must be equipped with a suitable scoop shovel and airtight container. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(8)) 
Sec. 12-471. - Trailers. 
Any trailer or vehicle involved in transporting animals governed in this division must be in good working order and must be near the working location, so as to provide speedy removal of any animal in an emergency situation. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(9)) 
Sec. 12-472. - Drivers of animal-drawn vehicles. 
Drivers of animal-drawn vehicles shall be required to comply with the following: 
(1)  Each driver must have in his possession a completed trip sheet for the vehicle he is driving and his current shift. Said trip sheet shall be kept with the carriage and available for inspection by the City. 
(2)  Drivers must have a working knowledge and general experience involving livestock and driving carriages or animal-drawn vehicles. 
(3)  Companies must provide new drivers with a driver-apprentice training program. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(10)) 
Sec. 12-473. - Animal-drawn vehicle route system. 
A proposed detailed route system shall be submitted to the City Police Chief for review, recommendation and approval. The Police Chief shall designate streets and hours of the day that animal-drawn vehicles will be prohibited. A route system shall be submitted for each vehicle to be placed into operation. This detailed route system shall include the following information: 
(1)  The hours of operation for the vehicle; 
(2)  The days of the week the vehicle will be in operation; 
(3)  The duration of the operation (i.e., summer only or yearround); 
(4)  All locations for loading and unloading passengers. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(11)) 
Sec. 12-474. - Animal-drawn vehicle operating specifications. 
Animal-drawn vehicles shall adhere to the following operating specifications during the hours of operation: 
(1)  Vehicles shall not make any left turn movements except from one-way streets. 
(2)  Vehicles shall travel in the curb lane except when passing parked vehicles or other obstructions which prevent use of the curb lane. 
(3)  Vehicles shall not travel on streets with grades equal to or greater than ten percent without approval of the Police Chief. 
(4)  Vehicles shall not stop within the roadway other than at designated loading and unloading areas except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
(5)  Vehicles shall observe all applicable rules of the road as set forth in the State of Georgia rules of the road. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(12)) 
Sec. 12-475. - Identification and marking generally. 
Every animal-drawn carriage shall have a sign plainly painted on each side of the vehicle, in letters not less than four inches high, containing the full name of the animal-drawn carriage company operating the vehicle. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(13)) 
Sec. 12-476. - Registration of number and names of owner and operator; tag required. 
(a)  Registration. The number assigned an animal-drawn carriage in accordance with this division together with the names of the owner and operator of the animal-drawn carriage shall be registered with the City Clerk in a book to be kept for that purpose. 
(b)  State license tag for animal-drawn carriage required . Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle as an animal-drawn carriage under the provisions of this division, the owner of the vehicle shall secure and display on the vehicle a current Georgia license registration tag. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(14), (17)) 
Sec. 12-477. - Condition of animal-drawn carriages. 
(a)  Safe mechanical condition of animal-drawn carriage required. Every animal-drawn carriage operated on the streets of the City shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety equipment remaining intact and operating at all times when the animal-drawn carriage is in service. 
(b)  Cleanliness of animal-drawn carriage required. Each vehicle operating under this division shall be kept painted, and in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(15), (16)) 
Sec. 12-478. - Authority for removal of animal-drawn carriages from streets. 
The City Clerk or Police Chief shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the City any vehicle used as an animal-drawn carriage which is in violation of this division and to prohibit operation of the animal-drawn carriage until all deficiencies have been corrected. An order of the City Clerk or Police Chief to remove a vehicle from the streets may be appealed to the Mayor and Council. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(18)) 
Sec. 12-479. - Rates of fare; rate card required. 
No owner or driver of an animal-drawn carriage shall charge a greater sum for the use of the animal-drawn carriage than in accordance with the published and advertised rates which shall be displayed in each vehicle. Rates shall be displayed in such place as to be conspicuous and to be in clear view of all passengers. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(19)) 
Sec. 12-480. - Stands generally. 
(a)  No parking shall be permitted in the corporate limits of the City except at such stands as may be established by the City Council upon the recommendation of the City Clerk. Whenever any stand is established, the stand may be used by animal-drawn carriages upon a rotation basis of first come-first serve. Fees for the use of stands shall be set by the Council. 
(b)  Drivers of animal-drawn vehicles operated under this division shall maintain stands in a sanitary condition at all times. Any failure on the part of the driver to conform to the requirements of this section shall be unlawful and shall subject the driver and owner to the penalties provided in this division. 
(c)  Any person desiring to have a place designated as a regular stand for animal-drawn carriages in the City shall make application by written petition to the City Council for the establishment of the animal-drawn carriage stand, setting out the location desired for the stand. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(20)) 
Sec. 12-481. - Driver not to leave vehicle while waiting to be hired. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of any animal-drawn carriage to leave the vehicle, or the immediate premises thereof, while the vehicle is parked in an animal-drawn carriage stand while waiting to be hired. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(21)) 
Sec. 12-482. - Soliciting passengers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit passengers verbally or by gesture, directly or indirectly, at any animal-drawn carriage stand or upon the streets of the City. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(22)) 
Sec. 12-483. - Animal-drawn carriage movement prohibited under certain circumstances. 
No driver shall collect fares, make change, or take on or discharge passengers while his animal-drawn carriage is in motion. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(23)) 
Sec. 12-484. - Property left in animal-drawn carriage by passenger. 
Any animal-drawn carriage driver or operator discovering in any animal-drawn carriage under his control, personal property which was lost or left therein by a passenger of such animal-drawn carriage, shall report the loss, and deliver all the property to the office of the animal-drawn carriage company within 12 hours after the discovery of the property. The driver's report shall include brief particulars to enable the company to identify the owner of the property. The company shall retain the property on behalf of the owner for at least 60 days. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(24)) 
Sec. 12-485. - Safety equipment required. 
Each animal-drawn carriage shall be equipped with electrically powered lights or lanterns and reflectors when operating during the hours of darkness. The lights and reflectors shall be mounted so that they are visible from any direction. Each animal-drawn carriage shall have on board at all times a four-pound all-purpose fire extinguisher and a first aid kit. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(25)) 
Sec. 12-486. - Hours of operation. 
No animal-drawn carriage shall be operated on City streets between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:30 a.m. on any day. No animal-drawn carriage shall be operated between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except that such restriction shall not apply on legal holidays. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(26)) 
Sec. 12-487. - Traffic violations. 
(a)  Animal-drawn carriages shall be prohibited from stopping in traffic or delaying any on-street traffic for the purposes of loading or unloading passengers or for any other purposes. 
(b)  Every person riding any animal upon a roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle within the City limits of the City of Lawrenceville shall be subject to the provisions of this division and shall operate the vehicles in accordance with the traffic laws of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(c)  Due to the nature of operating animal-drawn vehicles in areas of congestion and heavy traffic within the City, it shall be unlawful to operate the animal-drawn vehicles except when the animals are under complete control at all times and shall be operated with extra caution and due care for the safety of others. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(27)) 
Sec. 12-488. - Compliance required. 
Failure to comply with this division or any of the laws, ordinances and regulations of this City can result in revocation of permit and citation and punishment at Municipal Court. Owners, operators, and all of their agents and employees, including drivers shall comply with any ordinance or laws of this City, and any county, state or federal agency which governs the treatment of animals, including horses or other oxen of burden. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(28)) 
Sec. 12-489. - Penalty. 
Any citation to Municipal Court for violation of any part of this division shall be punishable by fines not to exceed $500.00 per violation and/or community service. 
(Code 2005, § 32-218(29)) 
Secs. 12-490—12-516. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 12-517. - Scope. 
This division shall apply to any person, corporation or other organization which, for a fee, applies any tattoo or other needle-driven processes involving the manipulation of the superficial tissues of the human body, including, but not limited to, tattoos, body paint and similar treatment of the human body within the City limits. The rules and regulations promulgated by the Gwinnett County Board of Health titled "Rules of Gwinnett County Board of Health Body Art Studios and Artists" are hereby adopted by the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia and incorporated by reference into the law of this City. 
(Code 2005, § 32-219(a); Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-518. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin, by pricking in coloring matter so as to form indelible marks or figures, or by the production of scars; provided, however, that the term "tattoo" does not mean a mark placed upon the skin by a physician for medical identification purposes. 
Tattoo artist or practitioner means any person who actually performs the work of tattooing. 
Tattoo establishment means the room, place or building where tattooing is practiced or where any part of the business of tattooing is conducted. 
Tattoo operator means any person, firm, or entity which controls, operates, conducts or manages any tattoo establishment, whether actually performing the work of tattooing or not. 
(Code 2005, § 32-219(b); Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-519. - License, application; information to be given. 
Any person desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of a tattoo artist or practitioner or similar trade or business shall, before engaging in that business trade or profession, file an application for a license addressed to the City Council. The application shall be in writing and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  Applicant shall first obtain a body art studio permit and/or a body artist permit from the Gwinnett County Board of Health pursuant to the "Rules of Gwinnett County Board of Health Body Art Studios and Artists" incorporated by reference into this division in section 12-517. A copy of the required permits shall be attached to this application; 
(2)  Operator and employees must be fingerprinted by the Police Department and a character reference supplied for all persons to operate as a tattoo artist or practitioner and all employees; 
(3)  Name and address of operator; 
(4)  Name and address of any person having previously employed the operator for a space of two years or longer; 
(5)  If the operator is a corporation, the address of the corporation as well as the names and addresses of the agents and employees of the corporation for a period of two years immediately prior to the filing of the application; 
(6)  Qualifications must be plainly stated together with required exhibits annexed to the application; 
(7)  A certificate certifying as to the good moral character of the operator, signed by three currently qualified and registered voters of good moral character of the City. These letters shall not be required for annual renewals of licenses issued under this division. For the purpose of this division, the term "good moral character" means that the person to whom the phrase refers shall not have been convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude; 
(8)  Fingerprints must be submitted to the City at least 60 days prior to issuance of license to allow for investigation of operator and employees and processing of fingerprints by GCIC; 
(9)  Should the operator be a corporation, it shall also submit with the application a certificate, executed as described in subsection (7) of this section, certifying as to the good moral character of each employee and agent of the corporation who is actually engaged in the business of the corporation. 
(Code 2005, § 32-219(c); Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-520. - License requirements; restrictions; issuance; fee. 
(a)  Qualifications . Each operator and all employees under this division, prior to making application for a license must have the following qualifications: 
(1)  The operator and all employees must be of good moral character, and in case the operator is a corporation, it must be created in or domesticated by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  The operator must be at least 18 years of age and have received a high school diploma or graduate equivalency diploma. 
(3)  The operator and each employee must furnish a current health certificate from a medical doctor which shall accompany the application as an exhibit. Should the operator be a corporation, it shall furnish a certificate for all its agents and employees actually engaged and working under the license. The certificate shall recite that the operator or employee is in good health and is free from infectious or contagious disease. 
(4)  The operator, or the manager in the event the operator is a corporation, must furnish with the application their affidavit of previous employment, together with an affidavit of the persons under whom the apprenticeship or practical experience was obtained, specifying that the operator has satisfied the requirements of this section. 
(5)  The operator must submit proof of licensure, certification or permitting by the State pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1 et seq. 
(b)  Location restricted . No permit shall be issued for the operation of a tattoo establishment or to any person engaged as a tattoo operator in any area other than that zoned HSB (Highway Service Business) by the City. In addition, no permit shall be issued if the proposed location is within 1,000 feet, measured by the shortest distance, of a church, school, school yard, day care center, library or other public building. 
(c)  Issuance; fee . If the application is submitted in proper form and is approved by the Council, then the business license department is authorized to issue a business license to the operator upon the payment of any business taxes and regulatory fees due. 
(Code 2005, § 32-219(4)—(6); Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-521. - Information concerning employees to be filed with the City Clerk. 
It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license under this article to file with the City Clerk the names of all employees, their home addresses, home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees with the names of new employees must be filed with the City Clerk within three days from the date of any such change. 
(Code 2005, § 32-219(7); Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-522. - Record of treatments to be kept. 
It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at an establishment, the type of treatment administered, and the name of the employee administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by any City license inspector or City police officer. 
(Code 2005, § 32-219(8); Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-523. - Grounds for suspension or revocation; notice; hearings; refund. 
(a)  No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the City to any licensee hereunder shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause as defined in this division, except that the suspension or revocation of the State permit or license shall cause the City license to be suspended or revoked automatically. 
(b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of the license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating the business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating the business. 
(c)  The City Clerk is delegated the authority to suspend any license issued under this division for due cause in any emergency situation, and said suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next session of the Municipal Court. 
(d)  When a license is revoked under any of the provisions of this section, the City shall not be required to refund any portion of the business tax or regulatory fee. 
(Code 2005, § 32-219(9); Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-524. - Patronage of establishments by minors. 
(a)  Restricted . It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any tattoo establishment unless that person carries with him or her, at the time of the patronage, a written order directing the treatment to be given signed by a licensed physician or unless that person carries the written permission of their parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  Duty of operator. It shall be the duty of the operator of the establishment to determine the age of the persons patronizing the establishment, and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of the establishment. 
(Code 2005, § 32-219(10); Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-525. - Treatment by unlicensed persons to be given only under supervision of license holder. 
Tattoo treatments may be given by persons not holding a license as an tattoo artist or practitioner, provided that the treatments are given under the direct supervision of a person having such a license, and further provided that a person holding the license shall be in the same room where the treatment is being administered during the entire time of the giving of the treatment. 
(Code 2005, § 32-219(11); Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-526. - Hours of operation. 
No tattoo practitioner shall engage in the business or profession except within and between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. nor shall any operator of a parlor, establishment or business operate the same except within and between the aforesaid hours. 
(Code 2005, § 32-219(12); Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-527. - Signed copy of ordinance to be filed with license application. 
A signed copy of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be filed with any license application. 
(Code 2005, § 32-219(13); Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 12-528. - Regulatory fee. 
To perform the investigation required by this division, the operator shall pay the City a regulatory fee of $300.00 at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 2005, § 32-219(14); Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Secs. 12-529—12-549. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - SOLICITING 

Sec. 12-550. - Intent. 
The intent of the City Council in enacting this division is to regulate the sale of goods and services by canvassing, soliciting, or peddling at residences in the City, to the end that criminal activity in the City and abusive techniques utilized by any such canvassers, solicitors or peddlers which adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare in the City will be curtailed. This division is not intended as a de facto prohibition of door-to-door solicitation, nor is it an attempt to adversely affect interstate commerce. Instead, this division is intended to balance competing interests, reduce criminal activity and protect City citizens from abusive sales techniques versus the conduct of proper commercial sales activity. This division is not intended to allow any business activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
Sec. 12-551. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division, the terms "canvasser," "solicitor" or "peddler" include any person who solicits orders door-to-door or house-to-house on behalf of a business, entity, individual, vocation or occupation. 
Sec. 12-552. - Exempt activities or organizations. 
(a)  Persons, businesses and organizations exempted from local regulation by operation of State or federal law or by the Constitution of the United States, or of the State, are exempt from the requirements of this division. 
(b)  Bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations whose field sales representatives are under the age of 15 are not required to obtain an occupation tax certificate, canvasser's or solicitor's permit. 
(c)  Federal, State or local government employees or public utility employees in the performance of his duty for his employer. 
Sec. 12-553. - Occupation tax certificate required, application. 
(a)  All persons, firms, companies, corporations or other entities engaging or offering to engage in business as a canvasser, solicitor or peddler involving going from door-to-door or house-to-house, without an appointment or invitation, in residential areas or businesses of the City, for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions, or conducting business of any kind, shall file an application in the required form, and obtain an occupation tax certificate for such activity from the City Clerk. Provided, however, that nonprofit agencies, entities, or organizations which are certified as exempt from payment of U.S. Income Taxes by the Internal Revenue Service may canvass or solicit without permits, upon registering with the City Clerk and furnishing the Police Department written confirmation of their tax exempt status and a list of their representatives including names, addresses, date of birth, Social Security number, and telephone numbers. 
(b)  The application shall include but shall not be limited to the information required on all occupation tax returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  Full name, date of birth, address, and Social Security number of applicant. 
(2)  Full name(s), date(s) of birth, and Social Security number(s) of any other person(s) having an ownership interest in the proposed business. In the case of a corporation, this list shall include owners of 20 or more percent of the common or preferred stock. 
(3)  Full names, dates of birth, and Social Security numbers, and titles of corporate officers where appropriate. 
(4)  Full name, address, telephone number, date of birth, title, and Social Security number of individuals to be employed. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding an occupation tax certificate under this section to annually file, along with the renewal application for the occupation tax certificate, the names, home address, home telephone number, date of birth, Social Security number and place of employment for all employees so engaged in canvassing, soliciting or peddling. 
Sec. 12-554. - Work permits required, annual list. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, a work permit shall be required for the owner(s), manager(s) and employee(s). 
(b)  Applications for work permits shall be submitted to the Police Department. The application shall be submitted along with a fee of $25.00. The application shall include the following information: full name, home address, home telephone number, date of birth and Social Security number. The Police Department shall conduct a background check and shall issue permits subject to the requirements and limitations contained in sections 12-555 and 12-557. 
(c)  If an application for a work permit is denied for any reason, the applicant will be notified in writing of such denial and the reason for the denial. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Police Department to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the City Clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the Police Department and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $50.00. 
Sec. 12-555. - Applicant disqualification. 
No occupation tax certificate or work permit shall be granted to any person under the age of 18 or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession or sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate or work permit and has been released from parole or probation. 
Sec. 12-556. - General operating provisions. 
It shall be the duty of any person granted a certificate under this division to maintain correct and accurate records concerning proposed method of operation in the City, including the dates and times and area of operation, and employee's assignments by geographic area and dates. Such record shall be kept for a minimum of 12 months beyond the expiration date of the occupation tax certificate and shall be made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee or City Clerk or designee. A copy of such record shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police or his designee quarterly. 
Sec. 12-557. - Suspension or revocation of occupation tax certificate or permit. 
(a)  The work permit or certificate of any canvasser, solicitor or peddler charged with any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sex crime, theft or violence against person or property, criminal solicitation to commit any of these offenses, or violation of this chapter or any other City ordinance while canvassing or soliciting shall be deemed suspended and subject to seizure from the time of lawful arrest by the Police Department, or an arrest for any violation of the Georgia Criminal Code by any law enforcement agency within Gwinnett County. Such suspension shall remain in effect until the canvasser, solicitor or peddler is convicted or acquitted, or until the charge is dismissed, "dead-docketed," "nolle prossed," or "no-billed." It shall be the responsibility of the canvasser or solicitor to present the Police Department with proof that the arrest which led to the suspension was dismissed, "dead-docketed," "nolle prossed," or "no-billed." Upon presentation of proof of such dispositions, the certificate or the canvasser or solicitor permit will be reinstated and will be valid until date of original expiration. 
(b)  The certificate or permit of any canvasser, solicitor or peddler who is convicted, has entered a plea of guilty, or has received a nolo contendere to a felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sex crime, theft or violence against person or property, or criminal solicitation to commit any of these offenses, shall be deemed revoked and subject to seizure by the Chief of Police or designee or the City Clerk or designee from the time of such conviction, guilty, or nolo contendere sentencing. 
(c)  The certificate or permit of any canvasser, solicitor or peddler who is convicted, has pled guilty, or received nolo contendere sentencing for any violation of this chapter shall be deemed revoked and subject to seizure by the Chief of Police or designee or the City Clerk or designee from the time of such sentencing. 
(d)  If a certificate or work permit is denied, revoked or suspended for any reason, the applicant will be notified in writing of such denial and the reason for the denial. The applicant may appeal the decision to deny, revoke or suspend the certificate or permit to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the City Clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the Police Department and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $50.00. 
Sec. 12-558. - Unlawful or prohibited activities. 
The following are prohibited practices for canvassers, solicitors, and/or peddlers and any violation shall constitute grounds for suspension, revocation, or denial of renewal of certificate or permit, and/or arrest: 
(1)  Canvassing, soliciting or peddling on Sunday, or between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(2)  Canvassing, soliciting or peddling at any location where a sign is posted at or near the main entrance or driveway to the residence or business prohibiting such activity. 
(3)  Using any entrance, or part of the building, other than the main entrance to the residence or business. 
(4)  Entering a residence except at the express invitation of the occupant. 
(5)  Failure of the canvasser, solicitor or peddler to inform the occupant in plain terms of the purpose of the call. 
(6)  The canvasser, solicitor or peddler to represent that they are participating in any contest, game or other competitive endeavor, or that they are offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game or endeavor. 
(7)  The canvasser, solicitor or peddler to use vulgar, insulting or threatening language in the course of any solicitation. 
(8)  The canvasser, solicitor or peddler to remain upon the property of the residence or business after the occupant has verbally indicated that they do not wish to make a purchase or donation. For the purpose of this chapter, a solicitation shall be deemed to continue until the solicitor has left property of the residence or business. 
(9)  Canvassing, soliciting or peddling anyone under the age of 18 years. 
(10)  Failure of canvasser or solicitor to have a valid permit prominently displayed on their person (upper front portion of the body commonly referred to as the top of the shoulders down to the waist) or refuse any customer or prospective customer's request to examine same. All canvassers or solicitors of nonprofit organizations who solicit funds without a certificate or permit shall have prominently displayed documentation identifying themselves, their organization including tax exempt status, and shall not refuse any customer or prospective customer the right to examine same upon request. Except that canvassers or solicitors of nonprofit organizations who are under the age of 15 are not required to display or produce for examination any documentation. 
(11)  For more than two canvassers, solicitors or peddlers to engage in solicitation upon any residence or business at the same time for the same goods or services. 
(12)  Canvasser, solicitor or peddler to make more than one solicitation call at the same residence within any consecutive two-week period without receiving prior invitation from the occupant of such residence. 
(13)  Canvasser, solicitor or peddler to violate any of the provisions of this article, or to violate any other county ordinance while engaging in any of the activities described. 
(14)  Canvasser, solicitor or peddler to engage in any of the conduct described in this article during a period in which their certificate or permit is denied, suspended, or revoked. 
(15)  Canvasser, solicitor or peddler to lend, rent, or sell their certificate or permit card to another, or canvass or solicit using the certificate or permit card of another. 
(16)  The canvasser, solicitor or peddler to deviate from the stated guidelines as set out in the certificate or permit application or amendments thereto filed by applicant or certificate holder. 
Secs. 12-559—12-584. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - BILLIARD ROOMS 

Sec. 12-585. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billiard room means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. 
Billiards means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and shall include all forms of the game known as carom billiards, pocket billiard, and English billiards. 
(Code 2005, § 32-222(1); Ord. of 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 12-586. - Occupational tax certificate required; application. 
(a)  Required. All persons, firms or corporations desiring to operate a billiard room shall, prior to commencing such business, trade or profession, comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the governing authority regulating the operation of billiard rooms. 
(b)  Application. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the information required on all occupational tax returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  Name and residence address of the owner-applicant; 
(2)  If the owner-applicant is a corporation, the names of the officers, along with the name and address of the agent for service of process; 
(3)  The name of the manager, and the name of all shareholders holding 20 or more percent of any class of corporate stock; 
(4)  Failure to furnish required information, and in the form designated, shall automatically serve to dismiss the application; 
(5)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths; and 
(6)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provision of the article, and after lapse of the time for appeal, or upon the adjudication of the appeal with decision rendered in favor of the City, the applicant may not reapply for an occupational tax certificate for at least 120 days from the final date of denial. 
(c)  Applicant disqualifications . 
(1)  No occupational tax certificate shall be granted to any person who has had any occupational tax certificate revoked within two years prior to filing the current application. 
(2)  The City Clerk may decline to issue a certificate when any person having an ownership or management interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section for the certificate holder. 
(Code 2005, § 32-222(2), (3); Ord. of 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 12-587. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  No gambling or other games of chance shall be permitted in a billiard room except as authorized by the State of Georgia. 
(b)  All establishments which have three or more billiard tables shall have a manager, or designated employee on duty during operating hours whose responsibility is the operation of the billiard tables. 
(c)  Any establishment which serves any type of alcohol shall have no more than two billiard tables. 
(Code 2005, § 32-222(4); Ord. of 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 12-588. - Inspection of registered establishments. 
Sworn officers of the Police Department or Planning Department shall have the authority to inspect establishments registered under this division during the hours in which the premises are open for business. Such inspection shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-222(5); Ord. of 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 12-589. - Unlawful or prohibited activities. 
No occupational tax certificate shall be granted to any person under the age of 18 years or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, State, or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual-related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under State law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such certificate and has been released from parole or probation. 
(Code 2005, § 32-222(6); Ord. of 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 12-590. - Hours of operation. 
No billiard room shall be open or operated during the hours of 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 2005, § 32-222(7); Ord. of 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 12-591. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall conduct a business or occupation without having obtained a license therefor, or who shall violate any other provision of this division, shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, any and all such penalties to be imposed in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court. 
(Code 2005, § 32-222(8); Ord. of 1-7-2008) 
State Law reference— Local regulatory authority concerning billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 
Secs. 12-592—12-615. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 18. - SOLICITATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS 

Sec. 12-616. - Registration and permit; qualifications. 
(a)  Registration and permit. Any person who wishes to organize, form, or conduct a solicitation of contribution on streets and highways within the City shall be required to apply for a permit for such activity at least seven days in advance of the date on which the solicitation shall take place and to obtain a permit therefor. A separate application shall be required for each day of soliciting. 
(b)  Qualifications . In order to receive such permit, the applicant must produce evidence satisfactory to the City Police Chief or his designee that the organization is a charitable organization registered in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5 or is a charitable organization exempt from such registration in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-l7-9. The Police Chief or his designee shall not process any application which does not contain certification of the registration or exemption of the charitable organization. 
(Code 2005, § 32-223(1), (2)) 
Sec. 12-617. - Application; review of application; disposition; waiver. 
(a)  Application. The application for a permit to conduct such solicitation shall be made to the Police Chief in writing, shall be signed by the person responsible for supervising the solicitation, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The proposed date and time of the solicitation; 
(2)  The proposed location of the solicitation; 
(3)  The number of persons who are expected to participate in the solicitation, the name and address of each participant, and an executed agreement from each participant agreeing to hold harmless and indemnify the City; 
(4)  The name and address of the person or organization sponsoring or promoting the proposed solicitation; 
(5)  A certificate of insurance demonstrating that the organization sponsoring or promoting the proposed solicitation maintains general liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00, together with a certificate showing the City of Lawrenceville as a holder of the policy or an additional named insured; 
(6)  The name, address and phone number of the person making the application for a permit. 
(b)  Review of application. The Police Chief or his designee shall review the information set forth in the application and ascertain the following: the extent of vehicular and pedestrian traffic anticipated at the time and place and on the route of the proposed solicitation; whether or not, in light of all circumstances the proposed solicitation will reasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the City by the general public. The Police Chief shall consider the risk involved in soliciting to the participants and to others using the streets of the City in the selected areas. 
(c)  Disposition . In the event the Police Chief determines, in view of all the circumstances, that the proposed solicitation will unreasonably burden and interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the City by the general public, he shall deny the request for a permit. If he determines on the contrary that the proposed solicitation will not unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the City by the general public, he may grant the permit. In either case, the Police Chief or his designee shall indicate his disposition on the application in writing and shall notify the applicant of the action taken. 
(d)  Waiver . The Police Chief, in his discretion, may waive any of the foregoing requirements of the application. 
(Code 2005, § 32-223(3)—(6)) 
Sec. 12-618. - Conduct during solicitation. 
Each person participating in the solicitation shall wear reflective clothing and shall wear vests, hats or other material to identify the group soliciting. The applicant shall further post adequate notices at least 500 feet in front of the solicitation warning oncoming vehicular traffic of the presence of the solicitation. 
(Code 2005, § 32-223(7)) 
Sec. 12-619. - Revocation of permit. 
Every permit issued under this division is subject to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same should any solicitation occur contrary to the provisions of this division, any other ordinance of the City of Lawrenceville, the laws of the State of Georgia, or the public safety and welfare as determined by the Police Chief of his designee. 
(Code 2005, § 32-223(8)) 
Sec. 12-620. - Penalty. 
Any applicant, participant, person or organization violating the provisions of this division, in addition to the revocation of his or its license, shall be liable for a fine or penalty not less than $200.00 no more than $1,000.00 for each offense and up to six months of imprisonment. 
(Code 2005, § 32-223(9)) 
Sec. 12-621. - Repeal of conflicting laws. 
All existing ordinances of the City of Lawrenceville are hereby repealed insofar as they may be inconsistent with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-223(10)) 
Secs. 12-622—12-645. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 19. - RESERVED 

Secs. 12-646—12-669. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-06, § 1, adopted Mar. 7, 2016, repealed Div. 19, §§ 16-646—16-648, which pertained to telecommunication companies. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
DIVISION 20. - VIDEO STORES 

Sec. 12-670. - Purpose. 
(a)  Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Houston, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; Chattanooga, Tennessee; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Dayton, Ohio; and Gwinnett County, Georgia, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, the Mayor and Council take note of the opportunity for unlawful sexual activities, including, but not limited to, masturbation and oral and anal sex to occur at video stores which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films or videos depicting nudity, and for sexually transmitted diseases to spread as a result of the unhealthy conditions and unlawful activities associated with such booths, and the Mayor and Council further note that persons frequent such video booths for the purpose of engaging in sexual activities within such video viewing booths, and bodily fluids, including semen, urine and feces are found in such video viewing booths. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council find that removal of doors on such video viewing booths and prohibiting holes between such booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in such booths. The Mayor and Council therefore find that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the community to require that doors or other partitions on video viewing booths in video stores be removed and that no doors or holes be allowed to exist between or on adjoining booths. The Mayor and Council find that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing unlawful sexual activities and unhealthy conditions in video viewing booths found in video stores. The Mayor and Council further find that these regulations will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To those ends, this division is hereby adopted. 
Sec. 12-671. - Requirements. 
Any video store having available for customers, patrons, or members, any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any video or motion picture must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access . Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the video store, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction . Every booth, room, or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Each booth, room, or cubicle shall have at least one side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the video store is located. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light-colored, nonabsorbent, and smooth-textured. 
d.  The floor must be light-colored, nonabsorbent, and smooth-textured. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room, or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants . Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room, or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room, or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room, or cubicle. 
(4)  Definition of video stores . The term "video store" means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade which includes videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent of more of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos. The term "video store" includes adult video stores as defined in section 12-401. 
(5)  Enforcement . The provisions of this division may, in addition to any criminal remedy available, be enforceable through an action for abatement of a nuisance in the manner provided by law. The City may apply to a court with jurisdiction to grant equitable relief to abate or remove private video viewing booths and to restrain or enjoin any person from operating or engaging in conduct contrary to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2005, § 32-225) 
Secs. 12-672—12-700. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 21. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS 

Sec. 12-701. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nonpermanent location means any location used to conduct business in a temporary location or for a limited time. The term "nonpermanent location" includes, but is not limited to, moveable vehicles, temporary or moveable structures, tents, awnings, hotels or motels and the like. 
Permanent location refers to a business domiciled within a properly constructed building located within an area zoned for such business. 
Precious metals means any metals, including, but not limited to, in whole or in part, silver, gold and platinum. 
Precious metals dealer means any person, partnership, sole proprietorship, corporation, association or other entity engaged in the business of purchasing, bartering or acquiring in trade any precious metals from persons or sources, other than from manufacturers of or licensed dealers in precious metals, for re-sale in its original form or as changed by melting, reforming, remolding, or for re-sale as scrap or in bulk. 
(Code 2005, § 32-226(1); Ord. of 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 12-702. - Hours and method of operation. 
The hours during which precious metals dealers may conduct business shall be from no earlier than 7:00 a.m. to no later than 9:00 p.m. If dealing in precious metals is ancillary to the principle business, this provision shall only apply to dealings in precious metals and not to other portions of the business. Precious metals dealers may only operate from a permanent location. Conducting business as a precious metals dealer in any nonpermanent location shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 2005, § 32-226(2); Ord. of 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 12-703. - License required, supplementary to business license or occupational tax. 
All persons, before beginning the business of operating a precious metal dealer business, shall first file an application with the City of Lawrenceville Police Department for an annual precious metals dealer license to conduct such business. The issuance of said precious metals dealer license shall be a requirement in addition to a business license or occupation tax certificate required by the Planning and Zoning Department of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(1)  Form of application. The application for a precious metals dealer license shall be completed on a form prescribed by the Police Chief or his designee. At minimum, the application shall include the physical address at which the business is proposed to be operated and the full name, address, phone number, date of birth, photograph and social security number of managerial employees of the business. Additionally, the permit shall list the owner of the business. In the event the business is owned by a partnership or corporation, the partners or officers and registered agent shall be listed. 
(2)  License fee; separate license required for each physical location . The completed form must be accompanied by an application and license fee of $100.00. In the event an owner has more than one physical business location, each location will be required to obtain a separate license. The application fee is nonrefundable in the event the applicant, for any reason, is not issued a license, business license, or occupational tax certificate. 
(3)  Background check required . Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Police Chief or his designee shall conduct a background check on the applicant. A precious metals dealer license may not be issued where the applicant has been convicted, plead guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(4)  Falsified applications . No license shall be issued if it is found that the applicant falsified, concealed or misrepresented any material fact in the application. 
(5)  Denial of license; appeal process . If an application for a precious metals dealer license is denied for any reason, the applicant will be notified in writing of such denial and the reason for the denial. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Police Department to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the City Clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the Police Department and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $100.00. 
(6)  Renewal . Owners are required to renew the license upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee of $100.00. 
(7)  Replacement license . In the event a license is lost or destroyed, a replacement license may be issued for the unexpired term of the initial license. 
(8)  Display of license . Operators of precious metals dealer businesses shall conspicuously display the license at all times while the business is in operation. 
(9)  License issued in error; license the property of the City . Any precious metals dealer license issued through administrative oversight or error may be terminated and seized by the Police Chief or his designee. All precious metals dealer licenses remain the property of the City of Lawrenceville. Upon notice by the Lawrenceville Police Department, the holder of a precious metals dealer license must surrender said license. 
(10)  Suspension or revocation of license; appeal . The Police Chief or his designee may suspend or revoke any license issued under this section for falsifying an application, violation of this section, or if the applicant has otherwise become ineligible to hold a license under this section. The license holder may appeal the decision of the Police Chief to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(11)  Exclusions . Businesses holding a valid pawn license issued in accordance with division 7 of this chapter shall not be required to obtain a separate precious metals dealer license. 
(Code 2005, § 32-226(3); Ord. of 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 12-704. - Work permits required of employees. 
No person shall be employed by a precious metals dealer in any capacity that receives precious metals from others, other than from manufacturers of or licensed dealers in precious metals, until such person has obtained a work permit from the Lawrenceville Police Department. 
(1)  Form of application; fee required . An application for a work permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the Police Chief or his designee. Such application form shall include, at a minimum, the applicant's name, date of birth, and social security number. The applicant must also provide positive identification (only official government-issued pictured identification accepted, e.g., driver's license, passport, military card, or State-issued identification card) at the time of application. 
(2)  Fee for permit. The completed permit application form must be accompanied by an application and permit fee of $100.00. The application fee is nonrefundable. 
(3)  Background check required . Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Police Chief or his designee shall conduct a background check on the applicant. A permit may not be issued where the applicant has been convicted, plead guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(4)  Falsified applications . No permit shall be issued if it is found that the applicant falsified, concealed or misrepresented any material fact in the application. 
(5)  Denial of permit; appeal process . If an application for a work permit is denied for any reason, the applicant will be notified in writing of such denial and the reason for the denial. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Police Department to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the City Clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the Police Department and in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $50.00. 
(6)  Renewal . Permit holders are required to renew the permit upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee of $50.00. 
(7)  Replacement permit. In the event a permit is lost or destroyed, a replacement permit may be issued for the unexpired term of the initial license upon the payment of a permit replacement fee of $20.00. 
(8)  Permit in possession while working; inspection by Police Department . Permit holders must have a valid permit on their person at all times while working within a precious metals dealer establishment. The permit shall be displayed upon the request of a Lawrenceville police officer. 
(9)  Permits issued in error; permit the property of the City . Any work permit issued through administrative oversight or error may be terminated and seized by the Police Chief or his designee. All permits remain the property of the City of Lawrenceville. Upon notice by the Lawrenceville Police Department, the holder of a permit must surrender said permit. 
(10)  Suspension or revocation of permit; appeal . The Police Chief, or his designee may suspend or revoke any permit issued under this section for falsifying an application, violation of this section, or if the applicant has otherwise become ineligible to hold a license under this section. The permit holder may appeal the decision of the Police Chief to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(11)  Exclusions . Persons whose work is substantially that of a precious metals dealer who work at a pawnshop as defined in section 12-200 are not required to have a precious metals work permit in addition to the pawn work permit. 
(Code 2005, § 32-226(4); Ord. of 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 12-705. - Records of transactions; required information; method of transmittal. 
Engaging in the business of dealing in precious metals within the City limits of Lawrenceville is hereby declared to be affected with the public interest due to the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. In the public interest and as set forth in this section, all precious metal dealers shall document all transactions as required by this division. A transaction number will be assigned to every transaction to document the transaction. 
(1)  Identification of persons pledging items . Employees of precious metals dealers shall require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling precious metals to show proper identification prior to conducting a transaction. For purposes of this section, the term "proper identification" consists of a government-issued identification document, such as a driver's license, state identification card, military identification card or passport. 
(2)  Required documentation of identifying data . Employees of precious metals dealers shall document the name, address, telephone number, race, gender, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, social security number, and identifying number from the presented identification of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling precious metals along with the date and time of the transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(3)  Photographs required. Employees of precious metals dealer shall photograph all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling precious metals. Such photograph will be made with a digital camera or web camera. Such photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the precious metals dealer transaction number. Additionally, photographs of the items being pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or sold shall be made. The photographs shall be appended to the record of the transaction in a manner prescribed by the Police Chief or his designee. 
(4)  Fingerprint and signature required . Employees of precious metals dealers shall obtain from all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property the fingerprint of the right hand index finger. The fingerprint shall be appended to the record of the transaction in a manner prescribed by the Police Chief or his designee. The subject shall also sign the transaction. In the event the indicated finger is missing, the next finger available on the right hand will be used and the finger used will be noted on the transaction record. If the right hand is amputated, congenitally deformed, or otherwise unavailable due to medical condition, the left hand may be used and noted on the record. If neither hand is available due to medical condition, amputation or congenital deformity, that fact will be noted on the transaction record. Fingerprints and the information required in this section shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any precious metals. 
(5)  Accurate property descriptions required . Employees of precious metals dealers shall document an accurate description of all items pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or sold to the precious metals dealer. Such description shall include, at a minimum and to the extent possible, manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones (if jewelry), and any identifying names, marks, numbers or engravings. 
(6)  Tags required . Each item received by a precious metals dealer as a pledge, trade, pawn, exchange, or purchase shall be tagged with the transaction number. Such tag must remain attached to the item until the item is disposed of by sale, trade or other lawful means. 
(7)  Wholesale purchases excluded . The requirements of this section shall not apply to property purchased from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sale; however, the precious metals dealer employees shall maintain purchasing records for property exempted under this subsection while the property remains in inventory. 
(8)  Special requirements for new or unused goods . Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging may not be accepted by a precious metals dealer unless the customer can supply a copy of the original sales receipt or other proof of purchase. Precious metals dealers shall retain a copy of such receipt or proof of purchase on file while the item is in inventory. 
(9)  Entry of transactions for electronic transmittal . Each precious metals dealer shall enter each transaction into the electronic automated reporting system as it occurs. In the event the electronic transmittal system is unavailable, precious metals dealers shall make records in paper form as prescribed by the Police Chief or his designee. Such paper forms shall include all information otherwise required. Precious metals dealers shall keep a supply of paper forms available at all times. 
(10)  Automated reporting system; mandatory use . The Police Chief or his designee shall select and designate an automated electronic reporting system for use by precious metals dealers to record and transmit transactions. The precious metals dealer will be assessed a fee for each transaction entered into the system. This fee may be assessed to the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property. Said fee will be collected by the Police Chief or his designee, which may be a third-party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Code 2005, § 32-226(5); Ord. of 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 12-706. - Retention of property; storage; police holds. 
(a)  All property received through any precious metals dealer transaction shall be held for at least 30 days before being disposed of by sale, transfer, shipment, smelting, reforming, reshaping or otherwise. 
(b)  All property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or sold to the precious metals dealer shall be held and maintained on the premises of the licensed precious metals dealer that completed the transaction, or, if impractical, at such other location as may have been previously approved in writing by the Police Chief or his designee. No off-site locations will be approved which are outside of the City limits of Lawrenceville. 
(c)  The Lawrenceville Police Department shall have the authority to place property that is the subject of a law enforcement investigation on police hold. In that event, the Police Department shall notify the precious metals dealer of the need for the police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Such notification may be made verbally; however, written notice shall be provided within 24 hours of the verbal hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the precious metals dealer to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from the police hold or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Code 2005, § 32-226(6); Ord. of 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 12-707. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any precious metals dealer, his agents or employees, to receive, from minors, goods of any character or description. A minor, for the purpose of this section, is an individual under the age of 18. 
(Code 2005, § 32-226(7); Ord. of 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 12-708. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The Lawrenceville Police Department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this section. Sworn officers of the Lawrenceville City Police Department, and civilian employees designated by the Police Chief shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this section during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this section and State law. 
(Code 2005, § 32-226(8); Ord. of 9-13-2010) 
Sec. 12-709. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, company, corporation or other entity who violates any provision of this division may be subject to arrest or summoned to appear in the Lawrenceville Municipal Court and, upon conviction or other finding of guilt, may be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or six months imprisonment, or both. 
(Code 2005, § 32-226(9); Ord. of 9-13-2010) 
State Law reference— State law does not prevent local government from licensing precious metals dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-5. 
DIVISION 22. - ESTATE SALES 

Sec. 12-710. - Definitions. 
Estate sale means the sale of personal property, which is open to the public and conducted from or on any property located on any residential lot by an individual, company, firm, corporation or other entity for a profit and on behalf of another person or persons. The term "estate sale" shall not include yard sales, garage sales or carport sales which are conducted directly by individuals who own the goods or merchandise to be sold. 
Personal property means any property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individuals and acquired in the normal court of living in or maintaining a residence. Such term includes, but is not limited to, clothing, furniture, jewelry, artwork, household items, dishes, antiques and other similar goods owned by the person or persons who reside or formerly resided in the residence where such estate sale is to take place. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-1-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-711. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to conduct an estate sale without first having obtained a license from the City of Lawrenceville Police Department. There shall be no fee charged for such permit; however, no permit will be granted unless all requirements set forth herein have been met. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-1-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-712. - Application for permit. 
At least five business days prior to the start date of an estate sale, the person or entity seeking to conduct such sale shall file a written application with the City of Lawrenceville Police Department, setting forth the following information: 
(1)  Full name and address of the person or entity seeking the permit; 
(2)  The address of the proposed estate sale; 
(3)  The dates and times which the proposed sale will take place; 
(4)  The estimated value of the goods to be sold; 
(5)  The estimated number of attendees; 
(6)  A traffic and parking plan detailing the proposed method for controlling traffic in order to ensure the flow of vehicular traffic will not be impeded during the proposed sale; and 
(7)  An affirmative statement that the goods to be sold are owned by the person or persons with whom the applicant has contracted to conduct the sale, and that such goods were not acquired for the purposes of resale. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-1-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-713. - Number and duration. 
No estate sale shall be permitted on any premises more than two times in any 12-month period. A second shall on one premises shall not begin until at least 30 days after the last day of the first sale. Each estate sale shall be limited to four consecutive days and shall be allowed only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-1-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-714. - Display area. 
All personal property offered for sale shall be displayed within the residence, garage, carport or rear yard. However, a vehicle offered for sale may be displayed on the paved driveway within the front yard. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-1-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-715. - Conditions of permit. 
Any estate sale permit issued to an applicant shall be subject to the following additional conditions: 
(1)  Parking of motor vehicles is restricted to one side of the street, and where practical, shall be restricted to the same side of the street which the sale will be conducted. 
(2)  No permit holder shall allow vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the vicinity of the sale. Permit holders shall report to the Police Department any vehicles which are parked in violation of this division. 
(3)  Permit holders shall keep the streets, sidewalks and general vicinity of the sale location free from trash and litter. 
(4)  No permit holder shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on or near the premises. 
(5)  No permit holder shall permit persons to line up or congregate, either on foot or in automobiles, prior to the start of the estate sale. 
(6)  All signs advertising an estate shall meet the requirements of article X of the City of Lawrenceville Zoning Ordinance. 
(7)  Such further conditions as the Chief of Police shall deem necessary to ensure the general health, safety and welfare of the public. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-1-2016 ) 
Sec. 12-716. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this division may be revoked or any application for issuance of a permit may be refused by the Chief of Police if the application submitted by the applicant or permit holder contains any false, fraudulent or misleading information or statements. 
(b)  The Chief of Police may revoke any estate sale permit and order the sale stopped upon a determination that any of the conditions of this division have been violated. 
( Ord. No. 2016-01, 2-1-2016 ) 
Chapter 14 - COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Appointment of judge, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2; maximum punishment authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); powers of judges of municipal courts in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-5 et seq., 40-13-22, 40-13-23. 

Sec. 14-1. - Scope of jurisdiction. 
The Municipal Court of this Municipality shall try violations of Municipal Ordinances, State traffic laws, and certain misdemeanor offenses as identified in State law, and shall have the power and authority to impose fines upon persons convicted of said offenses, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law if such fines are not paid. 
(Code 2005, § 5-101) 
Sec. 14-2. - Appointment and qualifications of Judge. 
The Mayor, with consent of the City Council, shall appoint a Chief Judge and any such Associate Judges in accordance with the qualifications contained in the City Charter. In the event that the Chief Judge and the duly appointed Associate Judges are not able to attend court, the Chief Judge shall have the authority to appoint a judge pro hac vice. 
(Code 2005, § 5-102) 
Sec. 14-3. - Record of cases. 
A record of all cases heard in the Municipal Court for violation of this Code or other municipal ordinances shall be kept in a suitable bound volume or in appropriate electronic format by the Court Administrator. Such record shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final disposition of the case, and the date of final disposition. 
(Code 2005, § 5-103) 
Sec. 14-4. - Service of summons. 
Any person charged with violating any City ordinance shall receive notice by service of a summons or citation as provided in this section. Such summons or citation may be issued by the Court Administrator, a Code Enforcement Officer or any police officer of the City. The summons or citation shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, the time and place, as far as practicable, of the offense charged, and the day, hour and place of trial, requiring the accused to appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court to answer the accusation made. Service of the summons or citation shall be made by a police officer or Code Enforcement Officer of the City either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his most notorious place of abode, except that in the case of a summons or citation issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons or citation may be directed to an unknown person as owner of an automobile designated in the summons or citation and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. 
(Code 2005, § 5-104) 
Sec. 14-5. - Subpoenas. 
The Court Administrator shall issue subpoenas for the appearance of all witnesses necessary for the prosecution or for the defense in any case pending before the Municipal Court. All subpoenas shall be served in the same manner as a summons. 
(Code 2005, § 5-105) 
Sec. 14-6. - Failure to obey summons or subpoena. 
Any person who fails to appear at the time and place set out in any summons or subpoena served upon him shall be guilty of contempt of court and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for same. 
(Code 2005, § 5-106) 
Sec. 14-7. - Arrest and bond. 
(a)  Appearance bond; procedure for accepting . Offenses against the ordinances of the City shall be bailable as follows: 
(1)  The Police Chief, Judge, Court Administrator or any other officer designated by the Police Chief may accept bond of the accused payable to the City, conditioned upon the appearance of the accused at the next session or any subsequent session of the Municipal Court as stated in the bond to answer the charge. 
(2)  The bond shall be in writing in an amount established in a schedule approved by the Municipal Court Judge. 
(3)  A person arrested for violation of a City ordinance may be released on his own recognizance or may deposit, in lieu of an appearance bond, his driver's license with the arresting officer, the Police Chief or the Judge if, in any of these officials' determination, the person will appear at the time set for the court appearance in view of the following considerations: 
a.  The seriousness of the offense charged; 
b.  The penalty provided by law; 
c.  The number of charges pending against the defendant; 
d.  The criminal record of the defendant; 
e.  The residence of the defendant and the length of time of residence; 
f.  The defendant's age; 
g.  Marital status and number of children; 
h.  Residency of the relatives of the defendant; 
i.  Employment of defendant (by whom, nature of work and how long employed); 
j.  Former employment; 
k.  Amount of earnings; 
l.  The defendant's character, reputation and previous criminal history; 
m.  The defendant's mental condition; and 
n.  Whether the defendant has membership in any clubs or societies, church affiliation and other things which could show that he is a responsible member of the community with established community ties. 
(4)  Any person released under subsection (a)(3) of this section shall receive a receipt for any driver's license deposited, or, if released on the person's own recognizance, shall sign and receive a copy of the citation or ticket describing the violation for which the person was arrested. 
(5)  All persons arrested or notified by citation or ticket of parking violations shall be released on their own recognizance. 
(b)  Professional bondsman . 
(1)  Bond required. No professional bondsman shall be accepted as surety on a bail bond unless he has deposited with the City Clerk the sum of $10,000.00 to guarantee the payment of any bond, if forfeited, which he may sign. In the event the defendant named in any bond signed by a professional bondsman fails to appear according to the conditions of the bond, and the bond is forfeited, the City Clerk shall deduct the amount of the bond from the deposit made as required in this section and pay the same into the City treasury, and the bondsman shall not be accepted as surety on a bail bond again until he has deposited with the City Clerk an amount sufficient to restore the deposit to the original required amount. 
(2)  Qualifications . In addition to the qualifications contained in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50(b), professional bondsmen shall meet the following additional qualifications. 
a.  Each bondsman shall provide the City with a current period financial statement, including a documented balance sheet. 
b.  Each bondsman shall provide the City with a copy of his business license for Gwinnett County or the City of Lawrenceville. 
c.  Each bondsman shall provide a written proposal outlining the steps it takes as a surety to identify and locate potential defendants after their bonds are forfeited. 
d.  Each bondsman shall provide a written history of his experience in the bonding business, including a statement listing the principals, officers, directors, and shareholders of his corporation. 
e.  Each bondsman shall provide to the Court Administrator with the business name, complete address, telephone number and email address of the chief operating officer or his designee. 
f.  Each bondsman shall update this information annually. 
g.  Each bondsman shall submit to and must pass a full investigation by the Gwinnett County Sheriff as provided in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50. Any information which demonstrates any involvement in criminal activity shall be grounds for disqualification of the applicant. 
(Code 2005, § 5-107) 
Sec. 14-8. - Forfeiture of appearance bonds. 
(a)  The Judge or his designee shall call the case in its regular order, and, if the accused is not in Court and does not answer the call, and, if no good and sufficient reason is given for nonappearance, the Judge shall enter on the docket where the case is stated "bond forfeited," or similar words. 
(b)  Upon forfeiture of any bond, the cash deposited as security shall be paid to the City Clerk by the Clerk of Court, and it shall become the property of the City. 
(c)  Upon the forfeiture of any bond signed by a person as surety, the Clerk of Court shall issue an execution against the principal and surety on the bond for the amount thereof which shall be collected as tax executions are collected. 
(Code 2005, § 5-108) 
Sec. 14-9. - Court costs. 
The Chief Judge of the City of Lawrenceville Municipal Court shall be authorized to establish, by court order, a surcharge amount which shall be added to any penalty imposed for violation of City ordinances, codes or State law violations over which the Court has jurisdiction. The surcharge shall be used to defray the cost of operation associated with the prosecution of such offense and the amount set by the Chief Judge shall bear a reasonable relationship to the Court's operation costs, which sums shall be paid into the City Treasury. If the addition of the surcharge results in a total monetary penalty exceeding that which is allowed by law, such surcharge shall be reduced to ensure compliance with all applicable laws. 
(Code 2005, § 5-109; Ord. of 7-2-2009; Ord. of 10-3-2011) 
Sec. 14-10. - Bench warrant fee. 
The Judge of the Municipal Court is authorized to impose a bench warrant fee in the amount of $200.00 whenever an accused fails to appear in Court on or before the date provided in the summons or citation. 
Sec. 14-11. - Collection of fines. 
When directed by the Judge of the Municipal Court, the City Clerk shall issue executions for fines imposed by said Court, including the costs, which executions may be levied upon any goods or chattels, lands, or tenements of the person so fined. 
(Code 2005, § 5-111) 
Sec. 14-12. - Terms of court. 
Each term of court of the Municipal Court of Lawrenceville shall be for a period of 180 days. 
(Code 2005, § 5-112) 
Chapter 16 - ELECTIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Adoption of State rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations promulgated by the State Election Board which pertain to municipal elections, together with the provisions of the the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, are hereby adopted as the rules, regulations, and provisions that shall govern the conduct of municipal general and special elections in this City. 
(Code 2005, § 2-101) 
Sec. 16-2. - Expenses. 
Such funds as are necessary for the conduct of elections and for the performance of the duties that are specified by this chapter shall be budgeted and appropriated annually, and from time to time. 
(Code 2005, § 2-102) 
Secs. 16-3—16-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CANDIDATES 

Sec. 16-23. - Notice of candidacy. 
(a)  Filing . Each candidate desiring to have his name placed on the ballot for an office to be filled by a municipal general or special election shall file personally or by agent notice of his candidacy in the manner required by O.C.G.A. § 21-3-132. The notice shall be accompanied by the documents and information required by said section. The time for qualification shall be as established by State law. Qualification fees for each office are hereby set at three percent of the annual salary of the office, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
(b)  Designation of office sought . In the event that a candidate seeks two or more public offices of the City having the same title, the office he is seeking shall be designated by the candidate he seeks to succeed. 
(Code 2005, § 2-301) 
Sec. 16-24. - Qualification fees. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election shall be paid as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132, as amended. 
(Code 2005, § 2-302) 
Sec. 16-25. - Campaign financing disclosure. 
All candidates for municipal public office shall keep all such records and file all such records as are required by the Georgia Campaign and Financial Disclosure Act. 
(Code 2005, § 2-303) 
Secs. 16-26—16-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VOTING 

Sec. 16-54. - Election officials. 
(a)  Appointment . The City Clerk shall be designated the Municipal Election Superintendent and shall select any required manager, assistant managers and poll officers. 
(b)  Qualifications and powers . The Municipal Election Superintendent and all poll officers shall meet such qualifications and exercise all such powers and duties as are provided in Title 21, Chapter 2 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Code 2005, § 2-401) 
Sec. 16-55. - Election districts. 
The area comprising the corporate limits of the City, as the same is now or shall hereafter exist, shall constitute the sole election district of the City. 
(Code 2005, § 2-402) 
Sec. 16-56. - Polling places. 
The polling places within the City shall be as established from time to time. 
(Code 2005, § 2-403) 
Sec. 16-57. - Contested elections. 
Contested elections shall be governed by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 21-2-520—21-2-529. 
(Code 2005, § 2-407) 
Chapter 18 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions, other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, emergency transportation, plan protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Code 2005, § 16-101) 
Sec. 18-2. - Office of the County Emergency Management Director. 
It is the desire and intent of the governing officials of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, that the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, be a part of the Gwinnett County Emergency Management Agency. The present Emergency Management Director will serve as Director for the entire county. Should that office become vacant, the Chairman and County Commissioners of Gwinnett, with concurrence of the Mayors of cities within the County, shall nominate for appointment, by the Governor, a Director of Emergency Management for Gwinnett County. When appointed, the Emergency Management Director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the City on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist City officials in organizing City departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with City and County departments, the Gwinnett County Plan for emergency functions set forth in section 18-1. Such plan will be in consonance with the Georgia Emergency Operations Plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of Gwinnett County and the cities therein for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the Emergency Management Agency and to oversee the carrying out of the day-to-day administration of the Gwinnett Emergency Management Program, including the submission of required reports to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc. 
(6)  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the Gwinnett Emergency Operations Center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the Gwinnett Emergency Operating Center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of Gwinnett governing officials. 
(Code 2005, § 16-102) 
Sec. 18-3. - Gwinnett Emergency Management Agency. 
(a)  The Gwinnett Emergency Management Agency shall be established around existing City and County departments and the emergency functions described in section 18-1 are assigned as follows: 

 
* As appropriate to the local organization, these functions can be assigned to existing departments or may be separate. Functions should be assigned consistent with the local Emergency Operations Plan. 
(b)  Heads of City departments listed in this section are responsible for assisting County department heads in developing appropriate annexes to the local Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the Emergency Management Director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Code 2005, § 16-103) 
Sec. 18-4. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of Lawrenceville, the Mayor of Lawrenceville, separately or jointly with the Chairman, County Commissioners, or, in their absences, their legally appointed successors, the Mayor Pro tem may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operation control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the County. 
(Code 2005, § 16-104) 
Sec. 18-5. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the City, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as City officers and employees. 
(Code 2005, § 16-105) 
Sec. 18-6. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for committing a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2005, § 16-106) 
Sec. 18-7. - Liberality of construction. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Code 2005, § 16-107) 
Chapter 20 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIR QUALITY CONTROL 

Sec. 20-19. - Emissions of gases, vapors and odors. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer or allow any emission of gases, vapors or odors beyond the property line from which such emissions occur to be in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as is or is likely to be injurious to the public welfare, to the health of human, plant or animal life, or to property, or which interferes with the enjoyment of life and property. 
(b)  Detectable odors emitted from the following sources of emission are hereby declared to be objectionable per se: 
(1)  Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture; 
(2)  Asphalt manufacture or refining; 
(3)  Blood processing; 
(4)  Bag cleaning; 
(5)  Celluloid manufacture; 
(6)  Coal tar products manufacture; 
(7)  Compost heaps; 
(8)  Crematory; 
(9)  Creosote treatment or manufacture; 
(10)  Disinfectants manufacture; 
(11)  Distillation of bones, coal or wood; 
(12)  Dyestuff manufacture; 
(13)  Fat rendering; 
(14)  Fertilizer manufacture and bone grinding; 
(15)  Glue or gelatine manufacture; 
(16)  Incinerator or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal or refuse; 
(17)  Oiled rubber or leather goods manufacture; 
(18)  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture; 
(19)  Paper and pulp manufacture; 
(20)  Rubber or gutta percha manufacture; 
(21)  Sauerkraut manufacture; 
(22)  Shoe-blackening manufacture; 
(23)  Soap manufacture; 
(24)  Stockyards; 
(25)  Sulfuric, nitric, or hydrochloric acid manufacture; 
(26)  Tar distillation or manufacture; 
(27)  Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture; 
(28)  Any other air contaminant discharged into the open air of a character and in a quantity which is detrimental to or endangers the public health. 
(Code 2005, § 13-101) 
Sec. 20-20. - Open burning. 
(a)  In general . Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person shall kindle an open fire in any public or private place outside any building. Fires started in violation of this section shall be promptly extinguished by the person responsible for same upon notice by the Gwinnett County Fire Department or the City of Lawrenceville Police Department. During the existence of an air pollution alert, as may be declared by the City Manager, all exceptions are void and no open fires shall be kindled. 
(b)  Exceptions. Open burning may be done under permit as follows: Under a duly granted permit after application for such a permit on forms provided by the Gwinnett County Fire Department. The permit shall be issued by the Gwinnett County Fire Department only. 
(Code 2005, § 13-102) 
Sec. 20-21. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by any designated representative of the Gwinnett County Fire Department and the Police Chief and such subordinate officers of the Gwinnett County Fire Department and the Police Department as are necessary to effectuate the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Code 2005, § 13-103) 
Sec. 20-22. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00, such fine to be imposed at the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court. 
(b)  Action pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall not be a bar to enforcement of this article by injunction or other appropriate remedy, and the Police Chief shall have the power to institute and maintain in the name of the Municipality any and all such enforcement proceedings. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of any person to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding for damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property. 
(Code 2005, § 13-104) 
Secs. 20-23—20-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE REGULATION 

Sec. 20-48. - Noise regulations in general. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, or unusually loud noise which the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing within the City limits. 
(Code 2005, § 14-101) 
Sec. 20-49. - Noises prohibited. 
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing noises in violation of this article, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exhaustive: 
(1)  Motor vehicle horns . The sounding of any horn on any automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle on any street or public place of the City, except as a warning signal. 
(2)  Radio, television sets, and similar devices . The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and amplifiers . The using or operating of any loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device mounted upon any vehicle within the City for the purpose of broadcasting or advertising any information about any business or activity for any other purpose unless a permit for such sound amplification has been obtained from the City Manager. 
(4)  Construction equipment and activity . The operating of any equipment or the performing of any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, roads, or projects within the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless a permit for such construction or repair work between such hours has been obtained from the City Manager. 
(5)  Exhausts . The discharging into the open air of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(6)  Animals and birds . The keeping of any animal or bird which, by frequent or continuous barking, chirping or other means of communication, disturbs the comfort or repose of the residents of any residential neighborhood. 
(7)  Vehicle repair in residential areas . The repairing, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the residents of the area. 
(8)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals . The creating of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same are in sue, or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, or court street. 
(9)  Hawkers and peddlers . The selling of anything by outcry within the residential areas of the City, except at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
(10)  Drums . The using of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the City, unless a permit for such use has been obtained from the City Manager or Police Chief. 
(11)  Radios, televisions, musical instruments and similar devices . 
a.  The operating or playing of any radio, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound on the public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the operator of the device. 
b.  The operating or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in a motor vehicle or public park in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 15 meters (50 feet). 
(12)  The use of Consumer Fireworks as defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1, as amended, at any time after 9:00 p.m. or before 10:00 a.m. on each day with the exception of the hours of 9:00 p.m., to and including the time of 11:59 p.m. on January 1, July 3, July 4, and December 31 of each year, and between the time of 12:00 midnight and up to and including the time of 1:00 a.m. on January 1 of each year. 
(Code 2005, § 14-102; Ord. No. 2017-16, 7-12-2017 ) 
Sec. 20-50. - Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals and warning devices; 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency; and 
(3)  Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(Code 2005, § 14-103) 
Sec. 20-51. - Injunctions. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this article which causes discomfort to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents of this City shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subjected to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 2005, § 14-105) 
Chapter 22 - FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 22-1. - Adoption of Gwinnett County Fire Code. 
The City Council adopts and incorporates by reference the Fire Code within Gwinnett County Code of Ordinances, Chapter 46, Article II, as may be amended from time to time, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life or property from fire and explosion; the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this chapter, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Code 2005, § 10-101) 
Sec. 22-2. - Modifications of terms. 
The aforementioned County Code provisions incorporated by reference in section 22-1 shall be considered amended in any manner necessary to change the wording to express the intent of adoption and incorporation. "City of Lawrenceville, Georgia" shall replace references to "Gwinnett County." "Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia" shall replace "Board of Commissioners" where appropriate. 
(Code 2005, § 10-102) 
Sec. 22-3. - Amendments to the Gwinnett County Fire Preventive Ordinance. 
(a)  The following specific amendments to the Gwinnett County Fire Preventive Ordinance are adopted for application within the City of Lawrenceville: 
(1)  Section 7, Waivers is deleted and in lieu thereof the following provision is substituted: 
Administrative Variances of O.C.G.A. Title 30, Chapter 3. The Fire Marshal, or his assistant, is authorized to grant exemptions from the provisions of the Official Code of Georgia, Title 30, Chapter 3, with regard to the access and use of facilities by handicapped persons. The decision of the Fire Marshal on said exemptions may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(2)  Gwinnett County Code § 46-36, Appeals, is deleted and in lieu thereof the following provision is substituted: 
Appeals and Administrative Variances. Any appeal or request for a variance from the provisions of this chapter shall be submitted in writing to the Fire Marshal's Office with the explanation and reasons for the variance. In response thereto, the Fire Marshal's Office shall furnish a statement as to the purpose of the requirement with their recommendations on the request. Both statements shall then be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals for final disposition. 
(3)  Gwinnett County Code § 46-28, Enforcement of article, is deleted and in lieu thereof the following provision is substituted: 
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by authorized officers of the Gwinnett County Department of Fire and Emergency Services, authorized officers of the Gwinnett County Department of Police Services, or authorized officers of the City of Lawrenceville Police Department. 
(b)  All violations shall be returned to the Municipal Court of the City where the violation falls within the jurisdictional limits of said Court. 
(Code 2005, § 10-103) 
Chapter 24 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.; local ordinances relating to unfit structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything which causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another, provided that the hurt, inconvenience or damage complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary reasonable person; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
Nuisance per se means an act, occupation, or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
Private nuisance means a nuisance limited in its injurious effects to one or a few individuals. 
Public nuisance means a nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
(Code 2005, § 33-101) 
Sec. 24-2. - Proceedings to abate generally. 
Any nuisance existing within the corporate limits of this City, except for a nuisance hereinafter expected, shall be abated in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
(1)  Initiation . Proceedings to abate a nuisance, whether public or private, shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint with the Municipal Court, which complaint shall state the nature and location of the nuisance and the name and address of the complainant. In the case of a private nuisance, the complaint shall be filed by the person injured by the nuisance; in the case of a public nuisance, the complaint shall be filed on behalf of the public by a City Official or by a citizen specially injured by the nuisance. 
(2)  Notice of hearing . 
a.  Upon the filing of a complaint as provided in this section, the Municipal Court shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance complained of is located and, if the person maintaining the same is a different person from the owner, then also to the person maintaining the nuisance, calling on such person to show cause, either personally or by attorney, at the time and place directed by the Municipal Court, why such activity alleged to be a nuisance should not be ordered abated and removed by the City. Such notice shall be served at least two days prior to the date set for the hearing by any police officer of the City, and shall be made either personally or by leaving a copy at the party's most notorious place of abode. 
b.  A copy of such notice shall also be mailed to the complainant. 
(3)  Order of abatement . If, after hearing all the evidence, the Municipal Court should decide that the activity complained of is a nuisance, the Judge shall issue an order commanding that the nuisance be abated. A copy of such order of abatement shall be served on the party maintaining the nuisance. 
(4)  Effect of noncompliance . In the event of a refusal to comply with the order of abatement issued by the Municipal Court, the person maintaining the nuisance shall be subject to arrest for violation of state law. 
(Code 2005, § 33-102) 
Sec. 24-3. - Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in section 24-2 shall prevent the Municipal Court from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Code 2005, § 33-103) 
Sec. 24-4. - Findings regarding unsafe, unsanitary or abandoned buildings, dwellings or structures. 
Under the authority of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9, the City specifically adopts by reference and incorporates in this section the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17. These provisions are adopted as if specifically set forth in their entirety in this section. 
(Code 2005, § 33-104) 
Sec. 24-5. - Duties of Director of Planning, Zoning and Inspections. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-10, the Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville hereby designate the Director of Planning, Zoning and Inspections as the public officer with the authority to enforce the provisions of section 24-4. The Director of Planning, Zoning and Inspections may determine, under existing ordinances, that dwellings, buildings or structures are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such buildings, dwellings, or structures which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwellings, buildings or structures; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residences of the Municipality. Such conditions may include the following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
(b)  The public officer designated by this chapter may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(c)  Within the context of this chapter, the public official shall utilize the existing codes of the City of Lawrenceville to the standard for satisfaction of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the electrical codes, building codes and fire codes previously adopted by the City of Lawrenceville. 
(Code 2005, § 33-105) 
Sec. 24-6. - Powers of Director of Planning, Zoning and Inspections. 
The Director of Planning, Zoning and Inspections is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this chapter and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-10 and 41-2-12 through 41-2-17, in addition to others: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the City of Lawrenceville in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and affix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Code 2005, § 33-106) 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities may proscribe certain conduct not already prohibited by state law, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Prohibited . It shall be unlawful for any person to create any disturbance that is contrary to the peace and tranquility enjoyed by the people; or interfere with the lawful movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or ignore, interfere or disobey a lawful command from a law enforcement officer in the lawful performance of his duties; or engage in any of the following acts: 
(1)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear for safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Any person who shall endanger the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, threats of violence or abusive conduct; 
(4)  Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(5)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(6)  Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place; 
(7)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for unlawful purposes as defined by the current ordinances of the City of Lawrenceville; 
(8)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purposes or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(9)  Any person who shall go to or be at any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(10)  Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the City of Lawrenceville, or who shall aid or abet therein; 
(11)  Any person who shall, without provocation, use to or of another person in his presence "fighting words" that are opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace or such words, and which, as a matter of common knowledge under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in his presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment; 
(12)  Any person operating a motor vehicle upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle access or pedestrian walkway of any parking facility by sudden starting, stopping or turning so as to endanger the person or property of another; 
(13)  Any person operating a motor vehicle upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle access or pedestrian walkway of any parking facility at a speed great enough to endanger the person or property of another; 
(14)  Any person who aids or abets or encourages a minor to do any act which constitutes disorderly conduct or a breach of the peace; 
(15)  Any person who, without authority of law, purposely or recklessly obstructs free pedestrian or vehicular access to any public school parking area or building designated for use of persons attending or participating in an athletic event in such a way as to deny access or in such a way as to create a hazard or fails or refuses to remove such obstruction after receiving a reasonable official request or order of a police officer or principal or his assistant, or duly authorized agent of such public school that he do so; 
(16)  Any person knowingly or willfully ignoring, interfering with or disobeying a lawful command from or obstructing a law enforcement officer in the lawful performance of his duties; 
(17)  Any person giving to any law enforcement officer or official of the City of Lawrenceville acting in the lawful discharge of his official duties a false name, address, date of birth, social security number, false identification document, or to otherwise fail to identify himself after a lawful request has been made for such information; 
(18)  Any person urinating or defecating on a public street, sidewalk, alleyway, or other place, public or private, within the view of the public; or 
(19)  Any person engaging in aggressive solicitation. For purposes of this subsection, the term "aggressive solicitation" includes actions seeking the immediate giving of money or other items of value from persons in any place in the City when: 
a.  The solicitor has initially been given a negative response; 
b.  The solicitor engages in uninvited touching or physical contact of any person while engaged in the solicitation; 
c.  Blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means while engaged in soliciting; or 
d.  Speaking in a loud boisterous voice, lacing speech with profane or vulgar language, or using threatening gestures while engaged in soliciting. 
Any singular or combined presence of the acts stated in this subsection may constitute a violation of this section. 
(b)  The safe operating environment of private or public educational institutions being a concern for the faculty, staff, and students and being necessary to foster a proper environment for learning, any person violating plainly posted and publicly visible rules and regulations of such schools regarding conduct of visitors to such campuses shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 2005, § 31-101; Ord. of 12-1-2008; Ord. of 9-24-2010) 
Sec. 26-2. - Discharging firearms, air guns, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm within 50 yards of any street, alley or building, or at any point upon the land of another person without the expressed consent of the owner or occupant thereof; or to discharge, at any time, any air gun, BB gun or toy gun which projects lead or any other missile. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property; nor any person shooting for sport in an indoor place of amusement. 
(Code 2005, § 31-102) 
Sec. 26-3. - Tampering and/or diversion of City services. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post or other apparatus belonging to the City of Lawrenceville and used by the City in the sale of electricity, gas, water or other public service; or to intentionally and without authority prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied, or in any way to intentionally divert any services of the City or cause the services to be used without the consent of the City. 
(b)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section and/or the person who, with knowledge of such violation, receives the benefit of such services without proper charge as a result of such improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. Additionally, any person violating this section may be ordered to pay restitution to the City in an amount equal to the value of the services unlawfully received and/or damage caused to the City's property. 
Sec. 26-4. - Possession of marijuana. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to possess marijuana within the corporate limits. Pursuant to Ga. Const. art. VI, § IV, ¶ I, the Municipal Court of the City of Lawrenceville shall have jurisdiction to try and dispose of cases where a person is charged with the possession of one ounce or less of marijuana. 
(Code 2005, § 31-111) 
Sec. 26-5. - Smoking prohibited on the campus of Georgia Gwinnett College. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  Studies by the Surgeon General of the United States, the National Academy of Science and other health organizations have linked passive exposure to tobacco smoke (second-hand smoke) to a variety of negative health conditions in nonsmokers. 
(2)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, seek to strike a reasonable balance between the rights of smokers and nonsmokers by regulating smoking on certain public properties located within the City of Lawrenceville. 
(3)  In an effort to provide a safer and healthier environment the City of Lawrenceville, the Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville implement this section restricting smoking on the campus of Georgia Gwinnett College. 
(b)  Prohibition. No persons shall smoke upon the campus of Georgia Gwinnett College other than in areas which have been specifically designated as smoking areas by the administration of Georgia Gwinnett College. For purposes of this section, the campus of Georgia Gwinnett College shall include all property located within the City limits of the City of Lawrenceville and owned by the Georgia Board of Regents, the State of Georgia, Gwinnett County, the City of Lawrenceville, or any other entity which is under the operational control of the administration of Georgia Gwinnett College and is used by Georgia Gwinnett College for the purposes of operating that College. 
(c)  Violation, penalty and enforcement. 
(1)  Smoking on the campus of Georgia Gwinnett College other than in a designated smoking area shall be a violation of this section and shall be punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed $100.00. 
(2)  This section may be enforced by the City of Lawrenceville Police or the campus police of the Georgia Gwinnett College. 
(3)  All citations issued under this section shall be directed to the Municipal Court of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1006, § 31-116, 1-9-2012) 
Secs. 26-6—26-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 26-35. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means any mechanized and/or electronic device or set of devices intended to detect and signal the need for police at a premises in which such device or set of devices is installed. 
Alarm user means, with respect to any premises, any individual, partnership, association, public or private corporation, governmental entity or other person or group who owns, leases, manages, or otherwise controls such premises, whether such ownership, leasing, management, or control is shared with other persons and whether it is direct or indirect. 
Auto-dialer means any device or equipment designed or intended to call a predesignated telephone number in the event of an activation of the alarm system. 
False alarm means the transmittal of a request for response or assistance to the Lawrenceville Police Department under circumstances where no such response or assistance appeared to be reasonably necessary at the time of such transmittal, and where such transmittal is made either automatically by an alarm system or by an individual in reliance upon an alarm system. 
Police officer means any sworn member of the Lawrenceville Police Department. 
Premises means any structure or other improvement to real property or any portion of any such structure or other improvement which is intended for separate use and occupancy apart from other portions thereof. 
Response means the dispatch of a police officer to the premises where an alarm system has been activated. 
Responsible person means, with respect to any premises, any individual who owns, leases, manages, or otherwise controls such premises, whether such ownership, leasing, management, or control is shared with other persons and whether it is direct or indirect. 
Transmit means to send either manually or automatically, by any device or method, a signal to request a response or assistance from the Lawrenceville Police Department. 
(Code 2005, § 31-117(1)) 
Sec. 26-36. - Maintenance of alarm system. 
With respect to any premises, it shall be the joint and separate responsibility of each responsible person to cause any alarm system upon or within such premises to be maintained in a good state of repair so as to prevent the transmittal of a false alarm, or, in the alternative, to disconnect said alarm system. 
(Code 2005, § 31-117(2)) 
Sec. 26-37. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be a violation of this article for anyone to: 
(1)  Transmit a false alarm. 
(2)  Notify the Lawrenceville Police Department directly through its emergency phone lines of any alarm activation by means of any auto-dialer, telephonic recording, message, signal, or warning. 
(3)  Activate, except in the event of an actual emergency, any alarm system for the purpose of summoning a member of the Lawrenceville Police Department, or to aid or abet in the commission of such act. 
(Code 2005, § 31-117(3)) 
Sec. 26-38. - Notification. 
For the first four violations of section 26-37 within a calendar year at any premises, there shall be no penalty accessed. A first and all subsequent false alarms to a premises within a four-hour period shall be considered as one violation. The Lawrenceville Police Department shall notify any responsible person at the premises by U.S. mail following the occurrence of the fourth false alarm. Notice shall be deemed received by any responsible person if sent via U.S. mail addressed to the alarm user. 
(Code 2005, § 31-117(4)) 
Sec. 26-39. - Penalties. 
(a)  For the fifth and all subsequent false alarms within a calendar year at a premises, a fine of $50.00 shall be charged. 
(b)  Any responsible person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article may be summoned to the Municipal Court for each violation and/or noncompliance and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Code 2005, § 31-117(5)) 
Sec. 26-40. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of section 26-37 shall not apply to newly installed alarm systems which have been connected for less than 30 days, and have been installed by a state-certified and licensed alarm technician. A responsible person at a premises must maintain written proof, in the form of an invoice, of the date of installation of an alarm system for exemption under this section. 
(b)  The provisions of section 26-37 shall not apply to the owner or management company of a premises when such premises are leased for use unless the alarm system is under the control of the owner or management company. 
(Code 2005, § 31-117(6)) 
Secs. 26-41—26-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOITERING 

Sec. 26-69. - Engaging in drug-related activity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public, or any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any of the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 16, Chapter 13. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are: 
(1)  Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For purposes of this section, the term "known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller" means a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this State of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any controlled substances as defined in O.C.G.A. Title 16, Chapter 13, or such person has been convicted of any violation of any substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this State or of any other state; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as needle tracks, burned or callused thumb and index fingers, underweight, nervous and excited behavior. 
(2)  Such person is currently subject to a court order prohibiting his presence in a high drug activity geographic area. 
(3)  Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including, by way of example only, such person acting as a lookout hailing or stopping cars, or repeatedly beckons to, stops, or attempts to stop or engage in conversation with passersby whether such passersby are on foot or in a motor vehicle. 
(4)  Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a gang or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity. 
(5)  Such person transfers small objects or packages in a furtive fashion. 
(6)  Such person takes flight or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself upon the appearance of a police officer. 
(7)  Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity. 
(8)  Such person possesses any instrument, article, or thing whose customary or primary purpose is for the sale, administration or use of controlled substances, such as, but not limited to, crack pipes, push wires, scales, hypodermic needles, razor blades, or other cutting tools. 
(9)  The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking. 
(10)  Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. 
(c)  No arrest shall be made for a violation of subsection (a) of this section unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain his conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provisions of this division shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section 26-74. 
(Code 2005, § 31-118(1)) 
Sec. 26-70. - Loitering for purposes of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in public for the purpose of soliciting or procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section 26-74. 
(Code 2005, § 31-118(2)) 
Sec. 26-71. - Day labor prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Pick up or hire day laborers on private property without the permission of the property owner. 
(2)  Assemble on private property for the purpose of soliciting work as a day laborer without the permission of the property owner and after having been directed to cease such action by the property owner or other lawful authority. 
(3)  Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section 26-74. 
(Code 2005, § 31-118(3)) 
Sec. 26-72. - Urban camping and improper use of public places. 
(a)  City parks . It shall be unlawful to sleep, lie down, reside or store personal property in any park owned by the city. 
(b)  Sidewalks . It shall be unlawful to sleep, reside, store personal property, or sit or lie down on any sidewalk. 
(c)  Other public property; blocking ingress and egress . It shall be unlawful to sleep, reside, store personal property, or sit or lie down on any public property so as to interfere with the ingress or egress from the building. 
(d)  Other public property; urban camping . It shall be unlawful to use any public place, including city parks and sidewalks, for living accommodations purposes or camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use or specifically authorized by permit. 
(e)  Private property; urban camping without owner's permission . It shall be unlawful for anyone other than the owner, a leaseholder, an employee, or other rightful occupant to camp, sleep, reside, store personal property, or lie down, outside on any private property without the owner's or leaseholder's permission. 
(f)  Exceptions . Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, this section shall not apply to nor be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using parks, sidewalks, or other public places; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades for which valid permits have been issued; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; 
(5)  Persons sitting down, lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals and concerts taking place in any park, street or sidewalk closed by permit for such purpose; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; or 
(9)  Children under the age of 13 years sleeping in parks, or sleeping anywhere else while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(g)  Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section 26-74. 
(Code 2005, § 31-118(4)) 
Sec. 26-73. - Prowling and loitering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person with an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section 26-74. 
(Code 2005, § 31-118(5)) 
Sec. 26-74. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days. 
(Code 2005, § 31-118(6)) 
Secs. 26-75—26-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GRAFFITI AND VANDALISM 

Sec. 26-92. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to prevent graffiti and to promote its eradication and to prevent related vandalism, as they adversely affect property, both public and private, including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, paths, walks, streets, buildings and/or any other structures or surfaces which contain graffiti or are subject to graffiti-related vandalism. It is the further intent of this article to fight against blight, to preserve the value of property, both public and private, and to promote the security of the community, all of which are threatened by the spread of graffiti and graffiti-related vandalism. 
(Code 2005, § 31-119; Ord. of 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-93. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aerosol paint container means any canister, can, bottle, container, or other receptacle which contains any substance commonly known as paint, stain, dye and/or any other pigmented substance which is and/or can be modified to contain pressure, or be pressurized, in order to impel and/or propel any such substance. 
Etcher means any tool, device, and/or other mechanism, including, but not limited to, any tool, device, and/or other mechanism commonly known as glass etcher, metal etcher, cutting instrument or drill bit or any other instrument that can be applied by pressure or any other contact with any surface, including, but not limited to, glass, mirrors, windows, steel, aluminum, brass, tin, fiberglass, wood, plastic, concrete or any other surface which can cause any markings commonly known as graffiti or related vandalism. 
Graffiti and related vandalism means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface. 
Graffiti implements or paraphernalia means any substance or material, such as, but not limited to, aerosol paint containers, markers, paint sticks, etchers, gum labels; also including, but not limited to, tips (or nozzles) which can be applied to aerosol paint containers; any records of graffiti or related vandalism, including, but not limited to, pictures, photographs, drawings, scrap books and/or other records depicting or illustrating any forms of graffiti or related vandalism. 
Gum label means any substance consisting of a material, such as, but not limited to, paper, fabric, cloth, plastic, vinyl and/or any other similar material, where the material also contains one or more surfaces containing a substance, such as, but not limited to, any material commonly known as an adhesive or glue, which cannot be removed from the surface in an intact condition and with minimal efforts, including, but not limited to, decals, stickers, patches, stamps or labels. 
Marker means any implement commonly known as an indelible or permanent ink marker and/or marking pen and/or any similar implement which contains any pigmented substance, including, but not limited to, ink or any other substance, which can not be easily and completely removed with water after said substance has dried and where the width of the marking is 1/16 of one inch or greater. 
Paint balloon means any canister, can, container, bottle or other receptacle, including, but not limited to, anything commonly known as a balloon or other receptacle made of any material, such as, but not limited to, latex, plastic, rubber, paper, glass or other material, which contains any substance commonly known as paint, stain, dye or any other pigmented substance intended for the purpose of defacing any property, public or private, upon impact or contact of any surface, including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, windows, roofs, paths, walks, streets, buildings and/or any other structures or surfaces, regardless of the material of the component. 
Paint stick means any device which contains any substance, solid or liquid, including, but not limited to, any form of any substance commonly known as paint, stain, ink, chalk, wax, epoxy and/or any other similar substance, which can be applied to any surface by such means as applying pressure to and/or contacting any surface in such a way as to leave any visible mark measuring at least 1/16 of one inch at any point, otherwise described as graffiti or related vandalism. 
Stamp or stamping device means any tool, device or implement which can cause, upon impact or contact, any mark by means of ink, paint, stain or any other substance or material, including, but not limited to, any device commonly known as a rubber stamp or similar device, whether manufactured, handmade or devised, for the purpose of defacing property, public or private. 
Supplier means any person or entity, such as, but not limited to, any business, company, co-op, corporation, enterprise, manufacturer, organization, partnership, proprietor, retail or wholesale store or outlet, which sells, trades, donates, gives or requisitions to the public in any capacity whatsoever any graffiti implements. 
(Code 2005, § 31-119; Ord. of 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-94. - Interpretation. 
This article shall be interpreted so as to work with and in conjunction with, when and where applicable, any and all state and/or local ordinances relating to the control of graffiti and/or related vandalism. 
(Code 2005, § 31-119; Ord. of 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-95. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  A violation of this article is punishable in any of the following ways: 
(1)  A violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-16. Payment of any fine or completion of a jail term shall not relieve a person from the responsibility of correcting the violation and the Court may, in addition to any fine imposed or in lieu of imposing a fine, order the party to perform community service. 
(2)  A violation for a first time offense only may be charged as a minor infraction and can be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00. This option can be granted by the Court at the Judge's discretion. Payment of any penalty shall not relieve a person from the responsibility of correcting the violation and the Court may, in addition to any fine imposed or in lieu of imposing a fine, order the party to perform community service. 
(b)  As a part of any sentence imposed, the Court may also order that restitution be paid to the victim by the admitted or convicted perpetrator and, in the case of a perpetrator who is a minor, by the minor's parent or lawfully designated guardian or custodian. 
(c)  Upon conviction, the perpetrator and/or parent or lawfully designated guardian or custodian may be required to enroll in and attend a diversionary program, possibly requiring liability waivers and/or payment towards all or a portion of the cost of the program, as such costs shall have been established by the City Council. 
(d)  Upon conviction, the Court may, on its own motion or at the request of the City, issue an order directing the City to remove the graffiti from the property on such terms as the Court deems appropriate. The Court may also specify that the property owner may be liable for the cost incurred in the removal of the graffiti. 
(Code 2005, § 31-119; Ord. of 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-96. - Prohibition of graffiti and related vandalism. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or group of persons to commit any act resulting in or attempting to result in the application of graffiti or the engaging in or attempting to engage in an act of related vandalism, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Any act, such as drawing, scribing, etching, marking, painting, staining, sticking on or adhering to any surface, public or private, including, but not limited to, trees, signs, poles, fixtures, utility boxes, walls, windows, roofs, paths, walks, streets, buildings and/or any other structures or surfaces. 
(2)  Any act of participation in applying graffiti, such as, but not limited to, conspiring to commit or assist in the applying of graffiti or engaging in or assisting in an act of related vandalism, including, but not limited to, acting as a lookout, regardless of the fact the act was not actually witnessed. 
(3)  Any person who knowingly allows any acts of graffiti or related vandalism to occur on or to any property over which he has control as owner, tenant or possessor and who thereafter fails to promptly report such acts to the proper authorities is guilty of being a principal to the offense. 
Exceptions: Any mural or work of art approved by the City or other governmental agency through a design review or planning process and requiring proper permits prior to commencement of any work shall not constitute graffiti. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person having legal or equitable interest in a parcel of real property to permit graffiti to remain on a structure located thereon for a continuous period of more than three days. 
(c)  Graffiti and/or graffiti-related vandalism which appears on property and/or structures shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement. 
(Code 2005, § 31-119; Ord. of 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 26-97. - Possession of graffiti implements or paraphernalia. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any graffiti implement or paraphernalia with the intent of applying graffiti markings or engaging in related vandalism. Exceptions to this subsection are as follows: 
(1)  Any minor enrolled in any education class which requires otherwise legal possession of any graffiti implement or paraphernalia, provided that the minor is carrying written verification of any such requirements, including color, size, and quantity, and written consent from his parent or lawfully designated custodian, dated and signed. 
(2)  Any minor whose employment requires possession of any graffiti implement or paraphernalia, provided that the minor is carrying written verification of any such job requirements, including color, size, quantity, job information and purpose, and written consent from the employer, dated and signed. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to possess any graffiti implement or paraphernalia while in, on, at or about any public property, including, but not limited to, public parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, recreation facilities, schools, school district facilities, libraries, court houses, utility stations, storm drains or any other publicly owned, operated and/or maintained facility. 
(Code 2005, § 31-119; Ord. of 2-6-2006) 
Secs. 26-98—26-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CRIMINAL GANG PROHIBITIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local gang ordinances consistent with state law are not preempted, O.C.G.A. § 16-15-6. 

Sec. 26-123. - Short title; legislative intent. 
(a)  This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lawrenceville Criminal Gang Ordinance." 
(b)  The Mayor and City Council find and declare that it is the right of every person to be secure and protected from fear, intimidation, and physical harm caused by the activities of violent groups and individuals. The Mayor and City Council are determined to stop the property damage to private property that is being inflicted by the planned criminal activities of gangs. It is not the intent of this article to interfere with the exercise of the constitutionally protected rights of freedom of expression and association. The Mayor and City Council recognize the constitutional right of every association. The Mayor and City Council recognize the constitutional right of every citizen to harbor and express beliefs on any lawful subject whatsoever, to associate lawfully with others who share similar beliefs, to petition lawfully constituted authority for a redress of perceived grievances, and to participate in the electoral process. 
(1)  The Mayor and City Council, however, further find that the City of Lawrenceville and its citizens are being adversely impacted by violent and destructive criminal gangs whose members threaten, terrorize, and commit a multitude of crimes against the peaceful citizens of their neighborhoods. These activities, both individually and collectively, present a clear and present danger to public order and safety and are not constitutionally protected. 
(2)  The Mayor and City Council find that there are criminal gangs operating in the City and that the number of gang-related crimes is increasing. It is the intent of the Mayor and City Council in enacting this article to seek the eradication of criminal activity by gangs by focusing upon patterns of criminal gang activity and upon the organized nature of gangs which together are the chief source of terror created by street gangs. 
(3)  The Mayor and City Council further find that an effective means of punishing and deterring the criminal activities of gangs is through forfeiture of the profits, proceeds, and instrumentalities acquired, accumulated, or used by gangs. 
(Code 2005, § 31-120; Ord. of 5-7-2007; Ord. of 9-10-2007; Ord. of 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 26-124. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Criminal gang means a group of three or more persons associated for some criminal purpose, including committing crimes of any nature or conspiring to damage public and private property and to inflict intentional injury to other people. The term "criminal gang" includes any organization, association, or group of three or more persons associated in fact, whether formally or informally, to engage in criminal gang activity as defined in this section. The existence of such a criminal gang organization, association, or group of individuals shall be established by demonstrating evidence of activities that are commonly performed by criminal gangs to the Court. The proof of the existence of two or more of the following activities defining criminal gangs as established by the City of Lawrenceville Police Department, other law enforcement agencies and regional gang intelligence associations shall establish adequate proof of the existence of a criminal gang: 
(1)  The group has initiation rights that include physical beatings, rituals requiring criminal conduct or sexual activity. 
(2)  Members identify themselves and admit that the association is a criminal gang. 
(3)  Members engage in the conduct of painting or marking buildings with letters, signs and symbols that reflect identification of the association, warnings and other territorial limits, including items commonly referred to as graffiti. The same markings and lettering of identification may be displayed on clothing worn by the gang members. 
(4)  The association members participate in hand signs and stacking. 
(5)  The association members wear colors or other attire to identify their association. 
(6)  The association members pledge and execute statements of affiliation which may be written or may be executed by conduct described in subsection (1) of this definition. 
(7)  The association appears on a gang list of a state or federal law enforcement agency as an identified criminal gang and the local association has adopted and implemented the letters, symbol, colors, tattoos or conduct of the larger identified criminal gang. 
(8)  Members of the association have been involved in or convicted of crimes as defined in the Official Code of Georgia. 
(9)  The association members are marked with branding or tattoos for the purpose of confirming membership in the group. 
(10)  Members have been identified in written correspondence or communications as being members of the association. 
(11)  Members have been identified at least two or three times by other individuals as recruiting prospective members for the association and in the communication identified their association as a criminal gang. 
(12)  The association members have engaged in a pattern of planning and executing actions that are crimes. 
(13)  The members have in their possession organizational information in the form commonly referred to as a book of knowledge. 
The term "criminal gang" shall not include three or more persons, associated in fact, whether formal or informal, who are not engaged in criminal gang activity. 
Criminal gang activity means the commission, attempted commission, conspiracy to commit, or solicitation, coercion, or intimidation of another person to commit any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense defined as racketeering activity by O.C.G.A. § 16-14-13; 
(2)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-90—16-5-96, related to stalking; 
(3)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 as rape, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-2 as aggravated sodomy, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-3 as statutory rape, or in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-22.2 as aggravated sexual battery; 
(4)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-10-50—16-10-56, relating to escape and other offenses related to confinement; 
(5)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-100—16-11-173, relating to dangerous instrumentalities and practices; 
(6)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 42-5-15, 42-5-16, 42-5-17, 42-5-18, or 42-5-19, relating to the security of State or County correctional facilities; 
(7)  Any offense defined in O.C.G.A. § 49-4A-11, relating to aiding or encouraging a child to escape from custody; 
(8)  Any offense of criminal trespass or criminal damage to property resulting from any act of gang-related painting on, tagging, marking on, writing on, or creating any form of graffiti on the property of another; 
(9)  Any criminal offense committed in violation of the laws of the United States or its territories, dominions, or possessions, any of the several states, or any foreign nation which, if committed in this State, would be considered criminal gang activity under this section; and 
(10)  Any criminal offense in the State of Georgia, any other state, or the United States, that involves violence, possession of a weapon, or use of a weapon, whether designated as a felony or not, and regardless of the maximum sentence that could be imposed or actually was imposed; and 
(11)  Any offense defined in the Code of the City of Lawrenceville sections 26-1, 26-2, 26-6, 26-7, articles IV and V of this chapter, 4-70, 4-72 and 4-73, or sections relating to general offenses. 
(Code 2005, § 31-120; Ord. of 5-7-2007; Ord. of 9-10-2007; Ord. of 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 26-125. - Unlawful acts; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person employed by, associated with or a member of a criminal gang to conduct or participate in criminal gang activity through the commission of any offense enumerated in section 26-124. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person employed by, associated with, or a member of a criminal gang to plan or assist other members of the association to commit any offense enumerated in section 26-124 with knowledge that members of such criminal gang have committed one or more of such offenses. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any offense enumerated in section 26-124 with the intent to maintain or increase his status or position in a criminal gang. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to acquire or maintain, directly or indirectly, through criminal gang activity or proceeds derived therefrom any interest in or control of any real or personal property of any nature, including money. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person who occupies a position of organizer, supervisory position, or any other position of management with regard to a criminal gang to engage in, directly or indirectly, or conspire to engage in criminal gang activity. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, encourage, solicit, or coerce another to participate in a criminal gang. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly assist, encourage, aid, house or support a criminal gang or criminal gang activity. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful to fail to report criminal gang activity. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate, directly or indirectly, with another any threat of injury or damage to the person or property of the other person or to any associate or relative of the other person with the intent to deter such person from assisting a member or associate of a criminal gang to withdraw from such criminal gang. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate, directly or indirectly, with another any threat of injury or damage to the person or property of the other person or to any associate or relative of the other person with the intent to punish or retaliate against such person for having withdrawn from a criminal gang. 
(k)  Any person who violates subsection (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section shall, in addition to any other penalty imposed by law, be punished as provided for in this section. 
(l)  Any crime committed in violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 2005, § 31-120; Ord. of 5-7-2007; Ord. of 9-10-2007; Ord. of 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 26-126. - Forfeiture of contraband property. 
(a)  The following are declared to be contraband and no person shall have a property interest in them: 
(1)  All property which is, directly or indirectly, used or intended for use in any manner to facilitate a violation of this article; and 
(2)  Any property constituting or derived from gross profits or other proceeds obtained from a violation of this article. 
(b)  The Police Chief or other appropriate City official may take the necessary steps to initiate forfeiture proceedings as allowed by law. 
(c)  Abatement of nuisances; actions for damages or injunctions. 
(1)  Any real property which is erected, established, maintained, owned, leased, or used by any criminal gang for the purpose of conducting criminal gang activity shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated as provided by Title 41 of the Official Code of Georgia, relating to nuisances. 
(2)  An action to abate a nuisance pursuant to this section may be brought by the district attorney, solicitor-general, prosecuting attorney of a municipal court or city, or county attorney in any superior, state, or municipal court. 
(Code 2005, § 31-120; Ord. of 5-7-2007; Ord. of 9-10-2007; Ord. of 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 26-127. - Civil suits for damages and restitution for victims of criminal gang activities. 
(a)  Any person who is injured by reason of criminal gang activity shall have a cause of action for three times the actual damages sustained and, where appropriate, punitive damages; provided, however, that no cause of action shall arise under this subsection as a result of an otherwise legitimate commercial transaction between parties to a contract or agreement for the sale of lawful goods or property or the sale of securities regulated by Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or by the federal Securities and Exchange Commission. Such person shall also recover attorney's fees in the trial and appellate court and costs of investigation and litigation reasonably incurred. All averments of a cause of action under this subsection shall be stated with particularity. No judgment shall be awarded unless the finding of fact determines that the action is consistent with the intent of the General Assembly as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-15-2. 
(b)  Upon identification of a criminal gang by conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, the City of Lawrenceville may initiate a civil cause of action on behalf of the City and/or the injured victims for restitution, damages, attorney fees and punitive damages against all parties legally responsible, including, but not limited to, the gang member convicted; all gang members conspiring with the convicted gang member; in the case of minors, the parents of the convicted gang members; and any other conspirators or legally liable parties. 
(c)  The State, any political subdivision thereof, or any person aggrieved by a pattern of gang activity may bring an action to enjoin violations of this section in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-14-6. 
(Code 2005, § 31-120; Ord. of 5-7-2007; Ord. of 9-10-2007; Ord. of 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 26-128. - Effect of conviction of criminal gang activity on subsequent civil action. 
A conviction of an offense defined as criminal gang activity shall estop the defendant in any subsequent civil action or proceeding as to matters proved in the criminal proceeding. 
(1)  Certain offenses admissible as evidence. The commission of any offense enumerated in section 26-124 by any member of a criminal gang shall be admissible in any trial or proceeding for the purpose of proving the existence of the criminal gang and criminal gang activity. 
(2)  Penalty and minimum sentences for conviction of a violation under this section or for conviction of a crime by a gang member in the commission of criminal gang activity. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or six months in jail, or both. The minimum sentence imposed by the City of Lawrenceville Municipal Court for conviction of a first offense under this section shall be a six-month sentence, of which two months are required to be served in jail. Upon a second conviction in a separate incident, a minimum sentence of six months shall be imposed, of which six months are required to be served in jail. Upon conviction of three or more times in separate incidents, a minimum of six months sentence shall be served in jail. 
(Code 2005, § 31-120; Ord. of 5-7-2007; Ord. of 9-10-2007; Ord. of 12-1-2008) 
Chapter 28 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal recreation systems generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means intoxicating beverage, malt beverage, wine or any other beverage containing any alcohol whatsoever. 
Building means any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Director means either the City Manager, or his authorized designee, or the Director of the Gwinnett County Department of Community Services or his authorized designee. In the case of park facilities owned and operated by the City, the term "Director" means the City Manager or his authorized designee. In the case of park facilities owned or operated by Gwinnett County, such as the Historic Courthouse and Rhodes Jordan Park, the term "Director" means the Director of the Gwinnett County Department of Community Services or his authorized designee. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, paper, rubbish, debris, trash and all other waste material whether natural or artificial. 
Park and/or recreation facility means all recreation areas in parks, including land, buildings, lakes, ponds, streams, swimming pools, sports fields, cemeteries, and all other property and buildings owned, leased, or managed by the City of Lawrenceville or any of its departments or agencies, Gwinnett County, the County Recreation Authority, the designated agents or departments of the County or the County Recreation Authority, and including all recreation areas and parks in the City owned by the City, County, State or federal government and managed by the County or the City. 
Vehicle means any motor-driven or engine-driven equipment, such as an automobile, truck, motorcycle, bicycle, sled, go-cart, scooter, skateboard, ATV, child's toy vehicle, or Segway. 
Weapon means a firearm, rifle, pistol, revolver, paintball gun, or any weapon designed or intended to propel a shot, bullet, or other missile of any kind, or any device capable of discharging a projectile by air, spirit, gas or explosive, or any explosive substance or harmful solid, liquid and gaseous substance, or any spear, arrow, bow and arrow, slingshot, crossbow, spear or spear gun, or any knife as defined by State law, dirk, Bowie knife, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, or any other knife, straight-edged razor, spring stick, metal knuckles, blackjack, any bat, club or other bludgeon-type weapon, or any flailing instrument or any disk which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, or any weapon of like kind, and any stun gun, taser or similar device. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-101, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-2. - Enforcement of chapter. 
This chapter shall be enforced by any authorized law enforcement officer of the City or the County. Where there has been a violation of any provisions of this chapter, the law enforcement officer, in his discretion, may issue a warning, citation, and/or order the person to leave the park or recreation area. The Municipal Court of the City of Lawrenceville shall have jurisdiction to hear all matters arising out of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-102, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-3. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months, or any combination thereof. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter may further be denied any park permit or other permission to utilize the facilities of any park or recreation facility for a period of 60 days following such conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-103, 8-6-2012) 
Secs. 28-4—28-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF RECREATION FACILITIES 

Sec. 28-25. - Littering prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter on the grounds, streets, sidewalks, fountains, ponds, lakes, swimming pools, streams or other body of water in any park or recreation facility except within public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or recreation facility. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park or recreation facility by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. It shall be unlawful to take into, carry through, or put into a park or recreation facility any litter generated outside the park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-131, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-26. - Discharging weapons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any weapon or similar device in a park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-132, 8-6-2012; Ord. of 10-6-2014) 
Sec. 28-27. - Throwing objects prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stone or missile at any person or at any public or private building in a park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-133, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-28. - Improper use of sound-producing devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use any sound-producing or motorized equipment, including, but not limited to, generators and vehicles, or play or operate any sound amplification devices, including, but not limited to, radios, television sets, stereos, musical instruments, public address systems and the like, in such a manner as to unreasonably annoy, disturb, injure, or endanger other persons, or to otherwise destroy the comfort, repose, peace or safety of other persons in a park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-134, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-29. - Improper personal conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, abusive, lewd, profane, vulgar, wanton, obscene or otherwise disorderly speech or conduct that is or may be disturbing or annoying to other persons, or that could cause injury to other persons while in a park or recreation facility, which conduct may include, but is not limited to, loitering, fighting, throwing or breaking articles, indecent exposure, inappropriate sexual acts, urinating or defecating in public, or public drunkenness. No person shall, upon or in connection with a recreation facility, by act or speech, willfully or unreasonably hinder, interrupt or interfere with any duly permitted activity or unreasonably or willfully intrude on any areas or into the structures designated for the use of a certain person to the exclusion of others by written permit of the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-135, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-30. - Fires restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire in a park or recreation facility except in designated areas which are clearly marked by signs or defined with fire rings, fireplaces, grills or other facilities designated for the purpose of safely maintaining a fire, except by written permit by the Director. Fires shall be confined to those areas so designated, shall not be left unattended and must be completely extinguished prior to departure. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-136, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-31. - Damaging or removal of any park property or vegetation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, graffiti, harm or damage any park buildings, wildlife, property, equipment or signs; or dig up, cut, damage or remove any trees, tree limbs, shrubbery, flowers, rocks, mulch, water, historical artifacts or other vegetation in a park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-137, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-32. - Possession, use or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, use, or consume any alcoholic beverage in a park or recreation facility, other than at a publicly owned golf course, an indoor publicly owned civic and cultural center/arena or publicly owned stadium or, when approved by permit, at the Gwinnett Historic Courthouse or the Lawrenceville Lawn. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-138, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-33. - Vehicles restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any unauthorized vehicle in a park or recreation facility except upon designated roadways and parking areas maintained for vehicular traffic. Approved personal mobility devices for those persons with disabilities are allowed on pedestrian trails and walkways or when permitted and approved by the Director. Law enforcement or other public safety officials, and City or County employees whose duties require them to drive maintenance vehicles and equipment, shall be exempt from the limitations set forth in this section. All persons operating any vehicle in a park or recreation facility upon roadways designated and maintained for vehicular traffic must operate such vehicle in a safe manner, and must obey all posted speed limits and traffic signs. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to operate any vehicle in a park and/or recreation facility at an excessive speed, in a reckless and unsafe manner, or in violation of posted traffic signs. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-139, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-34. - Parking restricted. 
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in a park or recreation facility except in those areas designated by the appropriate signs as vehicle parking areas or in marked parking spaces. It shall be unlawful to leave a vehicle standing or parked in a park or recreation facility during hours when the park or recreation facility is closed. It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a parking space or location designated for handicapped parking unless the vehicle properly displays a handicapped parking permit. In all such instances, the vehicle may be towed and impounded from the park or recreation facility at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-140, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-35. - Parking limited to park and recreation facility users. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park in a park or recreation area if the owner of the vehicle is not utilizing the park or recreation facility unless authorized by the Director. It shall be unlawful for persons to congregate within a parking area of a park or recreation facility so as to disrupt traffic or other persons, or so as to create a safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-141, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-36. - Commercial activity restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any merchandise or operate or attempt to operate a concession or engage in any commercial activity in a park or recreation facility unless approved by permit by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-142, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-37. - Hours open to public restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or vehicle to enter or be within a park or recreation facility outside of the posted hours of operation unless approved by permit by the Director or unless such person is participating in authorized and scheduled programs, classes, special events or meetings. 
(b)  Park hours of operation are sunrise until 11:00 p.m., or sunrise to sunset, as determined by the park designation, unless posted otherwise as authorized by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-143, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-38. - Golfing regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice, play or otherwise participate in the game of golf except at a park or recreation facility designated for such use and only in accordance with the rules, regulations and restrictions promulgated by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-144, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-39. - Swimming and watercraft regulated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person not to leave a swimming area when so directed by a lifeguard on duty or not to cease any activity which would be hazardous to others when so directed by a lifeguard. It is unlawful for any person to engage in any activity within a swimming pool or swimming area that could cause injury or damage to a person or to other persons using the swimming facility. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to launch or travel in watercraft, swim, bathe or wade in any body of water in a park or recreation facility unless designated for such use and then only in accordance with the rules, regulations and restrictions promulgated and posted at the recreation area. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-145, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-40. - Violation of facility regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any rules or regulations relating to the use of the park or recreation facility as established by the Director or by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-146, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-41. - Animals restricted. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian whose animal is in a park or recreation facility to have physical control of the animal by leash or lead line at all times unless in designated dog park areas where off leash is permitted or approved otherwise, by permit, by the Director. It shall be unlawful for any person with an animal, other than service animals, such as guide dogs, as necessary, to access areas of a park or recreation facility which are restricted to animals. It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian of any animal whose animal is in a park or recreation facility to immediately and properly dispose of solid waste deposited by the animal, except for horses on designated equestrian trails. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian of any animal whose animal is in a recreation facility to have, in their possession, proof of a current rabies vaccination for their animal. It shall be the duty of every horse owner or custodian whose horse is in a park or recreation facility to have, in their possession, proof of a current negative Coggins test for their horse. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian of such animal in a park or recreation facility to immediately remove from such park or recreation facility such animal upon such animal exhibiting aggressive behavior toward any person or toward any other domesticated animal. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "aggressive behavior" includes, but is not limited to, barking, growling, baring of teeth or fangs, biting or attempting to bite, or any other behavior that could reasonably be expected to scare or intimidate any person or domesticated animal. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-147, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-42. - Pyrotechnics restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, display, use, set off or attempt to ignite any firecracker, fireworks, smoke bombs, rockets, black powder guns or other pyrotechnics, unless approved by written permit by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-148, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-43. - Engine-powered models or toys restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to start, fly or use any fuel-powered engine, jet-type or electric-powered model aircraft, boat or rocket or like powered toy or model, except at those areas designated by the Director for such use and then only in accordance with such rules, regulations and restrictions promulgated by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-149, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-44. - Launching hot air balloons and hobby rockets restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to launch hot air balloons and hobby rockets from a park or recreation facility unless approved by written permit by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-150, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-45. - Park and recreation facility restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to enter a locked or closed park or recreation facility, including any sports field (by field closed signage), unless approved by permit by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-151, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-46. - Use or possession of controlled substance. 
No person shall possess or use any drug or any other controlled substance, as defined in the laws of the State, except as permitted by the laws of the State, in any park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-152, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-47. - Camping. 
It shall be a violation of this article for persons to camp in a park or recreation facility except at sites or areas specifically designated for camping within the park or recreation facility, and unless such person has first purchased or obtained a permit to camp in the par or recreation facility from the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-153, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-48. - Smoking in prohibited areas. 
It shall be a violation of this article for persons to smoke or use tobacco products in enclosed buildings in all parks or recreation facilities and in areas posted within a park or recreation facility to restrict smoking or tobacco products in such areas. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-154, 8-6-2012) 
Sec. 28-49. - Hunting and trapping prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to hunt or trap animals, or attempt to hunt or trap animals, within a park or recreation facility. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-155, 8-6-2012) 
Secs. 28-50—28-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 

Sec. 28-72. - Guidelines for issuance. 
Permits for special events in a park or recreation facility shall be obtained by application to the Director. Guidelines for the issuance of permits by the Director include: 
(1)  That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the enjoyment of the park or recreation facility; 
(2)  That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility will not unreasonably interfere or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation of a park or recreation facility; 
(3)  That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime, or disorderly conduct; 
(4)  That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility will not entail unusual, extraordinary, or burdensome expenses or policy operation by the City or the County; 
(5)  That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility will not conflict with existing parks and recreation services; 
(6)  That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility desired has not been reserved for other use; 
(7)  That the permitting person will abide by all other State, County, City and parks and recreation laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and shall be liable for any loss, damage, or injury sustained by any person whatsoever by reason of negligence of the person to whom such permit shall have been issued; 
(8)  That the Director shall have the authority to revoke any permit upon the finding of a violation of any laws, ordinances, rules or regulations or upon good cause shown; and 
(9)  Persons may apply for a permit for a proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility under the following categories: picnicking, fundraising, special event, food service for approved activities, and park or recreation facility rentals. 
(Ord. No. 2765-001, § 15-201, 8-6-2012) 
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; disposal of dead animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; littering, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-42 et seq., 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter is to provide for the protection of the public health by prescribing the manner of storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of residential and industrial waste, rubbish, garbage, and refuse. 
(Code 2005, § 12-101) 
Sec. 30-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collection means when a person, under agreement, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include when an individual collects and/or transports waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a one- or two-family dwelling unit, apartment dwelling, roominghouse or condominium. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into stable, odor-free humus. 
Condominium means individual ownership units in a multifamily residential structure with a front and back entrance to each unit on the ground level. 
Construction/demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, wood, brick, metal, concrete, wall board, paper cardboard, inert waste, landfill material, and other non-putrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment utilization, processing, or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal, including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design, and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location or land area where the final disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludge; and other waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety, or environment, including, but not limited to, asbestos and asbestos-containing waste, and radioactive materials as provided for in Rules of the Department of Human Resources, Chapter 270-5-20, titled "Radioactive Materials" and all other materials classified as hazardous by State and federal law, including, but not limited to, the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste regulated under the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: Electric power generations; fertilizer and agriculture chemicals; food-related products and byproducts; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal and foundry products; organic chemicals, plastics and resins; pulp and paper; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textiles; transportation equipment; and water treatment. The term "industrial waste" does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Landfill means a method of disposing of solid waste, other than putrescible waste or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include construction and demolition waste and solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn, or to otherwise create environmental pollution or nuisance. 
Owner means any person, firm or corporation owning, leasing, renting, occupying, or managing any premises in the jurisdiction of the City of Lawrenceville. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standard of at least 1.5 mills and not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, with securing twist ties. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing material from solid wastes for future use. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused, or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recycling means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid commercial and industrial wastes. 
Residential unit means any freestanding structure or shelter or any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one family. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Sanitary landfilling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials. 
Service provider means a person, persons or entity granted a franchise to provide collection services by the Council of the City of Lawrenceville under written agreements for compensation by those receiving services and does the work of collecting and transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, and similar locations or from residential dwellings or construction and demolition waste from construction and demolition sites; provided, however, that the term "service provider" does not include an individual collecting and transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit or persons who, as an incidental part of providing construction or demolition services, and using vehicles which they own or lease, remove construction or demolition debris from the sites at which they are performing such services. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludge, animal manures, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, food-processing wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in this chapter. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation from one vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
Solid waste handling facility means any facility the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal vehicle. 
Violation means any failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter or any other applicable laws and regulations. Failure to provide the Director of Sanitation or his designee with proof that there was no violation or that the alleged violation was resolved within 48 business hours of the alleged violation shall also constitute a violation. 
Waste stream means the total flow of solid waste from residential units, commercial establishments, condominiums, apartments, institutions and the like to its ultimate disposal site or facility. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Code 2005, § 12-102) 
Sec. 30-3. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. The Director of Sanitation shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. In the exercise of his solid waste management duties, said Director shall: 
(1)  Supervise the collection of solid wastes, including the operation and maintenance of equipment and the supervision of personnel; 
(2)  Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors and private transportation and disposal systems to ensure that such operations are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Limitations of authority . All regulatory actions of the Director of Sanitation shall be subject to the review of the Mayor and Council. 
(c)  Appeal . Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or a fee charged by, the Director of Sanitation shall have the right to appeal to the Mayor and Council, which body may, upon hearing, confirm, modify, or revoke such requirement or fee. 
(d)  Appointment of Director of Sanitation . The Director of Sanitation shall be a department head position and shall be appointed by the City Manager, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council, and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. 
(Code 2005, § 12-103) 
Sec. 30-4. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or be imprisoned not to exceed six months, both at the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court. 
(Code 2005, § 12-104; Ord. of 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 30-5. - Exemption. 
Any entity that operates an apartment complex may be exempt from complying with the terms and conditions of this chapter, provided that all of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The apartment complex contains 50 or more residential units. 
(2)  The entity applying for the exemption is the fee simple owner of the real estate on which the apartment complex is constructed. 
(3)  The entity operates a trash compactor on the premises for the collection of all of the solid waste of the residents of the apartment complex and the City of Lawrenceville is not required to provide any solid waste management support for the complex. 
(4)  The entity successfully and legally disposes of all solid waste from the premises of the apartment complex by transporting the waste to an appropriate disposal company or site. 
(5)  The entity is granted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville an exemption permit at a regular meeting of the Mayor and Council after applying for the permit on an application provided by and acceptable to the City of Lawrenceville Administration Department. 
(6)  All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Code 2005, § 12-105; Ord. of 12-5-2005) 
Secs. 30-6—30-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY GARBAGE DEPARTMENT SOLID WASTE SERVICES 

Sec. 30-29. - Regulations for solid waste disposal customers. 
(a)  In general . No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the City, except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth in this article or under the express prior approval of the Director of Sanitation. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The Director of Sanitation by written notice shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such solid waste accumulation to remove same. Failure to remove such accumulation within two weeks of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject to penalties hereinafter set forth. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues. 
(b)  Precollection regulations. 
(1)  All residential customers, except those otherwise exempted via the senior and disability exemption process outlined below, shall place all household trash at the curbside in bags adequate to restrain the garbage contained therein without spilling. When placing said trash at the curbside, trash cans can be used. Those residential customers who are granted an exemption from delivering their trash to the curbside shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  No trash can larger than 35 gallons shall be used. 
b.  All trash deposited in cans shall be lined with a plastic bag and all other trash shall be enclosed in a plastic bag. The plastic bags used in either case shall be strong enough to be carried to the street without rupturing or tearing. 
(2)  Senior and disability exemption process. 
a.  All residential customers at or over the age of 65 as well as all customers who, through a disability, are not able to deliver their trash to the curbside may apply for an exemption to the requirements detailed in subsection (b)(1) of this section via the following method: 
1.  Request an exemption application from the Director of Sanitation. 
2.  Complete the exemption application as thoroughly as possible by including the following information: 
(i)  Name; 
(ii)  Address; 
(iii)  Telephone number; 
(iv)  Date of birth; and 
(v)  Detailed explanation for requested exemption. 
3.  Submit the completed exemption application to the Director of Sanitation. 
b.  The Director of Sanitation will review all submitted exemption applications and will inform the applicant by mail once a decision has been reached. 
c.  All trash shall be placed within ten feet of the rear of the residence on the driveway side, provided that they shall not be placed further than 150 feet from the curb or paving, if there is no curb, of the public street fronting the house. 
d.  Trash cans shall not be placed within an enclosed or open carport and shall not be placed in an area enclosed by a fence. 
(3)  Yard trash must be placed at the curb or street enclosed in plastic or plastic-lined bags. 
(4)  Limbs and cuttings from shrubbery shall not exceed a length of ten feet, shall be cut to fit into the back of the truck used by the City to remove yard debris and shall be deposited on the curb or edge of the street for collection. 
(5)  All grass clippings, leaves, and small debris must be in paper or biodegradeable bags and placed at the street. To be acceptable for collection, the certification that the bag is biodegradeable must be clearly visible on the outside of the bag. All grass clippings, leaves, and small debris placed at the street for pick-up must originate from the parcel of property holding the utility account directly adjacent to the curb or street where the debris is located. Placing construction material or yard debris that originates from other locations is a violation of this article. 
(6)  Leaves will be collected by machine from October 1 through April 30 when placed by the street in piles not more than six feet from pavement. 
(7)  No commercial or construction materials are allowed on streets in residential areas. This material must be disposed of by the owner or contractor. 
(8)  Tree limbs, small trees, shrubbery, etc., must be cut in lengths no longer than three feet and placed at curb side. 
(9)  It shall be a violation of this section to put garbage in private dumpsters without the owner's permission. 
(10)  It shall be a violation of this section to place commercial garbage on sidewalks in the area downtown zoned Subarea 8 Courthouse Square. 
(11)  A fee will be assessed if you have one-half truckload of trash or more. 
(12)  A fee will be charged for appliances and certain types of furniture. 
(13)  Residential customers violating any provision of this section shall be subject to citation by the Director of Sanitation or by any uniformed officer of the City of Lawrenceville Police Department. Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 30-4. Said violations shall be heard by the Municipal Court of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(c)  Collection vehicles . Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be kept clean and in good repair. They shall be constructed in such manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked, or blown from the vehicle. They shall be readily identifiable by letters not less than three inches high and easily legible, painted on the door of the vehicle cab or in an equally conspicuous place, showing the owner's name, telephone number, state permit number, truck number, and rated load capacity in cubic yards. The rated load capacity shall be specified by the Director of Sanitation following his measurement of the load-carrying portion of the truck body. 
(Code 2005, § 12-201) 
Sec. 30-30. - Collection. 
(a)  Residential . 
(1)  Garbage will be collected on schedule approved by the Director of Sanitation. All residential customers, except those not otherwise exempted pursuant to the Senior and Disability Exemption Process outlined in section 30-29(b)(2), must place all trash at the curb no sooner than the night before the garbage is collected on a designated day, once each week. 
(2)  Anyone placing garbage or trash at the curb any day other than designated for collection will be in violation of this article. 
(3)  Residential customers violating any provision of section 30-29 shall be subject to citation by the Director of Sanitation or by any uniformed officer of the City of Lawrenceville Police Department. Any person convicted of violating any provisions of section 30-29 shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 30-4. Said violations shall be heard by the Municipal Court of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(4)  The only exception to placing garbage and other solid waste on the curb no sooner than the night before the garbage is collected is in the case of leaves raked and placed at the curb from October 1 through April 30. 
(b)  Commercial. Pickup will occur as required by the customer. 
(Code 2005, § 12-202) 
Sec. 30-31. - Fees. 
(a)  Charges for public collection and disposal. Monthly charges for public collection and disposal of solid waste shall be as provided from time to time. The City will pass on to the consumer all cost increases from the vendor. 
(b)  Classification of establishments. For the purpose of determining the initial classification of establishments as to volumes of waste generated, the Director of Sanitation shall make a volume survey of all establishments in the City to be served by public collection facilities. The Director shall observe each establishment for a period not less than one week, and the result of such survey and the classification established thereby shall be given in writing to each establishment. Similar surveys shall be made semiannually to determine whether changes should be made in classification and upon request of the owner of any establishment who feels his establishment is in an improper category, provided that not more than two such surveys per year may be so requested. 
(Code 2005, § 12-203) 
Sec. 30-32. - Billing. 
(a)  Against whom levied . Service charges in accordance with the schedule set down in section 30-31 are levied against the occupant of the premises served. 
(b)  Charges for solid waste collection and disposal . Charges for solid waste collection and disposal service shall be billed and collected monthly. When such payment has not been made, a ten percent penalty shall be added and collected. When such payment has not been made by the 15th day after billing service, service shall be discontinued until all arrears, including penalties, have been paid in full and the following month has been paid in advance. 
(c)  Charges for use of disposal sites . The municipal attendant shall make, in duplicate, a record of each time a vehicle discharges waste at a public disposal site. Such record shall show the date, the time of day, the vehicle owner's name, the truck number, and its rated load capacity in cubic yards. The record shall be signed by the driver of the truck and by the site attendant. One copy shall be retained by the attendant and filed daily with the Director of Sanitation, who shall tabulate records according to the rated loan capacity schedule in this article, and shall deliver them weekly to the Office of the City Treasurer for billing and collection. The failure of any person to pay such accrued charges within 15 days shall be sufficient reason to deny such person or his employee or agents the right to continue using the municipal disposal site until all such charges are paid in full. 
(Code 2005, § 12-204) 
Secs. 30-33—30-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE SOLID WASTE FRANCHISES FOR COLLECTION SERVICES 

Sec. 30-53. - Private contractors. 
No person other than employees of the City shall collect, transport, or dispose of solid waste for pay in the City without having first applied for and received a franchise under this section and a business license to engage in such business as provided in chapter 12. 
(Code 2005, § 12-301) 
Sec. 30-54. - Franchises. 
(a)  Upon application being filed on forms prepared by the Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville, firms may be franchised. Such franchised firm shall be approved and authorized by the Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville to collect and dispose of residential solid waste within a specific franchised area. Franchises authorizing collection and disposal of solid residential waste shall be granted for a period of one year. The City of Lawrenceville may award a new franchise to any applicant at any time; however, any new franchise must not have an effective date before the expiration of an existing franchise covering that territory unless the new franchise is a renewal or unless the existing franchise is terminated as provided in this article. Franchises shall be granted or disapproved after investigation into the financial status of applicants; ability of applicant to serve the franchised area; the needs of the area; and the ability of the applicant to provide a service as would be to the best interest and serve the general welfare of the citizens of the area. 
(b)  No franchise hereunder may be delegated, assigned or otherwise transferred to any person or entity by the existing franchisee without permission from the Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(c)  In the event a franchise is granted to any private contractor, the individual subscribing to the private contractor shall still be required to pay any fees and assessment provided by this article. 
(Code 2005, § 12-302) 
Sec. 30-55. - General solid waste handling. 
(a)  No person shall engage in solid waste handling in a manner which will be conducive to insect and rodent infestation or the harboring and feeding of wild dogs or other animals; impair the air quality; impair the quality of the groundwater or surface water; impair the quality of the environment; or likely create other hazards to the public health, safety, or well-being as may be determined by the Director of Financial Services or his designee. 
(b)  Provisions of this article apply to all persons presently engaged in solid waste handling as well as all persons proposing to engage in solid waste handling. 
(Code 2005, § 12-303) 
Sec. 30-56. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall engage in solid waste handling except in such a manner as to conform to and comply with this article and all applicable State and federal legislation, rules, regulation and orders. 
(b)  No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall collect and dispose of municipal solid waste for a fee without obtaining a franchise to provide service from the Mayor and Council. No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall collect or dispose of construction or demolition debris without obtaining an authorization to provide such service from the Mayor and Council. 
(c)  No solid waste may be disposed of by any person in an open dump, nor may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his property as defined by the rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, EPD, chapter 391-3-4-04. A person shall be presumed to have violated this provision if, upon written notification by the Chief of the City of Lawrenceville Police Department, or his designee, that litter or solid waste has been dumped on that person's property, not otherwise subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-51 through 16-7-54, and the person fails to provide the Chief of the City of Lawrenceville Police Department or his designee within 15 days of notification with written assurance that the accumulation of litter or solid waste will be properly disposed of within 30 days from the original date of notification. 
(d)  No person who first informs the Chief of the City of Lawrenceville Police Department or his designee in writing that illegal dumping has occurred on a particular parcel of that person's property shall be deemed to have violated this provision, if such person provides written assurance that all accumulated litter or solid waste will be properly disposed of within 30 days of the date of such written notification and subsequently provides proof of such disposal. 
(e)  The owner, occupant, manager or other person in charge of any premises, office, business establishment, institution, industry, or similar facility, including construction or demolition sites, shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste accumulated at the premises, office, business establishment, institution, or similar facility to a solid waste handling facility operating in compliance with the Georgia Environmental Protection Division rules and regulations unless arrangements have been made for such services with a collector operating in compliance with this article. 
(f)  No owner, occupant, manager or other person in charge of any premises, place, or facility shall allow the accumulation on premises under his control, or on or about his residential unit or commercial establishment, of solid waste where such solid waste creates or may create a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or is unsightly, or emits foul or obnoxious odors which constitute either a public or private nuisance. Such conduct shall constitute a violation of this article. Each day the solid waste remains on the premises may constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(g)  No person may dispose of yard trimmings in the City of Lawrenceville or dispose of yard trimmings generated in the City of Lawrenceville unless such disposal is carried out in accordance with the following restrictions: 
(1)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with municipal solid waste. 
(2)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of in municipal solid waste disposal facilities that have liners and leachate collection systems or that require vertical expansion. 
(3)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in a manner that facilitates collection, composting, or other lawful handling. 
(4)  Upon collection, yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled until their ultimate disposal by chipping, mulching, other beneficial use, or recycling. 
(Code 2005, § 12-304) 
Sec. 30-57. - Authorization to provide service. 
(a)  A service area map is hereby adopted and attached to this article, more specifically, to the original ordinance from which this article was derived. Copies of this article and the service area maps shall be available for public inspection in the Offices of the City Clerk, the Department of Sanitation, and at other locations as designated by the City Clerk. 
(b)  Nonexclusive franchises to provide collections services for residential or commercial collection and disposal for one or more areas designated on the service area map may be granted upon application to the Director of Sanitation or his designee, provided an applicant is able to provide services that meet at least the minimum requirements set out in section 30-58. The right to provide service authorized in collection and disposal of solid waste shall be granted for a period of no more than one calendar year from January 1 to December 31. 
(c)  Service providers must agree to provide collection services for not less than an entire service area, and in residential areas may pick up only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The Mayor and Council reserve the discretionary authority to revoke or rescind any such authorization to provide service in the interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(Code 2005, § 12-305) 
Sec. 30-58. - Application and requirements for service providers. 
(a)  All applicants to be service providers seeking a franchise within the City of Lawrenceville must meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Application. 
a.  All persons, firms or corporations desiring to provide solid waste collection and disposal service in the City of Lawrenceville shall make application on the form prescribed by the Director of Sanitation. 
b.  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to: the name and address of the applicant; the type of solid waste collection and disposal service to be provided; if a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; if a limited liability company ("LLC"), the name and address of the manager and the name of any person or legal entity owning 20 percent of the LLC; if a corporation, the names of the officers, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process, the name of the manager, and the name of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a service agreement is sought. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the Director of Sanitation the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change. 
(2)  Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and Georgia Department of Transportation (DOT) Requirements. 
(3)  The applicant must submit a notarized statement certifying all solid waste collection and disposal equipment meets minimum OSHA safety and health standards. 
(4)  The applicant must submit a notarized statement certifying all heavy equipment drivers have a current commercial driver's license (CDL) and all trucks are registered with the DOT. 
(5)  Permit. Prior to engaging in solid waste handling in the City of Lawrenceville, the service provider must have obtained a solid waste handling permit from the Director of Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or any successor agency authorized to issue permits pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-24. 
(6)  Insurance. At the time of submission of a signed authorized service agreement and prior to engaging in solid waste handling in the City of Lawrenceville, and annually thereafter, each service provider shall provide to the Director of Sanitation proof of insurance as follows: 
a.  Statutory workers' compensation insurance. 
b.  Employer's liability for bodily injury by accident: $100,000.00 each accident. 
c.  Employer's liability for bodily injury by disease: $500,000.00 policy limit $100,000.00 each employee. 
d.  Commercial general liability insurance: $1,000,000.00 limit of liability per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
(7)  The following additional coverage must apply: 
a.  1986 (or later) ISO commercial general liability form. 
b.  Additional insured endorsement (Form B CG 20 10). 
c.  Blanket contractual liability (included in 1986 or later forms). 
d.  Severability of interest (included in 1986 or later forms). 
e.  Personal injury (deleting both contractual and employee exclusions). 
f.  Incidental medical malpractice. 
g.  Hostile fire pollution wording. 
(8)  Auto liability insurance. 
a.  $1,000,000.00 limit of liability per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
b.  Comprehensive form covering all owned, non-owned, leased, hired, and borrowed vehicles. 
c.  Additional insured endorsement. 
d.  Contractual liability. 
e.  Umbrella liability insurance, minimum $2,000,000.00 limit of liability. 
(9)  The following additional coverage must apply: 
a.  Additional insured endorsement. 
b.  Concurrency of effective dates with primary. 
c.  Blanket contractual liability. 
d.  Drop down feature. 
e.  Care, custody, and control (follow form primary). 
f.  Aggregates: Apply where applicable in primary. 
g.  Umbrella policy must be as broad as the primary policy. 
(10)  The City of Lawrenceville (and any applicable authority) should be shown as an additional insured on general liability, auto liability and umbrella liability policies. 
(11)  The cancellation provision must provide 30 days' notice of cancellation. 
(12)  Certificate holder must read: 
City of Lawrenceville 
70 South Clayton Street 
Lawrenceville, GA 
(13)  Insurance company, except workers' compensation carrier, must have an A.M. Best Rating of A-6 or higher. Certain workers' compensation funds may be acceptable by the approval of the Risk Management Division. European markets, including those based in London and domestic surplus lines markets that operate on a non-admitted basis, are exempt from this requirement, provided that the contractor's broker/agent can provide financial data to establish that a market is equal to or exceeds the financial strengths associated with the A.M. Best's rating of A-6 or better. 
(14)  The Georgia Department of Insurance must license insurance company to do business. 
(15)  Certificates of insurance and any subsequent renewals must reference solid waste collection and disposal services. 
(16)  The contractor shall agree to provide complete certified copies of current insurance policies if requested by the City to verify the compliance with these insurance requirements. 
(17)  The contractor shall incorporate a copy of the insurance requirements as provided in this section in each and every subcontract with each and every subcontractor in any tier, and shall require each and every subcontractor of any tier to comply with all such requirements. The contractor agrees that if for any reason subcontractor fails to procure and maintain insurance as required, all such required insurance shall be procured and maintained by the contractor at the contractor's expense. 
(18)  No contractor or subcontractor shall commence any work of any kind under this contract until all insurance requirements contained in this contract have been complied with and until evidence of such compliance satisfactory to the City of Lawrenceville as to form and content has been filed with the City of Lawrenceville. The Accord Certificate of Insurance or a pre-approved substitute is the required form in all cases where reference is made to a certificate of insurance or an approved substitute. 
(19)  The contractor shall agree to waive all rights of subrogation against the City, the elected officials, employees, and agents from losses arising from work performed by the contractor. 
(20)  Compliance by the contractor and all subcontractors with the foregoing requirements as to carrying insurance shall not relieve the contractor and all subcontractors of their liability provisions of the contract. 
(21)  The contractor and all subcontractors are to comply with the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, Public Law 91-956, and any other laws that may apply to this contract. 
(22)  The contractor shall, at a minimum, apply risk management practices accepted by the contractor's industry. 
(23)  Indemnification. The service provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments from third parties for damages which may be the result of willful, negligent or tortuous conduct or operations arising out of the business of collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, whether or not the action or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article. 
(b)  Financial stability. All service providers shall, prior to engaging in solid waste handling in the City of Lawrenceville, give fidelity bond, payable to the City of Lawrenceville for the benefit of the citizens of the City of Lawrenceville, in an amount equal to the average revenue anticipated from three months' collections not to exceed $500,000.00 but in no event less than $50,000.00. Such bonds shall be increased/decreased yearly based on the quarterly average of the previous year's actual revenue. Alternatively, service providers may provide an irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of bond. 
(c)  All service providers shall, prior to engaging in solid waste handling in the City of Lawrenceville, post with the City Clerk a performance bond in an amount of $100,000.00. Alternatively, service providers may provide an irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of bond. 
(d)  In lieu of separate bonds or letters of credit described in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, service providers may provide an equivalent authorization to provide service bond at the time of application which encompasses both fidelity and performance. The amount of such bond must be acceptable to the Director of Sanitation or his designee, but in no event may be less than $150,000.00. 
(e)  Service providers obtaining both residential and commercial authorization to provide services must meet financial stability criteria but may submit one bond or letter of credit in an amount encompassing both service authorizations. 
(f)  Vehicles. 
(1)  All vehicles and containers used for collection operations shall comply with the requirements of Rule 391-3-4-.06 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R391-3-4-.06) of chapter 391-3-4 (Solid Waste Management) of the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, and must be compactor-type trucks, covered or enclosed vehicles. All vehicles must be constructed to be substantially leakproof, constructed of durable metal, easily cleanable and able to prevent litter from escaping during movement of the vehicle. 
(2)  Vehicles and containers shall meet all requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation for highway safety and local ordinances governing weight and size for the streets that must be traveled for pickup. All vehicles shall be subject to unannounced inspection by city officials for compliance with environmental and highway safety standards. 
(3)  All vehicles shall have, in letters at least six inches high and conspicuously placed in three places on the vehicle, the name and telephone number of the service provider. 
(4)  Service providers shall provide an adequate number of vehicles for regular collection services. Nothing in this article shall prohibit service providers from sharing backup vehicles with other service providers, provided that such sharing is adequately covered by insurance. 
(5)  Vehicles used exclusively for collecting and transporting recovered materials shall be exempt from this entire article except that an adequate cover shall be used to prevent litter from escaping during movement. 
(6)  Reporting requirements. 
a.  Within 30 days following the close of each calendar quarter ending March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 of each year of operation, the service provider shall submit to the Director of Sanitation or his designee reports of operation showing the following: 
1.  Gross collection revenues and average number of customers during quarter by service type. 
2.  Tonnage figures showing total waste tonnage collected by service type. 
3.  Tonnage figures showing total recovered materials collected by type, and proof of recycling in the form of manifests, bills of sale, or other records showing adequate proof of movement of the material to a recognized recycling facility. 
4.  Proof of disposal of nonrecovered materials at State-approved disposal facilities and name of each such facility. 
b.  The service provider shall maintain at its place of business books and records showing the names and addresses of all owners and tenants with whom the service provider contracted for solid waste handling services, including the street address for the property served. The service provider shall submit, upon reasonable request of the Director of Sanitation, to a financial audit by a certified public accountant or auditor employed by the City of Lawrenceville. Except for the operating reports described in subsection (6)a.1 through 4 of this section, the information provided in accordance with this section shall be confidential. 
(7)  Disposal assurance. As a precondition of the authorization to provide services and/or authorization renewal, all applicants shall obtain a letter of solid waste disposal assurance governing the next ten years from the landfill owner or operator where its solid waste is delivered. The letter of solid waste disposal must be on the letterhead of the company owning the landfill and signed by the chief executive operating officer or other appropriate official of the company. The letter must contain the following information: 
a.  Telephone number and title of the company official signing the assurance letter; 
b.  Address of the landfill; 
c.  Remaining permitted capacity of the landfill in cubic yards; 
d.  Estimated life of permitted capacity remaining at current and projected rates of waste disposal in tons or cubic yards; 
e.  A statement that sufficient landfill capacity exists to accommodate the applicant requesting the letter over the expected remaining life of the landfill based on remaining landfill capacity and the amount of waste received at the landfill; 
f.  A statement that appropriate arrangements are in place such that the landfill will reserve a portion of its capacity on behalf of the applicant over the remaining life of the landfill. If the landfill operator currently lacks capacity for the next ten years, the landfill operator shall provide a statement containing the following, if applicable: 
1.  Expected future additions or expansions of the landfill; 
2.  Additional capacity in cubic yards from such expected expansion; 
3.  When such future additions or expansions will be begun or completed; 
4.  Where such additions or expansions would take place; and 
g.  A statement that sufficient capacity will exist in the future addition or expansion of the landfill to accommodate the applicant over the designated time period. Otherwise, the landfill operator should indicate that no plans exist to continue landfill operations after the closing of the current landfill. In addition to initial letter requirements for obtaining an authorization to provide service, all letters of solid waste disposal assurance must be filed annually with the Director of the Department of Administration by July 30 as a condition for obtaining or continuing an authorization to provide service in the city. 
A one-time fee of $500.00 shall be paid by applicants who are not current holders of an authorization to provide service. Payment shall accompany the application and shall be made by cash or certified check. 
(Code 2005, § 12-306) 
Sec. 30-59. - Applicant qualifications. 
(a)  No solid waste collection and disposal service agreement shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(b)  The applicant must submit a sworn statement that the applicant and owner or operator, if different than the applicant, for a solid waste collection and disposal agreement or, in the case of a corporation, partnership, or association, an officer, director, manager, or shareholder of 20 percent or more of stock or financial interest in said corporation, partnership or association: 
(1)  Have not intentionally misrepresented or concealed any material fact in the application submitted for solid waste collection and disposal service; 
(2)  Are not attempting to obtain the solid waste collection and disposal agreement by misrepresentation or concealment: 
(3)  Have not been charged or convicted in the State of Georgia or any federal court of any felony within three years immediately preceding the application for a solid waste collection and disposal agreement; 
(4)  Have not been convicted of any violations of any environmental laws punishable as a felony in any State or federal court within three years preceding the application for a solid waste collection and disposal agreement; 
(5)  Have not knowingly, willfully, and consistently violated the prohibitions specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.7; and 
(6)  Have not been adjudicated in contempt of any court order enforcing any federal environmental laws or any environmental laws of the State of Georgia. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any City employee directly involved in the issuance of a solid waste collection and disposal agreement under this article to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any business providing solid waste collection and disposal service in the City. 
(d)  The Director of Sanitation may decline to issue a solid waste collection and disposal agreement when any person having any ownership interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section for the applicant. 
(Code 2005, § 12-307) 
Sec. 30-60. - Regulatory fees and franchises. 
(a)  A regulatory fee shall be charged to each resident that receives utility services from the City for utilities other than solid waste collection services. A regulatory fee shall be charged to the property owner for each residence on a parcel of land if no other utilities are provided to the parcel of land other than solid waste collection services. Fees shall be as established from time to time. 
(b)  A regulatory fee shall be charged to the service provider for each commercial customer to whom solid waste collection services are provided and billed during any portion of the quarter for which a franchise to provide service was granted and is in effect. Said fees shall be due and payable to the City of Lawrenceville when invoiced by the City. Proceeds from regulatory fees shall be used to defray the cost to the City of monitoring and enforcing compliance with this article and for meeting requirements dictated by State law, including studying and implementing plans and methods for the handling of solid waste and reduction of solid waste generated within the City of Lawrenceville. Said fees, as established from time to time, shall be paid into a special fund for such purposes. 
(c)  A late fee of ten percent of the amount due shall be imposed on any payment received after its due date. In addition, interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month or fraction thereof shall be charged on any amount in arrears. 
(d)  For the purpose of determining the initial classification of establishments as to volumes of waste generated, the Director of Sanitation shall make a volume survey of all establishments in the City to be served by public collection facilities. The Director shall observe each establishment for a period not less than one week, and the result of such survey and the classification established thereby shall be given in writing to each establishment. Similar surveys shall be made semi-annually to determine whether changes should be made in classification and upon request of the owner of any establishment who feels his establishment is in an improper category, provided not more than two such surveys per year may be so requested. 
(e)  Franchises. Upon application being filed on forms prepared by the Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville, firms may be franchised. Such franchised firm shall be approved and authorized by the Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville to collect and dispose of residential solid waste within the franchised areas. Franchises authorizing collection and disposal of solid residential waste shall be granted for a period of one year. The City of Lawrenceville may award a new franchise to any applicant at any time; however, any new franchise must not have an effective date before the expiration of an existing franchise covering that territory unless the new franchise is a renewal or unless the existing franchise is terminated as provided in this article. Franchises shall be granted or disapproved after investigation into the financial status of applicants; ability of the applicant to serve the franchised area; the needs of the area; and the ability of the applicant to provide a service as would be in the best interest and serve the general welfare of the citizens of the area. 
(1)  No franchise under this section may be delegated, assigned or otherwise transferred to any person or entity by the existing franchisee without permission from the Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(2)  In the event a franchise is granted to any private contractor, the individual subscribing to the private contractor shall still be required to pay any fees and assessment provided by this article. 
(Code 2005, § 12-308) 
Sec. 30-61. - Residential services. 
(a)  All service providers granted an authorization to provide service for solid waste collection and removal for any area shall provide a minimum of the following services: 
(1)  The service provider shall provide, at a minimum, weekly curb service collection of residential waste. Charges for residential collection and removal services shall be charged to the owners of the real property served, except that by requesting services, any tenant may become jointly bound to pay same. 
(2)  Collection and removal services for disabled persons and senior citizens 65 years old and older, as defined in section 30-62, shall be made and billed as directed in that section. 
(3)  The City of Lawrenceville assumes no responsibility to the service provider for the failure of any customer to keep current solid waste collection payments. The service provider quarterly will provide the Director of Sanitation with a list of residential customers whose service has been discontinued for nonpayment. Service providers shall cooperate fully in any legal action taken by the City for failure of any owner or resident to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  For all residential customers desiring to voluntarily participate in recycling, the City shall provide all recycling services through a qualified vendor approved by the Mayor and Council of the City. 
(5)  The Mayor and Council reserves the right to change the type and number of recovered items considered for collection. 
(6)  Service providers shall not dispose of recovered materials in landfills. 
(7)  No additional fee, over the amount charged for curbside collection of residential waste, shall be charged by the service provider for regular collections of recovered materials every week. 
(8)  All service providers shall agree to participate fully in recycling through a qualified vendor approved by the Mayor and Council of the City. 
(9)  Inoperative privately used worn-out household appliances (e.g., refrigerators, stoves, air conditioning units, water heaters, washing machines, and dryers) and discarded furniture shall be collected at the curb at least weekly as designated by the service provider at no additional charge, where said appliances contain no pollutants or hazardous wastes. A reasonable charge may be imposed where the service provider is required by law to properly remove and dispose of such hazardous wastes/pollutants. Service providers are not required under this provision to remove or dispose of materials generated from remodeling or renovation projects (e.g., carpet, lumber, etc.). 
(10)  Upon recovered materials being placed in designated recycling containers for regular curbside collection, they shall become the property of the service provider collecting residential waste for that residential address. During the 24-hour period commencing at 6:00 p.m. on any day preceding any day designated by the service provider for collection of recovered materials, no person other than an employee or agent of the service provider shall remove recovered materials from the designated recycling container which has been properly placed for collection. 
(11)  All service providers shall offer and provide for the collection of yard trimmings at a minimum of an on-call basis. An additional fee may be charged by the service provider for the collection of yard trimmings. 
(b)  Each collection in violation of this section during that period shall constitute a violation of this section, and shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the right of any individual, organization or other entity to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of recovered material, if such disposal does not violate any applicable statute, regulation or ordinance. 
(d)  The City of Lawrenceville at all times reserves the right to direct and control the time, place and manner of solid waste handling. Nothing in this article is intended to abridge the City of Lawrenceville's right to ownership and control of the waste stream. 
(Code 2005, § 12-309) 
Sec. 30-62. - Elderly and disabled. 
(a)  Nothing in this article is intended to prohibit the service provider from offering discounts to senior citizens or the disabled. 
(b)  Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential dwelling unit as described in section 30-61, who is at or over the age of 65 years, and who is disabled to the extent that he is incapable of moving refuse to the curbside may apply for an exemption to the requirement detailed in section 30-63 via the following method: 
(1)  Request an exemption application from the Department of Sanitation. 
(2)  Complete the exemption application as thoroughly as possible by including the following information: 
a.  Name; 
b.  Address; 
c.  Telephone number; 
d.  Date of birth; and 
e.  Detailed explanation for requested exemption. 
(3)  Submit the completed exemption application to the Director of Sanitation. The Director of Sanitation will review all submitted exemption applications and will inform the applicant by mail once a decision has been reached. 
(4)  This exemption shall not apply unless all of the adult persons in a residential unit are disabled and are granted an exemption by the Director of Sanitation. This section also applies to temporary disability not to exceed 90 days. 
(5)  Service providers shall provide recovered materials services to disabled persons and yard trimmings services to disabled persons. 
(Code 2005, § 12-310) 
Sec. 30-63. - General conditions of residential collection. 
(a)  Occupants of one-and two-family dwelling units, condominiums, or multifamily dwelling units not served by commercial container shall place all refuse, but not rubbish and yard trimmings, in plastic-lined paper bags or plastic bags securely tied in refuse receptacles, or in City-approved receptacles provided by the service provider, at front curbside locations in such manner as not to obstruct passage. Occupants shall place such refuse at the appropriate curbside location at or before 7:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the collection vehicles. This placement shall not be made before dusk on the day prior to collection day. Refuse placed on the curb after departure of the pickup crew of the service provider shall subject the service provider's customer to prosecution for violation of this article. No open containers or untied plastic bags shall be permitted. 
(b)  Occupants placing garbage or trash at the curb any day other than designated for collection will be in violation of this article. The only exception to placing garbage and other solid waste on the curb no sooner than the night before the garbage is collected is in the case of leaves raked and placed at the curb from October 1 through April 30. 
(c)  Occupants shall remove containers from a curbside location to a storage location, which storage location shall be at the residential unit located on the premises; removal should be accomplished within a reasonable time following collection on the day the contents are emptied and collected. 
(d)  Occupants shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon their property or the public thoroughfares bounding upon the occupant's property. 
(e)  It shall be a violation of this article to place or cause to be placed for collection any acid, explosive material, flammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(f)  Inoperative, privately used worn out household appliances (e.g., refrigerators, stoves, air conditioning units, water heaters, washing machines, dryers) and discarded furniture shall be collected at the curb at least weekly as designated by the service provider at no additional charge, provided that all pollutants and hazardous wastes have been removed prior to collection. 
(g)  Solid waste generated from the conduct of customary home occupations, as defined in the City of Lawrenceville Zoning Code, carried on from residential dwelling units will be collected on a residential fee basis. 
(h)  All trash and refuse will be collected by the service provider if placed in plastic receptacles or metal garbage cans of not more than 35-gallon capacity, in bags of not more than 30-gallon capacity, or tied in bundles not exceeding three feet in any dimension and weighing not more than 50 pounds, or in City-approved receptacles provided by the service provider. Reasonable approval will not be denied by the Director of Sanitation or his designee. No open containers or untied plastic bags shall be permitted. 
(i)  Recovered materials consisting of aluminum cans, bimetal/steel cans, glass bottles and jars, newspaper, plastic (PET and HDPE) bottles and containers will be collected by the service provider at least once every week if placed in designated containers properly placed for collection at the curbside. 
(j)  Yard trimmings consisting of grass clippings, leaves, etc., shall be placed in suitable receptacles. No yard trimmings shall be placed in plastic bags. Limbs not exceeding four inches in diameter or more than three feet in length must be tied in a bundle weighing not more than 50 pounds. 
(k)  During any week in which there is a legal holiday or extremely harsh weather conditions, such as snow or ice, service providers shall be required to collect residential solid waste once during such week. 
(l)  Nothing in this article shall prevent customers from contracting with service providers for additional services at additional costs. 
(m)  A list of all current service providers and the service areas will be available for public inspection in the Office of the City Clerk and in the Director of Sanitation's office at all times. 
(n)  Property owners shall not be responsible for the cost of solid waste collection during any period when the property is vacant for 30 days or more and they have notified the service provider providing service to them of that fact in writing in advance of that period. 
(o)  Customers shall not permit yard trimmings to remain at the curbside for more than two weeks. 
(p)  Residential customers violating any provision of this section shall be subject to citation by the Director of Sanitation or by any uniformed officer of the City of Lawrenceville Police Department. Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in 30-4. Said violations shall be heard by the Municipal Court of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(Code 2005, § 12-311) 
Sec. 30-64. - Commercial services. 
Applicants for commercial authorization to provide services are subject to the same requirements for a solid waste handling permit as are residential service providers under section 30-58. 
(Code 2005, § 12-312) 
Sec. 30-65. - General conditions of commercial collection. 
(a)  The owner, occupant, manager, or person in charge of any construction or demolition site, premises, office, business establishment, institution or industry or similar commercial establishment shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste accumulated at such premises, establishment or facility to a solid waste handling facility operating in compliance with State regulation and this article, and must arrange for service with an approved service provider. 
(b)  Holders of a valid solid waste handling permit from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources shall be exempt from such contracting but shall comply with the requirements of section 30-57. 
(c)  No business license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the owner or occupant of such premises provides the business license office of the City of Lawrenceville with the name of the service provider which provides collection for the business, or an exception has been granted by the Director of Sanitation or his designee. 
(d)  Yard trimmings from commercial premises or collected or disposed under commercial accounts shall be managed as provided in section 30-56(g)(1)—(4). Yard trimmings must be bundled or placed in a suitable container for collection. Yard trimmings may not be placed in plastic bags. 
(e)  The City of Lawrenceville reserves the right at all times to direct and control the time, place and manner of commercial solid waste handling. Nothing in this article is intended to abridge the City of Lawrenceville's right to ownership and control of the waste stream. 
(Code 2005, § 12-313) 
Sec. 30-66. - Termination of authorization to provide services. 
(a)  Authorization to provide services may be terminated by mutual agreement of the City of Lawrenceville and service provider at any time. Service providers may terminate authorization to provide services by giving 60 days' notice to the Director of Sanitation and furnishing proof to the Director of Sanitation that all advance payments have been used by providing a service or have been refunded. 
(b)  The Director of Sanitation or his designee shall notify any service provider of alleged violations by the service provider of this article. Upon notification of the alleged violation, a service provider shall have 48 business hours to provide the Director or his designee with proof that there was no violation or proof that the alleged violation was resolved. If the service provider fails to resolve the alleged violation or provide proof that there was no violation within 48 business hours of notification, such alleged violation shall be deemed to be a violation. If a service provider shall have received notices of alleged violations which the service provider did not establish as being resolved or not a violation within 48 business hours of notification in any one month, a hearing shall be held before the Council with the service provider being notified in writing of the time and place of the hearing and the violations of this article which were not corrected within 48 business hours of notification or otherwise shown by the service provider not to be a violation within 48 business hours of notification. The service provider will be given the opportunity to appear by representative or counsel to answer any such charge by the Director of Sanitation or his designee. Should the Council determine that any of the provisions of this article have been violated by service provider, the Council shall have, in its discretion, the absolute right to suspend or revoke the authorization to provide services or provide for probation for the service provider. 
(c)  If two or more of the violations of this article by the service provider are noise complaints received from residents in residential areas for noise associated with commercial collection in the same commercial location in a 120-day period, the following provision shall take effect in the area of such incidents: the service provider shall only engage in the collection, transportation or disposal of any solid waste or recyclables from such commercial location dumpsters, containers or receptacles of any kind or type between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. except to perform emergency work required to safeguard the immediate health, safety and welfare of the public. Every subsequent alleged noise complaint violation at that location shall constitute a violation of this article. In the discretion of the Director of Sanitation or his designee, a meeting may be scheduled between the service provider and the Director or his designee. Within five days after such meeting, a letter summarizing the meeting and setting forth any agreements reached between the parties shall be forwarded to the service provider. The service provider must acknowledge receipt of the letter and agreement or disagreement with the terms set forth in the letter within five business days of receipt thereof. If no response is received from the service provider, the service provider will be deemed to be in agreement with the terms set forth in the letter. In the discretion of the Director of Sanitation or his designee, if the service provider fails to abide by the terms set forth in the letter from the Director of Sanitation or his designee or if the Director of Sanitation or his designee deems it necessary, a hearing shall be held before the Council with the service provider being notified in writing of the time and place of the hearing and the violations of this article to be addressed. The service provider will be given the opportunity to appear by representative or counsel to answer any such charge by the Director of Sanitation or his designee. Should the Council determine that the service provider has violated any of the provisions of this article, the Council shall have, in its discretion, the absolute right to suspend or revoke the authorization to provide services or provide for probation for the service provider. 
(d)  Authorizations to provide services are nontransferable. 
(Code 2005, § 12-314) 
Secs. 30-67—30-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTERING AND DUMPING ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 30-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
(Code 2005, § 47-101) 
Sec. 30-92. - Regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this City or any waters in this City, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the City or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  The Municipal Court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2005, § 47-102) 
Sec. 30-93. - Evidence. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and/or by confinement in the County jail for a total term not to exceed six months; 
(2)  In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the Judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongings or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Code 2005, § 47-103; Ord. of 9-10-2007) 
Sec. 30-94. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by officers of the City of Lawrenceville Police Department and all law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this State or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this State or any political subdivision thereof, which is specifically designated by the Council of the City to be authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. Citations under this article shall be returned for trial and administration to the Municipal Court of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(Code 2005, § 47-104) 
Chapter 32 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING ORDINANCE 

Sec. 32-19. - Smoking prohibited in City buildings, vehicles, shops and work areas. 
(a)  Purpose . 
(1)  Studies by the Surgeon General of the United States, the National Academy of Sciences, and other health organizations have linked passive exposure to tobacco smoke (second-hand smoke) to a variety of negative health conditions in nonsmokers. 
(2)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, seek to strike a reasonable balance between the rights of smokers and nonsmokers by regulating smoking in certain City property. 
(3)  In an effort to provide a safer and healthier environment in the City of Lawrenceville, the Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville implement the following article restricting smoking on certain City property. 
(b)  Prohibition . No person shall smoke in any of the following areas: City buildings, City vehicles, City shops and work areas. 
(c)  Designated smoking areas . City department heads may designate smoking areas outside of City buildings and vehicles in which smoking may be permitted. Department heads shall inform employees of this article and of the location of designated smoking areas. Smoking will not be permitted in any area which has not been designated as a smoking area. 
(d)  Violation, penalty and enforcement. 
(1)  Smoking in a City building, vehicle, shop or work area shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(2)  Any person who violates this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $100.00. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  Persons found in violation of this article shall be issued a Municipal Court summons, which shall direct the person to appear in the Municipal Court at the time and date designated on the summons. The summons shall further inform the person that the fine for violation of the City's smoking ordinance may be paid prior to the hearing date, in which event there shall be no further need to appear. In the event that there is no prepayment or appearance on the scheduled hearing date, the Police Chief shall, via certified mail, return receipt requested, mail the person a notice advising him of a second hearing date before the Judge of theMunicipal Court. This notice will further advise the person that the fine may be paid in lieu of the court appearance. In the event the person fails to appear on the court date as specified in the certified letter or fails to pay the fine, then a subpoena will be issued by the Judge of the Municipal Court requiring the person to appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court. This subpoena shall be personally served. In the event the person fails to appear on the date specified in the subpoena, then the Judge of the Municipal Court will issue a bench warrant for contempt of court. 
(4)  It is the responsibility of all employees of the City of Lawrenceville to adhere to strict enforcement of the smoking policy of the City. 
(5)  Employees are encouraged to assist in the implementation of this policy by informing the visiting public of smoking restrictions and providing direction to areas where smoking is permitted. 
(Code 2005, § 31-115) 
Secs. 32-20—32-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES 

Sec. 32-42. - Registration and permit. 
Any person who wishes to organize, form, or conduct a parade, as defined in this article, shall be required to register such parade with the Police Chief at least 30 days in advance of the event and to obtain a permit therefor. 
(Code 2005, § 32-206(1)) 
Sec. 32-43. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any march, ceremony, demonstration or procession of any kind upon any public street of the City. 
(Code 2005, § 32-206(2)) 
Sec. 32-44. - Application. 
Application for a permit to conduct a parade shall be made to the Police Chief in writing, shall be signed by the person responsible for the conduct of the parade and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The time proposed for the parade; 
(2)  The route of the proposed parade; 
(3)  The number of vehicles, if any, and number of persons whose participation is anticipated in the proposed parade; 
(4)  The name and address of the person or organization sponsoring or promoting the proposed parade; and 
(5)  The name and address of the person making the application for a parade permit. 
(Code 2005, § 32-206(3)) 
Sec. 32-45. - Review of application. 
The Police Chief shall review the information set forth in the application and ascertain the following: the extent of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to be anticipated at the time and place of and on the route of the proposed parade; the availability of police forces to escort the proposed parade and to direct traffic in conjunction with the proposed parade; and whether or not, in view of all the circumstances, the proposed parade will unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the City by the general public. 
(Code 2005, § 32-206(4)) 
Sec. 32-46. - Disposition. 
In the event the Police Chief determines, in view of all the circumstances, that the proposed parade will unreasonably burden and interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the City by the general public, he shall deny the request for a parade permit, and if he determines on the contrary that the proposed parade will not unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the City by the general public, he shall grant the parade permit. In either case, the Police Chief shall indicate his disposition on the application and shall notify the applicant of the action taken. 
(Code 2005, § 32-206(5)) 
Sec. 32-47. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this section shall be inapplicable to any parade which is conducted under the supervision of a practicing mortician in conjunction with any funeral. 
(Code 2005, § 32-206(6)) 
Secs. 32-48—32-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY HALL AND MUNICIPAL COURT OPERATING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 32-66. - Title. 
The following article is adopted and shall apply to the operation of the City of Lawrenceville City Hall and municipal court building (hereinafter referred to as "City Hall"), which is located at 70 South Clayton Street, City of Lawrenceville, Gwinnett County, Georgia. The provisions of these regulations shall apply to all persons and personnel entering the City Hall. The guidelines of this operating procedure shall apply to all employees, agencies and departments operating in the City Hall. 
(Code 2005, § 48-101) 
Sec. 32-67. - Police enforcement. 
The City of Lawrenceville Police Department shall be the chief security force for the City Hall, including, but not limited to, the Court operations. 
(Code 2005, § 48-102) 
Sec. 32-68. - Inspection of items. 
Packages, briefcases, and any other containers brought into or being removed from City Hall shall be subject to inspection by the Police. By entering into the City Hall premises, the parties are waiving their right to have their person inspected in order to maintain absolute security and safety of the premises. 
(Code 2005, § 48-103) 
Sec. 32-69. - Hours of operations. 
The City Hall shall be open to the public during normal business hours. The normal business hours of the City are 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, or as otherwise designated by the City Manager of the City of Lawrenceville. City Hall shall also be closed on holidays which have been designated by the Council of the City of Lawrenceville. The City Hall may be closed to the public during normal business hours when situations require this action to ensure the safety of City personnel or the orderly conduct of business. The decision to close City Hall during normal business hours shall be made by the City Manager in consultation with the Mayor. 
(Code 2005, § 48-104) 
Sec. 32-70. - Damage or destruction of City Hall. 
The willful destruction of or damage to the City Hall or its contents, the creation of any hazards to persons within the City Hall and the throwing of articles of any kind within the City Hall or from any level of the City Hall is prohibited. 
(Code 2005, § 48-105) 
Sec. 32-71. - Official signs. 
Persons entering the City Hall shall at all times comply with the official signs of a prohibitory, regulatory or directory nature and with the instructions and directives of the Police and any other designated employees of the City. 
(Code 2005, § 48-106) 
Sec. 32-72. - Disorderly conduct. 
Any unwarranted loitering, disorderly conduct or other conduct in the City Hall which creates loud or unusual noise or nuisance; unreasonably obstructs the usual entrances, foyers, lobbies, corridors, offices, restrooms, elevators, stairways, or courtrooms; or otherwise impedes or disrupts the performance of official duties of the Mayor and Council, Court personnel and other City personnel; or prevents the general public from obtaining the services provided in the City Hall in a safe and timely manner, is prohibited. 
(Code 2005, § 48-107) 
Sec. 32-73. - Influence of alcohol and drugs. 
No person shall enter or remain in the City Hall while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs. This prohibition shall not apply in cases where a drug has been prescribed by a licensed physician. 
(Code 2005, § 48-108) 
Sec. 32-74. - Animals. 
Dogs and other animals shall not be brought into the City Hall for any purpose. The only exceptions to this provision are animals used as seeing eye dogs or other service animals for the blind or disabled and animals brought into the City by City employees acting in their official capacity. 
(Code 2005, § 48-109) 
Sec. 32-75. - Soliciting or distributing materials. 
Posting, fixing or distributing materials, such as pamphlets, handbills, or flyers, and the posting or affixing of said items on bulletin boards or elsewhere within the City Hall is prohibited except as authorized in writing by the City Manager of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(Code 2005, § 48-110) 
Sec. 32-76. - Weapons. 
No unauthorized person shall enter, or while in the City Hall, carry or possess firearms or dangerous weapons, knives, explosives or items intended to be used to fabricate an explosive or incendiary device, either openly or concealed. 
(Code 2005, § 48-111) 
Sec. 32-77. - Electronic devices to be turned off or silenced. 
All electronic devices shall be turned off or silenced in areas designated within the City Hall and the Police Department. All electronic devices shall be turned off in courtrooms and court processing areas, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Municipal Court Judge. 
(Code 2005, § 48-112) 
Sec. 32-78. - Law enforcement officers. 
Law enforcement officers or other public officials who are required to carry firearms in performance of their duties shall observe the following when carrying firearms in the City Hall: 
(1)  No person shall carry a firearm into any courtroom without first obtaining permission from the Judge presiding, except officers assigned to provide security for the courtroom. 
(2)  Persons authorized to bring firearms into the City Hall shall be in uniform or, if permitted to wear civilian clothes, must display, in clear view of the public, their official badge or their agency's official identification card. 
(3)  Employees of private security agencies are prohibited from bringing firearms into the City Hall. 
(Code 2005, § 48-113) 
Sec. 32-79. - Enforcement and penalty. 
The Police Chief shall be primarily responsible for enforcement of these regulations, along with such parties as he shall designate. Any person refusing to comply with the provisions of these regulations shall be removed from the City Hall or detained and brought before the Judge of the Municipal Court for disposition of an appropriate citation. Violations of these regulations shall be punishable by a finding of contempt, if appropriate, or shall be punishable by fines not to exceed $1,000.00 per offense or shall be punishable by imprisonment of not more than 180 days. In the enforcement of the punishment set forth in this provision, the Municipal Court is authorized to use any combination of fines, citations and imprisonment within the guidelines set forth in this section. In the enforcement of punishment set forth in this section, the Municipal Court is authorized to use any combination of fines, citations, restitution and imprisonment within the guidelines set forth in this section. 
(Code 2005, § 48-114) 
Sec. 32-80. - Remedies not exclusive. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this regulation, the provisions of these regulations are not intended to amend, appeal or abrogate in any way any other State, County, or local laws, rules or regulations applicable to City Hall. 
(Code 2005, § 48-115) 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENT 

Sec. 32-81. - Declaration of findings and purpose, scope, definitions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The City of Lawrenceville (the "City") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the City as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the City, and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the City, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including, but not limited to, article IX, section II, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2 and O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3, has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the City rights-of-way. 
(b)  Scope . The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. Where a franchise agreement, pole attachment agreement, or other agreement for the use of the City's rights-of-way has been entered into with the City, the provisions of such agreement shall control if any such provisions are in conflict with this article. 
(c)  Definitions . For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
(1)  City means the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia; 
(2)  City Clerk means the City Clerk of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, or his or her designee; 
(3)  City Engineer means the City Engineer of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, or his or her designee; 
(4)  Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia; 
(5)  Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way; 
(6)  Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way; 
(7)  Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property; 
(8)  Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the City; 
(9)  Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations; 
(10)  FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; 
(11)  Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the City or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances; 
(12)  Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the City has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the City, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities; 
(13)  Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public; 
(14)  Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the City or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the City and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the City; 
(15)  Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the City within the corporate limits of the City, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof; 
(16)  Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert; 
(17)  Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the City with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities; 
(18)  Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-82. - Utility registration. 
(a)  Administration . The City Clerk or his or her designee shall be the city official responsible for the administration of this section. 
(b)  Registration required. 
(1)  Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the City Clerk within 90 days of the effective date of this article. 
(2)  Following the effective date of this article from which this section is derived, each utility who seeks to have facilities located in the rights-of-way under the control of the City, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the City Clerk. 
(c)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the City shall be on a form approved by the City Clerk and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the City at all times; 
(3)  A copy of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
(4)  A copy of the service agreement, if applicable, or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration; 
(5)  All required information pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b) for those utilities which are considered a "telephone company" under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 and seeking to install lines and similar facilities with the City's rights-of-way. 
(d)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the City Clerk shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the City Clerk shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(e)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way . Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the City for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by City ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the City. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the City of construction as required herein. 
(f)  Facilities in place without registration . Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required, but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the City, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by City ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-83. - Construction notification. 
(a)  Notification required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the City without first providing written notification to the office of the City Engineer in accordance with the terms of this section. 
(b)  Notification procedure. Written notification of construction shall be made to the office of the City Engineer on a form approved by the City Engineer and shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  The estimated cost of the project; 
(7)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the City to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other City property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(c)  Emergency situations. In the event that the City becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the City may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The City may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The City shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(d)  Locate requests required. As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6, the "Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act," and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform or engage in blasting or excavating with mechanized equipment unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utilities protection center or by calling 8-1-1, beginning the next business day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than business days. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-84. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
The failure to company with any of the terms and conditions set forth in this section may result in the revocation of registration and removal of facilities from the rights-of-way. 
(a)  Utility accommodation manual adopted. The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the city engineer or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Lawrenceville municipal equivalents. 
(b)  Protection of traffic and roadway. No utility may occupy the City rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the City from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(c)  Grading . If the grades or lines of any street within the City right-of-way are changed at any time by the City and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the City upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the City shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the City and the utility shall pay to the City the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(d)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the City determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-85. - Restoration of property. 
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the City, the City or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-86. - Discontinuance of operations, abandoned and unused facilities. 
(a)  A utility who has discontinued or is discontinuing operation of any facilities in the City shall: 
(1)  Provide information satisfactory to the City that the utility's obligations for its facilities in the rights-of-way under this article and any other provision in the codified ordinances or other laws have been lawfully assumed by another utility; 
(2)  Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities; 
(3)  Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities which must be approved by the City Engineer; 
(4)  Remove its entire facilities within a reasonable amount of time and in a manner acceptable to the City; or 
(5)  Submit to the City, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the City. If a utility proceeds to transfer ownership to the City, the City may, at its option do one or more of the following: 
a.  Purchase the facilities; 
b.  Accept donation of some or all facilities; or 
c.  Require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the City for its reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
(b)  Facilities of a utility who fails to comply with the above provision shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by City ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-87. - Termination of registration. 
(a)  The registration statement shall remain in place for one year and renew each Subsequent year automatically unless the utility is in default. The City shall give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a registration application or any law of the City, State, or federal government; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the City; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation of fact in its application for registration. 
(b)  If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the City, then such default shall be a material breach and the City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the approval of registration. If the City Engineer decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  The City shall serve the utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow the utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the City may declare the registration terminated. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-88. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  No utility shall use the rights-of-way to operate any facilities that have not been authorized by the City in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  No utility shall place or have placed in any facilities in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through the rights-of-way, unless allowed under this article. 
(c)  Each and every unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a violation of this article and a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this article continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(d)  No utility shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article. Each and every failure to comply shall be deemed a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this article continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(e)  Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 3-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 32-89. - Other provisions. 
(a)  Severability . If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(b)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The City by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the City under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the City's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. the utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the City, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the City at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the City pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with City zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(c)  Compliance . No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of City to enforce compliance. 
(d)  Appeal of administrative decisions. All appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the City required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the City Engineer or City Clerk as specified in this chapter. 
(e)  Chapter headings. Chapter headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 3-7-2016 ) 
Chapter 34 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Ad valorem tax and municipal tax sales. 
(a)  Rate of levy. The annual ad valorem tax rate shall be reset for the year during the annual budget process by the Mayor and Council. 
(b)  Assessment and fair market value. The Gwinnett County Tax Commissioner shall bill all ad valorem taxes, including real property and personal property, on behalf of the City pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. Ad valorem billing shall consist of a line item identified as taxes imposed by the City on the County's tax bills, and such taxes shall be collected using the County's due dates. The Tax Commissioner shall have the responsibility for the issuing of executions, levying upon properties, conducting tax sales, and pursuing collection through bankruptcy courts on behalf of the City of Lawrenceville. The City shall provide the County with its millage rate within the City, properly advertised, on or before June 1 of each year or the date allowed by the presentation by Gwinnett County to the City of Lawrenceville of the City ad valorem digest, whichever of the two dates occurs later. The City hereby adopts the schedule for terms of collections provided by Gwinnett County. 
(c)  Failure to pay tax . The City shall forthwith issue an execution against any person who has defaulted in the payment of any ad valorem to be paid. The execution this issued shall be a lien on all the property of such person, both real and personal, and shall be placed in the hands of the City officer responsible for collection by levy and sale. 
(d)  Against who charged. Taxes are to be charged against the owner of the property, if known, or against the specific property, if known, or against the specific property itself if the owner is not known. Life tenants and those who enjoy the use of the property are chargeable with the tax thereon. 
(e)  Exempted property. Property exempt from ad valorem taxation shall be as established in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-41. 
(Code 2005, § 4-101; Ord. of 5-6-2002; Ord. of 10-7-2002; Ord. of 8-7-2006) 
Sec. 34-2. - License fees and taxes for insurers. 
(a)  Insurer's license fees . There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Lawrenceville in the amount of $100.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b) of this section, which operates on behalf of such insurers within the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $100.00. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations . For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this chapter, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $35.00 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(c)  Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers . There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Due date for license fees . License fees imposed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. 
(Code 2005, § 4-102; Ord. of 7-7-2011) 
Secs. 34-3—34-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX 

Sec. 34-23. - Levy and scope. 
There is hereby set and levied upon each person, partnership, or corporation carrying on a business, profession, or occupation within the corporate limits of this Municipality an occupation tax, such tax to be determined in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2005, § 4-103(1); Ord. of 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 34-24. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any person who, within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, engages in, or causes to be engaged in, any occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either directly or indirectly, and shall include any person advertising by any means, including, but not limited to, signs, cards, circulars, newspapers, etc., that is engaged in a business of any kind. 
Engaged in business or carrying on business means doing or performing any act of selling any goods or services or soliciting business, or offering any goods or services for sale primarily in an attempt to make a profit, either as an owner, operator, or agent of any business, trade, profession, or occupation within the City. 
Occupation tax means the fee levied by this article upon all persons engaged in a business or occupation within the corporate limits of the City, such fee being based upon the number of employees of such business during the calendar year. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, association, joint venture, or other group or combination acting as a unit, and shall include the plural as well as the singular number. 
Transient and temporary business means all persons, both principals and agents, who engage in or carry on in this City at one location or in traveling from place to place, the business of selling goods, wares, services or merchandise with the intention of continuing in such business for a period of not more than 180 days. 
(Code 2005, § 4-103(2); Ord. of 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 34-25. - Levy on professions. 
There is hereby set and levied upon each person practicing one of the professions enumerated below and who maintains his principal office within the corporate limits of this City a professional occupation tax of $150.00 per calendar year. In the event an individual is engaged in the practice of more than one profession, such individual shall be required to pay a professional occupation tax for each of the professions, except that the tax for the second and any succeeding profession shall be assessed at 50 percent of the tax otherwise due. Professionals who have incorporated shall not be computed as set forth in this section. The professional corporation shall be subject to a tax levy of $300.00. 
(1)  Professions subject to tax. The professional occupation tax levied in this section shall be levied and assessed upon practitioners of the following professions, as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia: 
a.  Architecture. 
b.  Land surveying. 
c.  Landscape architecture. 
d.  Chiropractic. 
e.  Dentistry. 
f.  Embalming. 
g.  Engineering: 
1.  Civil. 
2.  Mechanical. 
3.  Hydraulic. 
4.  Electrical. 
h.  Funeral directors. 
i.  Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors (psychology). 
j.  Medicine. 
k.  Optometry. 
l.  Osteopathy. 
m.  Pharmacist. 
n.  Physiotherapy practitioners. 
o.  Psychology. 
p.  Public accounting. 
q.  Podiatry. 
r.  Veterinarians. 
(2)  Duty to register profession. Each person upon whom a professional occupation tax is levied by this section shall register said profession with the city clerk on or before the first day of January in each calendar year or within 20 days subsequent to the date that such person commences practice within the city of a profession enumerated above, whichever date should occur later. 
( Ord. No. 2017-15, 7-12-2017 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-15 , adopted July 12, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2005, § 4-103(3); Ord. of 4-5-2012. 
Sec. 34-26. - Levy on businesses and occupations other than professions. 
There is hereby set and levied upon each person, partnership, or corporation engaged in or carrying on a business or occupation within the corporate limits of this municipality and not subject to a tax under the provision of section 34-46, an occupation tax based upon the number of persons employed by said person, partnership, or corporation, in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
(1)  Computation of number of taxable employees . For the purpose of determining the tax levied in this section, the number of taxable employees shall be deemed to be the total number of persons employed during the second and third quarters (April 1 to September 30, inclusive) of the calendar year, except that the total number shall be adjusted to reflect employee turnover, part-time and overtime, so that the number upon which the tax shall be based will be the equivalent number of full-time employees for the two quarters. The owner of the business, his spouse or any relative, whether receiving direct compensation or not, shall be considered to be an employee of the business to the extent of the amount of time spent working with the business during the second and third quarters of the calendar year. Further, in determining the total number of employees, where part-time employment is to be considered, after combining fractional portions of employment, any remaining portion of one-half or more is to be considered one employee, while any part less than one-half is to be omitted. 
(2)  Duty to register business or occupation. The owner, proprietor, manager, executive officer, or legal representative of every business or occupation within the municipality upon which a tax is levied by this subsection shall register said business or occupation on or before January of each calendar year, except for new businesses which commence operations within the city for the first time, in which case the date of registration shall be on or before the date of commencing operations. 
( Ord. No. 2017-15, 7-12-2017 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-15 , adopted July 12, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2005, § 4-103(4); Ord. of 4-5-2012. 
Sec. 34-27. - Due dates. 
All occupation taxes set and levied by this article shall be due on or before March 1 of each calendar year that this section is in effect, or on the date that the business commences operations within the City, whichever occurs later. 
(Code 2005, § 4-103(5); Ord. of 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 34-28. - Inspection of records. 
All persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this article shall, upon request, furnish the City Clerk or his authorized representative during regular business hours at the taxpayer's place of business all personnel records or other information from which the correct amount of the occupation tax to which he is subject may be determined. 
(Code 2005, § 4-103(6); Ord. of 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 34-29. - Separate businesses. 
For the purposes of this article, if a business is conducted at more than one location or place, each such location or place shall be considered a separate business upon which a separate occupation tax shall be levied and paid. 
(Code 2005, § 4-103(7); Ord. of 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 34-30. - Change of address. 
Any person required in this section to register his business or occupation shall notify the City Clerk in writing of any change of address of such business. 
(Code 2005, § 4-103(8); Ord. of 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 34-31. - Certain persons and businesses exempted from tax. 
The following persons and businesses are exempted from the tax imposed by this section: 
(1)  Life insurance companies, although such businesses shall be separately taxed as determined and set forth in other laws of the City; 
(2)  Religious, charitable, and fraternal organizations chartered or operated for nonprofit purposes and which are not engaged in daily selling of goods or services to the public in competition with persons taxed by virtue of the provisions of this section; 
(3)  Persons or activities exempted from taxation by virtue of the Constitution or any statute of the United States or any statute of the State of Georgia; 
(4)  Any person exempted from the requirement of paying an occupation tax by any general ordinance heretofore or hereafter passed by the Council of this City; and 
(5)  Any person engaging in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, where such involve personal assets and are not the principal occupation of the individual. 
(Code 2005, § 4-103(9); Ord. of 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 34-32. - Administration. 
The City Clerk shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article, and shall have the power to prepare and provide the necessary forms for the registration of a business and for the collection of the tax levied in this article. 
(Code 2005, § 4-103(10); Ord. of 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 34-33. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person upon whom a tax is levied by this article who fails to register his business or occupation on or before the date required for such registration by section 34-26(2) shall be subjected to a fine of $500.00. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which the failure to register continues. 
(b)  Any person subject to the tax imposed in this article who fails to pay such tax by the due date specified in section 34-27 shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax then due. Any tax that is not paid on or before the applicable due date shall be considered delinquent and shall, from said date, bear interest at the rate of seven percent per annum. 
(c)  Insurance companies are expressly exempted from the $500.00 penalty fee provided for in this section as long as such company properly registers its business by June 6 of each calendar year that this section is in effect, or within six months of the date on which the company initially commences business operations within the City, whichever occurs later. Insurance companies are also exempted from the ten percent penalty fee provided for in this section, as well as the seven percent interest rate accruing thereon, as long as such company tenders the applicable occupation tax before December 31 of each calendar year that this section is in effect, or within six months of the date on which the company initially commences business operations within the City, whichever occurs later. 
(Code 2005, § 4-103(11); Ord. of 4-5-2012) 
Sec. 34-34. - Practice of law exempt from registration and tax. 
The registration requirements and occupation taxes set forth in this article shall be inapplicable to all individuals and/or businesses engaged in the practice of law. 
(Code 2005, § 4-103(12); Ord. of 4-5-2012) 
Secs. 34-35—34-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXES ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 34-57. - Business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions. The term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 2005, § 4-104(1)) 
Sec. 34-58. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the City of Lawrenceville shall file a return of its gross receipts with the City of Lawrenceville on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of the Department of Banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 2005, § 4-104(2)) 
Sec. 34-59. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall conduct a business or occupation without having complied with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, any and all such penalties to be imposed in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court. 
(Code 2005, § 4-104(4)) 
Secs. 34-60—34-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 34-77. - Purpose. 
It is declared to be the purpose and intent of the General Assembly that each municipality in this State shall be authorized to levy certain excise taxes; that funds be made available to the governing authorities of municipalities for any public purpose; and that funds be made available for the purposes of promoting, attracting, stimulating, and developing conventions and tourism in the various municipalities. 
(Code 2005, § 44-101) 
Sec. 34-78. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases are for the purpose of this chapter and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows: 
City means the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia and, variously, the incorporated territory of Lawrenceville, Georgia. 
City Clerk means the duly appointed City Clerk of the City of Lawrenceville, Gwinnett County, Georgia, or his designee. 
Due Date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the operator's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room means accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truckstop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, time-share or other condominium, inn, public club or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, or prison, detention or other buildings in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. However, the term "occupant" shall not include Georgia state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business, and who occupy rooms in any hotel as defined in this chapter for a period of five or more consecutive days. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceville, Gwinnett County, Georgia, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating that hotel, and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guest room in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the City of Lawrenceville is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent means the consideration received or occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this ordinance, as provided by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51(b) and 48-13-52 et seq. 
(Code 2005, § 44-102; Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 44-102) 
Sec. 34-79. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There is hereby levied and assessed, and there shall be paid a tax of eight percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city unless an exemption is provided in section 34-83. 
(Code 2005, § 44-103; Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 44-103) 
Sec. 34-80. - Persons liable for tax; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a room or accommodation as described in section 34-79 in the City is liable for the tax. His liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the City, except that a receipt from an operator maintaining a place of business in this City or from an operator who is authorized by the City Clerk, under such rules and regulations as he may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is, for the purposes of this chapter, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in this City, which receipt is given to the occupant pursuant to section 34-81, is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Code 2005, § 44-104) 
Sec. 34-81. - Collection of tax by operator; receipt of occupant; rules for collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the City and renting guest rooms in the City, not exempted under section 34-83, shall, at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant, give the occupant a receipt therefore. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefore at the time and to the extent that these credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The operator shall be liable for any amount of tax that he fails to collect appropriately. The City Clerk shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of tax. 
(Code 2005, § 44-105; Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 44-105) 
Sec. 34-82. - Unlawful advertising regarding tax. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guest room, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Code 2005, § 44-106) 
Sec. 34-83. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed hereunder: 
(1)  Upon a permanent resident; 
(2)  Upon an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; 
(3)  Upon the United States and the State or Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; 
(4)  Upon any official or employee of the State, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the State, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by State or local government credit or debit card; or 
(5)  Upon a foreign diplomat enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. 
(Code 2005, § 44-107; Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 44-107) 
Sec. 34-84. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the City shall immediately register with the City Clerk on a form provided by the City Clerk. Persons engaged in this business must so register no later than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but the privilege of registration imposed after the imposition of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. This registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the City Clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner, in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. The City Clerk shall, after this registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. This certificate shall be non-assignable and nontransferable and shall be returned immediately to the City Clerk upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon the sale or transfer of business at that location. 
(b)  If the City Clerk deems it necessary in order to facilitate initial registration hereunder of persons engaged in business or prior to the date of imposition of tax as set forth in this chapter, he may prescribe provisions therefore other than those provided in this section. Those provisions shall be made to effect the purposes of this chapter. For these purposes, those provisions shall be in lieu of those provided herein. The registration and the certificate thereof shall have the same effect as that provided herein. 
(Code 2005, § 44-108; Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 44-108) 
Sec. 34-85. - Determinations, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. The tax shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of any hotel in this City. All amounts of these taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the City Clerk on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; execution. On or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the City Clerk, in such form as he may prescribe, by every operator and by every person liable to payment of tax hereunder during that monthly period who has not paid the tax, and made return in regard to the related occupation which is the subject of the tax. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period and such other information as required by the City Clerk. 
(d)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due, to the City Clerk. 
(e)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deductions shall be that found in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52 as now or hereafter amended. 
(f)  Extension of time for filing a return and paying tax. For a good cause the City Clerk may extend, but not to exceed 30 days, the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension of time may be granted. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing. Any person to whom an extension of time has been granted, who makes a return and pays the tax within the period of extension shall pay in addition to the tax, interest on the amount thereof at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, for a period of this extension to the time of return and payment unless said tax is paid within the first ten days of the extension period. 
(g)  Delinquent returns. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(Code 2005, § 44-109; Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 44-109) 
Sec. 34-86. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Re-computation of tax; authority make; basis of re-computation. If the City Clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the City by any person or operator, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the City Clerk may offset overpayments for a period or periods against underpayments for another period or periods, against penalties and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 34-87(c). 
(d)  Penalty; negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of the rules of this chapter or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of this deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made due to fraud or an intent to evade any provisions of this chapter or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 50 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice of City Clerk's determination; service. The City Clerk, or his designated representative, shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the City Clerk. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this chapter or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(h)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Code 2005, § 44-110; Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 44-110) 
Sec. 34-87. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts . If any person fails to make a return, the City Clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this City which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in the City Clerk's possession or may come into his possession. Upon the basis of this estimate, the City Clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the City adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest . In making a determination, the City Clerk may offset overpayments for a period or penalties, and against the interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due . The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade . If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this chapter or rules and regulations, a penalty of 50 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in section 34-88. 
(e)  Giving of notice; manner of service . Promptly after making this determination, the City Clerk shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Code 2005, § 44-111) 
Sec. 34-88. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. 
Any person who fails to pay any tax to the City or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the City within the time required shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 34-87(c). 
(Code 2005, § 44-112) 
Sec. 34-89. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Security, City Clerk may exact; notice of sale; return of surplus. The City Clerk, whenever he deems it necessary to ensure compliance with this article, may require any person subject thereto to deposit with him such security as the City Clerk may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the City Clerk, but shall not be greater than twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such a manner as the City Clerk deems proper, or $10,000.00, whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased by the City Clerk subject to the limitations provided in this section. The City Clerk may sell the security at public auction, with the approval of the Council, if it becomes necessary to do so in order to recover any tax or any amount required to be collected, interest or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served upon the person who deposited the security personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be addressed to the person at his address as it appears in the records of the City Clerk. Upon any sale, any surplus above the amounts due shall be returned to the person who deposited the security. 
(b)  Notice of delinquency to persons holding credits or property of delinquent; duty of persons so notified . If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid by him, or in the event a determination has been made against him which remains unpaid, the City Clerk may, not later than three years after the payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the City having in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the delinquent, or owing any debts to the delinquent. After receiving the notice, the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of the credits, other personal property or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the City Clerk consents to a transfer or disposition or until 20 days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall within five days after receipt of the notice advise the City Clerk of all these credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. 
(c)  Action for tax; time for . At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the City Clerk may bring an action in the courts of this State, or of any other state or of the United States in the name of the City to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(d)  Duty on successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover this amount until the former owner procures a receipt from the City Clerk showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(e)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability . If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase price as required, he becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the City Clerk shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the City Clerk of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the City Clerk to mail the notice shall release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold the purchase price as provided in this subsection. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out his business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(f)  Refund of tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected . Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this chapter, it may be refunded, provided that a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Clerk within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be audited and shall be made on forms provided by the City Clerk. If the claim is approved by the City Clerk and the Council, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to this person, his administrators or executors. 
(Code 2005, § 44-113) 
Sec. 34-90. - Administration of chapter. 
(a)  Authority of City Clerk . The City Clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Rules and regulations . The City Clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the City, County and the State, or the Constitution of this State or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes under this article. 
(c)  Records required from operators; form . Every operator renting guest rooms in the City shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates or exemption and such other documents as the City Clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the City. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits . The City Clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any person renting guest rooms and any person liable for the tax and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents . In administration of the tax, the City Clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the City Clerk when he requires and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy and such other information as the City Clerk may require. 
(f)  Disclosure of business of operators; limitation on rule . The City Clerk or any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having that administrative duty under this article. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Code 2005, § 44-114) 
Sec. 34-91. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall not apply to any person as to whom, or to any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the Mayor and Council to impose the tax. It specifically shall not apply to any person not required to be licensed by the City for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodging or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(Code 2005, § 44-115; Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 44-115) 
Sec. 34-92. - Penalty for fraudulent returns, reports. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the City Clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, is guilty of and punishable for a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report who makes any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due required by this article to be made, is guilty of and punishable for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2005, § 44-116) 
Sec. 34-93. - How funds used. 
(a)  The City shall expend funds collected under this article in the following manner: (1) an amount equal to at least 1.5 percent for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows by the destination marketing organization designated by the City Council; (2) an amount not to exceed 1.5 percent for tourism product development; (3) an amount equal to two percent through a contract with the state, a department of state government, a state authority, a convention and visitors bureau created by local act for a municipality, a private sector nonprofit organization or through a combination of such entities; and (4) an amount equal to three percent for any general legal purpose permitted by law. The selection from the categories above shall total eight percent. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, a "destination marketing organization" shall be a private sector nonprofit organization or other private entity which is exempt from federal income tax under section 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that is supported by this tax, government budget allocations, private membership, or any combination thereof and the primary responsibilities of which are to encourage travelers to visit this destination, encourage meetings and expositions in the area, and provide visitor assistance and support as needed. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a private sector nonprofit organization shall be a chamber of commerce, a convention and visitors bureau, a regional travel association, or any other private group organized for similar purposes which is exempt from federal income tax under section 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, tourism product development shall have the meaning found in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2 as exists now or as hereafter amended. 
(e)  The determination as to whether the City has complied with the expenditure requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall be made for each fiscal year, as of the end of each fiscal year, shall be prominently reflected in the audit required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, and shall be determined by: 
(1)  Calculating the amount of funds expended or contractually committed for expenditure as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whichever is applicable, during the fiscal year; and 
(2)  Expressing such amount as a percentage of tax receipts under this article during such fiscal year. The City contractually expending funds to meet the expenditure requirements of subsection (1) of this section shall require the contracting party to provide audit verification that the contracting party makes use of such funds in conformity with the requirements of this section. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the power of the City to expend more than the required amounts, or all of the total taxes collected under this Code section for the purposes described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair, or authorize or require the impairment of, any existing contract or contractual rights. 
( Ord. No. 2015-14 , 5-4-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-14 , adopted May 4, 2014, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2005, § 44-117; Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 44-117. 
Secs. 34-94—34-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Levy and collection of excise taxes on motor vehicle rental charges, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93. 

Sec. 34-115. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Month or monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or leave for 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and non-monetary consideration for the rental or lease, including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver, but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the State of Georgia. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
Tax, excise tax or taxes means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 2005, § 45-101) 
Sec. 34-116. - Authority; rules and regulations; records. 
(a)  Authority. The City Clerk shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The City Clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the City and the State or the Constitution of this State or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of the tax under this article. 
(c)  Records required. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this article shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the City Clerk may require. 
(Code 2005, § 45-102) 
Sec. 34-117. - Excise tax levied; collection. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, art. 1, as amended. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in the amount of three percent of the rental charge as defined in this article. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time when and the place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. The customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to the tax levy as provided in this article shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery for other debts. 
(b)  The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the City Clerk of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia and the tax thus remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this article on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to the tax levied by this article shall be liable for the tax at the rate of three percent upon the rental charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever is greater. 
(Code 2005, § 45-103) 
Sec. 34-118. - Purposes for proceeds from tax. 
The following projects and purposes for which the proceeds of the tax levied by this article are to be expended are specified in State law, particularly O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93(a)(2). 
(Code 2005, § 45-104) 
Sec. 34-119. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article on the rental charge associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the State of Georgia and returns it within the State of Georgia; 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the State of Georgia and returns it outside the State of Georgia. 
(Code 2005, § 45-105) 
Sec. 34-120. - Amount of tax allowed to be retained for expenses. 
Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this article shall be allowed to retain three percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting and paying the amount of taxes due, if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Code 2005, § 45-106) 
Sec. 34-121. - Statement required showing gross rental charges and taxes. 
(a)  On or before the last day of each month , the rental motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for in this article shall transmit to the City Clerk, a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected by authority of this article for each preceding calendar month. Along with said statement, the rental motor vehicle concern shall submit to the City Clerk the net taxes due for that particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax then due, and in addition to such penalty, interest thereon on the unpaid principal amount due, computed at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Code 2005, § 45-107) 
Sec. 34-122. - Records. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and to collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of all rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying by any duly authorized agent of the City during regular business hours. 
(Code 2005, § 45-108) 
Sec. 34-123. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If the City Clerk is not satisfied with the returns of the excise tax provided for in this article or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the City by any rental motor vehicle concern, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the City Clerk shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found to be due by him. 
(c)  The City Clerk or his designated representative shall give to the rental motor vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail and, if by mail, the service shall be addressed to the operator or the owner of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the City Clerk as provided to him by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent of the addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the last day of the calendar month following the monthly period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Code 2005, § 45-109) 
Sec. 34-124. - Failure to make a return. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern fails to make a return, the City Clerk shall make an estimate of the excise tax due. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the rental motor vehicle concern has failed to make the return and shall be based upon such information which is or may come into the possession of the City Clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner as prescribed in section 34-123. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the last day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(Code 2005, § 45-110) 
Sec. 34-125. - Audit authority. 
Duly authorized employees of the City, upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours, may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports equipment and other facilities, if necessary, of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any return made pursuant to this article or, if no return is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(Code 2005, § 45-111) 
Sec. 34-126. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the City Clerk or his designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required in this article, such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Code 2005, § 45-112) 
Sec. 34-127. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this article, any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by the Municipal Court for the City of Lawrenceville in accordance with the limits established by the City of Lawrenceville. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The tax levied by this article shall be effective on July 1, 1999, and shall continue until its permissible existence shall expire as provided by law, or until otherwise terminated by the Georgia General Assembly or the Lawrenceville City Council. 
(Code 2005, § 45-113) 
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of local authorities concerning motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; powers of municipal courts concerning misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 

Sec. 36-1. - Uniform Rules of the Road. 
(a)  Adoption by reference . Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-1-1 through 40-1-5 and 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, the Uniform Rules of the Road are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this City, with like effect as if recited in full in this chapter. 
(b)  Penalties . Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  Repeal . All ordinances, Code sections or parts of ordinances or Code sections inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Code 2005, § 11-101; Ord. of 12-5-2005) 
Sec. 36-2. - Two-hour parking district. 
(a)  Designated two-hour parking district. 
(1)  The following geographical area is deemed to be a district where, due to limited access and congestion, a two-hour parking time limit shall apply. This time limit shall be in effect between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. every day except Sunday and designated national holidays. 
(2)  The geographical area is described as follows: 
a.  Clayton Street in its entirety between the intersection of Luckie Street and the intersection of Oak Street. 
b.  Crogan Street in its entirety between the intersection of Culver Street and the intersection of Chestnut Street. 
c.  Perry Street in its entirety between the intersection of Luckie Street and the intersection of Oak Street. 
d.  Pike Street in its entirety between the intersection of Culver Street and the intersection of Chestnut Street. 
(b)  Limitation on commercial use of parking spaces . 
(1)  No vehicle shall remain parked in a designated two-hour parking space for commercial purposes for more than ten minutes. 
(2)  Any vehicle remaining in such a space for more than ten minutes shall be in violation of this chapter. Such violation shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  For purposes of this subsection, the term "commercial vehicles" shall include, but is not limited to, any taxi or bus service, any pickup or delivery service, and any other vehicle which occupies a parking space for the purpose of transacting business by virtue of its occupation of that space. 
(c)  Definition of parking violation. For the purpose of this section, the term "parking violation" means any vehicle left parked in a designated two-hour parking area for a period of more than two hours. 
(d)  Notice. The geographical area designated in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be prominently and visibly marked so as to afford notice to the public that they are in a two-hour parking district and a parking violation as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall subject them to fine or vehicle impoundment, or both. 
(e)  Assessment of fines. Violations of this section will be assessed according to the following schedule: 
(1)  A parking summons or citation issued under this section will be assessed a fine not to exceed $250.00. Additionally, a vehicle may be impounded in the discretion of the Police Department. All outstanding parking summons or citations issued to the impounded vehicle must be cleared, either by appearance or appropriate cash bond being posted, before an impound release is given by the Police Department. The registered owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for all impound costs. 
(2)  The fifth or subsequent summons or citations issued to the same vehicle with the same registered owner as the prior parking summons or citations will be assessed a fine of not less than $100.00 and the vehicle impounded immediately. All outstanding issued parking summons must be cleared, either by appearance or appropriate cash bond being posted, before an impound release is given by the Police Department. The registered owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for all impound costs. 
(f)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Violation of the two-hour parking limit shall result in the issuance of a parking summons or citation by the Lawrenceville Police Department. Such summons or citation shall direct the registered owner or the person violating the two-hour parking limit to appear in the Municipal Court at the time and date designated on the summons or citation. The summons or citation shall further inform the registered owner or the violator of the two-hour parking limit that the fine for said violation may be paid prior to the hearing date, in which event there shall be no further need to appear. In the event that there is no prepayment or appearance on the scheduled hearing date, the City Police Department shall mail the registered owner of the vehicle involved a notice advising the registered owner of a second hearing date before the Judge of the Municipal Court, such notice will be by certified mail adding to the fines and cost an administrative fee of $15.00. This notice will further advise the registered owner that the parking summons or citation fine may be paid in lieu of the court appearance. 
(2)  In the event the registered owner fails to appear on the court date as specified in the certified letter or fails to cause the parking summons or citation fine to be paid, then a subpoena will be issued by the Judge of the Municipal Court requiring the registered owner of the vehicle involved to appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court. This subpoena will require personal service. 
(3)  In the event the registered owner fails to appear or to cause the violations to be paid on or before the court date specified on the subpoena, a bench warrant shall be issued and the vehicle registered to the same owner impounded and a hold placed on the vehicle by the Lawrenceville Police Department until which time the registered owner appears before the Judge of the Municipal Court. 
(4)  For the purpose of this section, the nearest authorized impound facility shall be that lot designated by the Police Chief. 
(Code 2005, § 11-102) 
Sec. 36-3. - Limited truck access on certain streets. 
Northdale Road, beginning at the intersection of Clayton Street to the intersection of Hurricane Shoals Road, and all of Phillips Street are limited to one-ton truck traffic only. No truck above one ton will use these streets as through streets at any time unless loading or unloading at a place of business or residence. 
(Code 2005, § 11-103) 
Sec. 36-4. - No parking in designated fire lanes. 
(a)  Designated fire lanes . There will be no parking in any designated fire lane in the City of Lawrenceville except to load or unload, not to exceed a period of three minutes. Fire lanes will be designated by curbing painted traffic yellow, or by a 20-foot wide, cross-hatched, traffic yellow way of access free of obstructions, or by the placement of fire lane signs. 
(b)  Enforcement . Citations for parking in a fire lane can be issued by a member of the Lawrenceville Police Department. A fine not to exceed $250.00 may be imposed by the Municipal Court Judge. 
(Code 2005, § 11-104) 
Sec. 36-5. - No parking rules. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful at any time to permit any vehicle to stand, stop or park in any of the following places except in compliance with the directions of a law enforcement official or traffic control device: 
(1)  In any intersection; 
(2)  In a crosswalk; 
(3)  Within 20 feet of any intersection or crosswalk; 
(4)  At any place where the vehicle would block the use of the driveway; 
(5)  At any place where the standing, stopping or parking of a vehicle will reduce the useable width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than 20 feet; 
(6)  At any place in the area of Nash Street from Neal Boulevard to Clayton Street next to the Lawrenceville City Hall; 
(7)  Overnight (10:00 p.m.—6:00 a.m.) parking shall be prohibited in all public right-of-way. Nothing shall prohibit parking in designated parking spaces. 
(b)  The Police Chief or any other person authorized by the Council shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is prohibited. 
(Code 2005, § 11-105; Ord. of 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 2016-26, 11-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 36-6. - Parking rules for specific zoning classifications. 
(a)  Parking in residential districts shall, in addition to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and section 10-31 of the City of Lawrenceville Property Maintenance Ordinance, meet the following requirements: 
(1)  No more than four vehicles, including watercraft and trailers, per dwelling unit shall be parked, stopped, standing or stored on any parcel of land. Vehicles parked inside of a carport or enclosed garage shall not be counted towards the maximum number of allowed vehicles. A waiver from the requirements of this provision may be requested, at no charge, when an applicant can show that the number of vehicles does not exceed the total number of licensed drivers in the home and that all vehicles are in operable condition. Waivers are subject to review and approval by the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
(2)  All vehicles must be parked on a driveway or parking area constructed of concrete, asphalt, grasscrete, or other impervious surface, including, but not limited to, pavers. Any parking area shall be directly adjacent to a paved driveway. 
(3)  Under no circumstances shall more than 35 percent of the front yard or rear yard consist of a driveway or parking area, and the remaining percentage shall be grass or landscaped areas. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any automobile, truck, vehicle, RV, camper, watercraft or trailer of any kind or type to be parked, stopped, standing or stored in any residential district without a valid license plate attached thereto. 
(5)  No person shall stop or stand any truck or bus with a body more than eight feet or 2.4384m wide or ten feet or 3.048m high on any street or public property including any parking lot for use by the general public without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof. 
(6)  No person shall park or stand any truck camper, camper trailer, motor home, boat, boat trailer or other recreational vehicle or watercraft on any residential street or public property for more than one hour at any time during the day or night. 
(b)  All public parking in office, business and commercial zoning classifications shall be subject to the following use restrictions: 
(1)  No delivery/service vehicles and vehicles, including, but not limited to, 18-wheel tractor trailers and vehicles displaying advertising, shall be parked in the front yard of the property except vehicles parked temporarily while making a delivery, providing a service, or purchasing goods or services. 
(2)  No person shall park or stand any bus, truck or other freight- or passenger-carrying vehicle in excess of one-half ton capacity upon any public street or highway for a period longer than one hour at any time during the day or night. 
(3)  No person shall stop or stand any truck or bus with a body more than eight feet (2.4384 meters) wide or 13 feet six inches (4.145 meters) high on any street or public property, including any parking lot for use by the general public without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof. 
(4)  No person shall park or stand any truck camper, camper trailer, motor home, boat, boat trailer or other recreational vehicle on any street or public property for more than one hour at any time during the day or night. 
(5)  Parking of a vehicle for sale or for private sale of the vehicle is prohibited except in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-2-39.1(a), or at a dealership or lot specifically approved in the zoning ordinance as a car lot or dealership for the sale of vehicles. The term "private sale" means a sale by an entity or individual that is not a licensed new or used vehicle dealer. 
(c)  Any vehicle in violation of this section and which remains in violation for a period of 24 hours or more shall be presumed to be abandoned and may be impounded by the Police Department. 
(Code 2005, § 11-106; Ord. of 1-14-2001; Ord. of 12-7-2009; Ord. No. 2015-40 , 11-2-2015) 
Sec. 36-7. - Speed zones. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish speed zones and speed limits for the City of Lawrenceville and to replace and amend those as necessary from time to time. 
(b)  Adoption of speed zones. The speed zones and speed limits approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation, numbered 3830-12-2015, are hereby adopted by the City Council. The speed zone list shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk and shall be available for copying or inspection by any person. 
(c)  Enforcement. The Lawrenceville Police Department, Georgia Gwinnett College Police Department, Gwinnett County Sheriff's Department, and the Georgia Department of Public Safety are authorized to use any appropriate and approved speed detection devices, whether hand held or attached to a motor vehicle, to enforce the duly adopted speed zones. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, 9-4-2013; Ord. No. 2016-27, 11-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 36-8. - Speed limits in work zones. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this section is to reduce the speed limits in construction and maintenance work zones located on or adjacent to any street or highway in accordance with Department of Transportation (the "Department") policy and Georgia law. Generally, temporary speed limit reductions in work zones should be implemented only for areas where workers are present, or where roadway or roadside conditions are of concern due to construction or maintenance activities. To reduce the speed limit in any temporary traffic control zone and be in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-188, the following guidelines and procedures shall be followed: 
(b)  Responsibility . 
(1)  The Department shall be responsible for determining the appropriate speed limit reduction for all roadways under its supervision. For a construction project let to contract, the contractor may request a reduction of the existing speed limit; however, the Department shall make the final determination. 
(2)  Any reduction in the established speed limit shall have written approval of the Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville. A copy of this written approval shall be kept in the appropriate project or maintenance file and the district speed zone file for that particular roadway section, and a copy sent to the General Office Traffic Operations section for their files. 
(3)  The Project Engineer responsible for the construction project or the Maintenance Foreman/Superintendent responsible for the maintenance activity requiring the reduced speed zone will be responsible for reviewing and determining the appropriate reduction in the speed limit, its duration, and the length of the work zone. A temporary speed reduction zone will be established for a section of roadway according to an identified need. A speed reduction will not be put in place for the entire length of the project unless conditions warranting the speed reduction are present for the entire project length. When establishing a reduced speed zone, the minimum reduction of the posted speed limit shall be no less than ten miles per hour and the maximum reduction shall be no greater than 20 miles per hour. 
(c)  Documentation . The appropriate Project Engineer or Maintenance Foreman/Superintendent shall record in a diary the date and time that each temporary speed reduction zone is installed and removed, the limits of the zone, and, if applicable, the traffic direction. 
(d)  Signing requirements . To temporarily reduce the speed limit in any construction or maintenance area and be in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-188, the following sequence of signs shall be required: 
(1)  At a minimum of 600 feet in advance of the beginning of the reduced speed zone, a standard R2-5a (REDUCED SPEED AHEAD) sign shall be erected. 
(2)  If the speed limit is to be reduced a total of 20 miles per hour, a standard R2-1 (SPEED LIMIT XX) sign shall be erected at a minimum of 600 feet in advance of the beginning of the reduced speed zone in order to reduce the speed in ten miles per hour increments. 
(3)  A black on white regulatory R2-Special (WORK ZONE/SPEED LIMIT XX/MINIMUM FINE $100.00) sign shall be erected 600 feet past the previous sign erected in subsection (d)(1) or (2) of this section. 
(4)  Intermediate R2-1 (SPEED LIMIT XX) signs shall be erected at intervals not to exceed one mile within the reduced speed zone. 
(5)  A standard R2-1 (SPEED LIMIT XX) shall be erected 600 feet past the work zone. This sign shall post the normal speed limit for the roadway. 
All existing speed limit signs shall be covered or removed while the temporary reduction in the speed limit is in effect. All signs shall be erected to comply with the minimum requirements of the MUTCD. 
(Code 2005, § 11-108) 
Sec. 36-9. - Concrete trucks; required equipment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any rear-loaded cement truck to operate on the streets of Lawrenceville or the County roads or State highways within the corporate limits of the City of Lawrenceville without having a device in place at the terminus of their chute designed to deter the spillage of cement onto the streets, roads, or highways. 
(b)  Any person operating a rear-loaded cement truck not equipped with such a device shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment not to exceed six months. 
(Code 2005, § 11-109; Ord. of 9-10-2007) 
Sec. 36-10. - Abandonment of motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or to leave unattended, for a period in excess of five days, any motor vehicle on any street, road, alley, or other public way in the Municipality. 
(Code 2005, § 31-108) 
Sec. 36-11. - Operating a motor vehicle without insurance. 
O.C.G.A. § 40-6-10 is hereby adopted by reference as an Ordinance of this municipality with the same effect as if set out in full. 
(Code 2005, § 31-110) 
Sec. 36-12. - Halting or impeding the flow of traffic. 
No person shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way or place so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic after having been directed to clear such public way or place when ordered by the police or any other authorized law enforcement official. 
(Code 2005, § 31-113) 
Chapter 38 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Time limit for disconnection. 
At the expiration of ten days from the penalty date specified on the utility bills submitted by the City of Lawrenceville to its customers, the City of Lawrenceville shall terminate the utility service to the premises which utilized the service. Disconnection by the City may occur if any portion of a bill remains unpaid ten days from the penalty date specified on the utility bills submitted by the City of Lawrenceville to its customers. 
(Code 2005, § 23-101) 
Sec. 38-2. - Notice of disconnection. 
No utility service may be disconnected unless: 
(1)  The customer has been given written notice of the proposed disconnection at least five days prior to the date of disconnection. 
(2)  Such notice shall be: 
a.  Served upon the customer by the U.S. mail in the case of residential accounts; 
b.  Served upon a commercial account by the U.S. mail. Should a commercial customer have closed the place of business, then such notice shall be sent through the U.S. mail to the last known address of the principal officer, agent, or partner or the applicant's commercial account. 
c.  Served through the U.S. mail in case of a landlord who pays for utility service. 
(3)  Such notice shall state: 
a.  Date of proposed disconnection; 
b.  Balance remaining unpaid; 
c.  That the customer may have a conference with a designated employee concerning the disconnection; 
d.  Telephone number of the designated City employee. 
(Code 2005, § 23-102) 
Sec. 38-3. - Restrictions on disconnection. 
(a)  No disconnection may occur if the temperature is forecast to drop below 32 degrees Fahrenheit at any time during the 24-hour period of the date of the proposed disconnection; 
(b)  If the City receives notice that an occupant of the premises to be disconnected has a serious medical problem which would be aggravated by the disconnection of service, notice may be delivered in writing or telephoned to be followed in writing. The notice shall include the statement of a physician explaining the medical problem. The customer, however, must pay at least 25 percent of the balance due in order to receive the above consideration. 
(Code 2005, § 23-103) 
Sec. 38-4. - Unauthorized use of utility. 
The procedures under this chapter will not be required when there is an unauthorized use of the utility service, bad checks, safety hazards, or building code violations. 
(Code 2005, § 23-104) 
Sec. 38-5. - Maintenance of metering devices. 
(a)  Owners and lessees of property shall be responsible to maintain access to City utility meters located on property owned or leased by them, clear of obstructions so that the meter may be accessed, read, and maintained easily by City employees. 
(b)  All meter set assemblies shall be maintained free from any landscaping obstructions in an area not less than three feet in front of and two feet to either side of the meter set assembly. Landscaping obstructions include, but are not limited to, rocks, bushes, fences, or other manmade or natural structures that restrict access to the meter set assembly. 
(c)  The City may relocate the meter away from an obstruction if the City, in its discretion, deems relocation to be the least expensive alternative or an appropriate alternative to removing the obstruction. The costs of relocating the meter shall be billed to the owner or lessee as part of their regular utility bill. 
(d)  Subject to the provisions set forth in this chapter, and in addition to the remedies provided in this section, the City is authorized to disconnect utility service to any property should the owner or lessee fail to remove any obstruction to the meter after receiving notice of the obstruction as set forth in this section. 
(Code 2005, § 23-105; Ord. No. 2011-1007, 1-9-2012) 
Sec. 38-6. - Planting and utility maintenance near transformers, water mains, water boxes and fire hydrants. 
(a)  No shrub, bush, flower, tree or other plant shall be planted within ten feet of the front or five feet of the side of a City transformer, water main, water box, or fire hydrant. 
(b)  Employees of the Electric or Water Departments may trim or remove any plant within ten feet of the front or five feet of the side of a transformer, water main, water box or fire hydrant which poses any safety hazard or threatens to interrupt service to City customers. 
(Code 2005, § 23-107) 
Secs. 38-7—38-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY SEWERAGE 

Sec. 38-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
B.O.D. (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain refers to that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH refers to the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters, and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treating sewage presently owned or afterward acquired by this Municipality. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 2005, § 21-101) 
Sec. 38-34. - General regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within this Municipality, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Municipality, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet within this Municipality, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Municipality, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain, or cause to be constructed or maintained, any privy, privy vault, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage works. 
(Code 2005, § 21-102) 
Sec. 38-35. - Connection to public sewers. 
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes within the corporate limits of this City, and located within 400 feet of a line of public sanitary sewer now in existence or after constructed to which such house, building, or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity, is hereby required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with said line of public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 60 days after the date of official notice so to do. 
(Code 2005, § 21-103) 
Sec. 38-36. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 38-35, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Gwinnett County Environmental Health Department. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Municipality, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the Superintendent. A permit and the inspection fee shall be paid to the Municipality at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of Gwinnett County. The enforcement authority shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction. In any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify Gwinnett County when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by Gwinnett County. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Georgia. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than the required square footage set by Gwinnett County. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(e)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(f)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the Municipality. 
(g)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(Code 2005, § 21-104) 
Sec. 38-37. - Building sewers and connections. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from Gwinnett County. 
(Code 2005, § 21-105) 
Sec. 38-38. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
The Superintendent or his designee bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 21-106) 
Sec. 38-39. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 38-34(d), shall be served by the Municipality with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 38-34(d) or who shall continue any violation of this article beyond the time limit provided for in section 38-35, or who shall continue any other violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense and, upon conviction therefor, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 2005, § 21-107) 
Secs. 38-40—38-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 38-67. - Municipal water works. 
The municipal water works shall be under the immediate control and supervision of a Director who shall perform all acts that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient, and economical management and protection of said water works. 
(Code 2005, § 20-101) 
Sec. 38-68. - Inspections. 
(a)  The Director of Public Works, or his designee, may enter the premises of any water taker at any reasonable time to examine the condition of the water pipes, meters, and fixtures. 
(b)  Authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the City of Lawrenceville. 
(Code 2005, § 20-102) 
Sec. 38-69. - Application for water. 
Application for the use of water shall be made to the City by the owner or agent of the property to be benefited, designating the location of the property and stating the purpose for which the water may be required. 
(Code 2005, § 20-103) 
Sec. 38-70. - Tapping charge. 
(a)  Upon the application for a new tap and service connection by any consumer within the corporate limits of the Municipality, the applicant shall pay to the City the appropriate sum as set from time to time to cover the cost of the fittings, installation of the tap by the Municipality, and the necessary pipe from the main to the curb box. 
(b)  The Municipality shall own and maintain the water line from the main to the curb box and the property owner shall own and maintain the service line from the curb box to the premises served. 
(c)  All work upon the service line shall be performed by a licensed plumber. 
(Code 2005, § 20-104) 
Sec. 38-71. - Size of service tap. 
No service tap shall be more than three-fourths inch in diameter, provided that the Director of Public Works may grant special permission for larger taps where the water supply and service facilities are sufficient to permit such taps. Where a larger tap is permitted, the Director shall fix the tapping charge therefrom. 
(Code 2005, § 20-105) 
Sec. 38-72. - Water meters. 
Each building or structure using city water shall have a water meter installed by the City, which may be installed in a curb box. All such meters are the property of the City. Every customer shall be served through a separate meter, if possible. 
(Code 2005, § 20-106) 
Sec. 38-73. - Service line regulations. 
No more than one building shall be permitted to use a water service line. All service lines shall be installed at a depth at least 40 inches below the surface of the ground. Each service line shall contain a stop and waste cock where the water may be turned off. 
Sec. 38-74. - Water waste prohibition. 
Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water outlets closed when not in actual use. Hydrants, urinals, water closets, bath tubs, and other fixtures must not be left running for any purpose other than the use for which they were intended. When any such waste occurs, the water service may be terminated. 
(Code 2005, § 20-108) 
Sec. 38-75. - Sprinkling restrictions. 
In case of water shortage or scarcity, the Mayor and Council may by resolution place any restrictions upon the use of water for irrigation or sprinkling purposes which such body deems necessary. 
(Code 2005, § 20-109) 
Sec. 38-76. - Use during fire alarms. 
During all fire alarms, the use by persons other than firefighters of hoses and other apparatuses maintaining a constant flow of water is absolutely forbidden. 
(Code 2005, § 20-110) 
Sec. 38-77. - Water rates. 
(a)  Municipal water rates for residential customers within the City's service area shall be as provided from time to time. 
(b)  Contracts for commercial water customers shall be negotiated with the City Manager with approval by the Mayor and Council on the basis of their requirements. 
(Code 2005, § 20-111; Ord. of 12-4-2006; Ord. of 11-21-2007; Ord. of 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 38-78. - Water bills. 
Water meters shall be read each month and bills shall be mailed on a regular schedule each month. All water bills shall be due when received, and if a water bill is not paid within five days of billing, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto and paid by the water user. 
(Code 2005, § 20-112) 
Sec. 38-79. - Discontinuance of service. 
If any bill for water as provided in this article is not paid within 20 days of the due date, the water service shall be cut off and in no case shall it be reinstated to the same property until the delinquencies shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 2005, § 20-113) 
Sec. 38-80. - Charges for turning water on. 
If the water supply to any premises is turned off for any reason, the charge as set from time to time shall be made for turning the water back on. 
(Code 2005, § 20-114) 
Secs. 38-81—38-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER SYSTEM BACKFLOW PREVENTION BY CONTAMINANT 

Sec. 38-104. - Cross connection control. 
The purpose of the cross connection control is: 
(1)  To protect the public potable water supply of the City of Lawrenceville from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the consumer's internal distribution system or the consumer's private water system such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water systems; 
(2)  To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the consumer's in-plant potable water system and non-potable water system, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and 
(3)  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control that will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. 
(Code 2005, § 20A-101) 
Sec. 38-105. - Responsibility. 
The Public Works Director or his designee shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If an approved backflow prevention assembly is required at the consumer's water service connection or within the consumer's private water system for the safety of the water system, the Public Works Director or his designated agent shall give notice in writing to said consumer to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly at a specific location on his premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved backflow prevention assembly at the consumer's own expense, and failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the consumer to install, have tested and maintained said assembly shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. 
(Code 2005, § 20A-102) 
Sec. 38-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air gap means a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel. An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch (2.54 centimeters). 
Auxiliary water supply. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public water supply will be considered as an auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source, such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These natural waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
Backflow means the undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable supply of water from any source. See Backsiphonage and Backpressure . 
Backflow preventer means an assembly or means designed to prevent backflow. 
Backflow prevention by containment program refers to the manual attached to the ordinance from which this section was derived, and incorporated in this section, to be used as the most comprehensive statement of the rules and regulations to be followed by the Water Department and others whose activities fall within the scope of this article. 
Backpressure means any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by pump, elevation of piping, or steam and/or air pressure) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration, which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow. 
Backsiphonage means a form of backflow due to a reduction in system pressure, which causes subatmospheric pressure to exist at a site in the water system. 
Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the water, which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, waste, etc. 
Cross connection means any unprotected, actual or potential, connection or structural arrangement between a public or a consumer's potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can or may cause are considered to be cross connections. 
(1)  The term "direct cross connection" means a cross connection which is subject to both backsiphonage and backpressure. 
(2)  The term "indirect cross connection" means a cross connection which is subject to backsiphonage only. 
Cross connection control means connection between a potable water system and a non-potable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
Cross connection control by containment means the appropriate type or method of backflow protection at the service connection, commensurate with the degree of hazard of the consumer's potable water system. 
Devices owned or leased by the City means pipes, hoses, fire hydrants, water lines, water mains, valves, pressure regulators, and water meters as used in this chapter. 
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly means an assembly composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard (i.e., pollutant). 
Hazard, degree of, means either a pollutional (non-health) or contamination (health) hazard and is derived from the evaluation of conditions within a system. 
Hazard, health, means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
Hazard, plumbing, means an internal or plumbing type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that may be either a pollutional or a contamination type hazard. This includes, but is not limited to, cross connections to toilets, sinks, lavatories, wash trays and lawn sprinkling systems. Plumbing type cross connections can be located in many types of structures, including homes, apartment houses, hotels and commercial or industrial establishments. Such a connection, if permitted to exist, must be properly protected by an appropriate type of backflow prevention assembly. 
Hazard, pollutional, means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard. The maximum degree of intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances. 
Hazard system means an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
Industrial fluids means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration which would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This includes, but is not limited to, polluted or contaminated used waters; all types of process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system which may deteriorate in sanitary quality; chemical in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulated cooling water connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling waters that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters, such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation to canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used industrially, for other processes, or for firefighting purposes. 
Pollution means an impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly means an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located resilient seated test cocks and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a non-health (i.e., pollutant) or a health (i.e., contaminant) hazard. This assembly shall not be used for backflow protection of sewage or reclaimed water. 
Water, non-potable, means a water supply which has not been approved for human consumption by the health agency having jurisdiction. 
Water, potable, means any public potable water supply which has been investigated and approved by the health agency. The system must be operating under a valid health permit. In determining what constitutes an approved water supply, the health agency has final judgment as to its safety and potability. 
Water service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, (i.e., where the water purveyor may lose jurisdiction and sanitary control of the water at its point of delivery to the consumer's water system). If a water meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the term "service connection" shall mean the downstream end of the water meter. 
Water , used , means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor. 
(Code 2005, § 20A-103) 
Sec. 38-107. - Requirements. 
The water system shall consist of two parts: 
(1)  The water purveyor's system shall include all facilities of the water system under the complete control of the purveyor, to the point where the consumer's system begins, and shall consist of the following: 
a.  Source facilities shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system; and 
b.  A distribution system shall include the network of pipes and conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the consumer's system. 
(2)  The consumer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the water purveyor's distribution system, which are utilized in conveying potable water to points of use. 
(Code 2005, § 20A-104) 
Sec. 38-108. - Policy. 
(a)  In addition to the policies set forth in this section, the Backflow Prevention by Containment Program, a copy of which is available in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby referenced and incorporated herein. The Backflow Prevention by Containment Program contains a more comprehensive statement of the rules and regulations to be followed by the Director of Public Works, employees of the Director, and other individuals and business entities whose activities fall within the scope of this article. 
(b)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division laws and regulations, the State of Georgia Plumbing Code and this article for the control of backflow and cross connections. An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system and is to be located immediately downstream of the water meter or as close as physically feasible to the water meter. The type of device is commensurate to the degree of hazard, which is determined by the Public Works Director or his designee. Any installation other than that specified in this section shall be approved by the Public Works Director or his designee. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention assembly is required by this article and is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(c)  The consumer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the City of Lawrenceville Water Department to determine whether unprotected cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the Public Works Director shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the consumer has corrected the conditions in conformance with the State of Georgia statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(d)  An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system immediately downstream of the water meter or as close as physically feasible to the water meter, but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
(1)  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the Public Works Director, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
(2)  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the water purveyor's system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
(3)  In the case of premises having one of the following: 
a.  Internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected or protected against, or intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes; 
b.  Intricate plumbing and piping arrangements; where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist; or the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line. 
(e)  The type of protective assembly required under subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
(1)  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in this section and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
(2)  In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve backflow prevention assembly. 
(3)  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
(4)  In the case of any premises where there are unprotected cross connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection. 
(5)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly on each service to the premises. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have a field test performed by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester upon installation, after any repairs and at least once per year. In those instances where the Public Works Director deems the hazard to be great enough he may require field tests at more frequent intervals. These tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by a certified tester listed on the City of Lawrenceville Certified Backflow Prevention Testers List. It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director or his designee to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the consumer whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. All repairs, overhauls or replacements shall be performed by a licensed plumber in the State of Georgia. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls shall be kept and a copy shall be sent to the Public Works Director or his designee. 
(g)  All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved devices for the purposes described in this section at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained shall, except for the testing and maintenance requirements under subsection (f) of this section, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the Public Works Director or his designee is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the water purveyor's system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than the minimum maintenance or when the Public Works Director finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Code 2005, § 20A-105) 
Sec. 38-109. - Preventing access or obstructing valves prohibited. 
No person shall remove or cover a water valve box with dirt or other material so that the cover or top of the valve box is not visible or direct access to the valve is denied to the Lawrenceville personnel. 
(Code 2005, § 20A-106) 
Sec. 38-110. - Unauthorized operation of valves or other water system control or regulating devices. 
No person shall operate or change the adjustment of any water system valve, pressure regulating device, or other water system control device without first obtaining written approval from the Public Works Director. 
(Code 2005, § 20A-107) 
Sec. 38-111. - Damage of any appurtenances to water distribution system prohibited. 
No person shall damage, destroy, deface, impair the function of, or otherwise vandalize any portion of the City's water distribution system. 
(Code 2005, § 20A-108) 
Sec. 38-112. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine for each offense or violation not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment not to exceed six months for each offense or violation. Additionally, any person violating any provision of this article may be liable to pay restitution in the discretion of the Municipal Court for: 
(1)  The total cost incurred by the City to repair or replace facilities damages as a result of the City violation; 
(2)  Any injury or damage to person or property or loss of services resulting from the violation. 
(Code 2005, § 20A-109) 
Sec. 38-113. - Conflicting parts. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Code 2005, § 20A-110) 
Secs. 38-114—38-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER CONSERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Water Stewardship Act, O.C.G.A. § et seq.; local governments may apply to state EPD for more stringent restrictions on outdoor water use during certain times, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7. 

Sec. 38-140. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through adopting and enforcing water use measures that encourage water conservation and ensure adequate supplies of water for the citizens of the City of Lawrenceville. 
(1)  It is the policy of the City to promote water conservation by regulating outdoor water use and by complying with the laws and regulations imposed by the State on outdoor water use. 
(2)  The Mayor and Council hereby delegate to the City Water Department the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective outdoor water use regulatory program for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2005, § 40-101) 
Sec. 38-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Address means the house number (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. The term "even-numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. The term "odd-numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared by the environmental protection division based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. 
Director means the Director of the City Water Department or his designee who is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective outdoor water use program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
Environmental Protection Division means the Georgia Environmental Protection Division ("EPD") of the Department of Natural Resources, an agency of the State which is charged with issuing permits that authorize withdrawal of water and with administering the rules. 
(Code 2005, § 40-102) 
Sec. 38-142. - Use schedule during non-drought periods. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(Code 2005, § 40-103) 
Sec. 38-143. - Use schedule during declared drought response levels. 
When the Environmental Protection Division makes drought declarations as authorized by state law and the rules, outdoor water use, other than activities exempted in section 38-144, shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. 
(Code 2005, § 40-104) 
Sec. 38-144. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and State guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Code 2005, § 40-105) 
Sec. 38-145. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and/or by confinement in the County jail for a total term not to exceed six months; however, for any first alleged violation of this article, a written warning will be given. Subsequent violations may result in the citation of the violator. 
(Code 2005, § 40-106) 
Sec. 38-146. - Termination of service. 
The Director shall have the authority to terminate water service to the offending party for repeated violations of the article. 
(Code 2005, § 40-107) 
Sec. 38-147. - Water standards for toilets, shower heads and faucets. 
The State regulation of toilets, shower heads and faucets (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1), particularly O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3 and the Soil and Water Conservation Act (O.C.G.A. § 2-6-20 et seq.), is adopted and made an integral part of this article by reference. 
Secs. 38-148—38-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 38-180. - Short title, authority and applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Lawrenceville Stormwater Utility Ordinance." 
(b)  The City of Lawrenceville has the authority to adopt this article pursuant to Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6), (c) and (d) and O.C.G.A. §§ 36-82-61(4)(C)(ii) and 36-82-62(a)(2). 
(Code 2005, § 12-401) 
Sec. 38-181. - Findings. 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Lawrenceville, Georgia, make the following findings: 
(1)  The federal Clean Water Act, as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act emphasizes the role of local governments in developing, implementing, conducting and funding stormwater programs which address water quality impacts of stormwater runoff. 
(2)  Stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities will assist the City in meeting the regulatory obligations imposed by its national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permits by reducing pollution and increasing water quality within the City. 
(3)  Stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities will assist the City in protecting the public health, safety and welfare and the environment. Provision of stormwater management services, stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of the use thereof renders and/or results in both service and benefit to individual parcels, parcel owners, citizens and residents of the City and to all parcels, parcel owners, citizens and residents of the City concurrently and the environment in a variety of ways. 
(4)  The City of Lawrenceville presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the City, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the City to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater management systems and facilities in the City in concert with the management of other public utilities in the City. In order to do so, the City must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program's operating needs and capital program. 
(5)  Stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities are needed throughout the City. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the City is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(6)  The provision of stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities in the City promotes an essential regulatory purpose by influencing where stormwater runoff flows and how it is managed, thereby reducing flooding, erosion and water pollution caused by stormwater runoff. 
(7)  By mitigating the impact of stormwater runoff from developed parcels, the stormwater management systems and facilities help prevent damage that would subject a parcel owner to civil liability. 
(8)  The Mayor and Council is responsible for the protection and preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community, and the environment, and finds that it is in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City and the community at large and the environment to proceed with the development, implementation, and operation of a utility for stormwater management accounted for in the City budget as a separate enterprise fund dedicated solely to stormwater management and to institute funding methods associated therewith. 
(9)  The City has undertaken a comprehensive review by staff and professional consultants of the need for, management of, and funding for, a stormwater utility. The City staff reports and the professional engineering analysis submitted to the City properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the City. 
(10)  As a result, the Mayor and Council find that a stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities, and the Mayor and Council finds that a stormwater service fee provides the most practical and appropriate means of funding stormwater management services in the City of Lawrenceville. 
(Code 2005, § 12-402) 
Sec. 38-182. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City standards means the City ordinances that govern water quality and water quantity, including, but not limited to, the development regulations, the floodplain management ordinance, the soil erosion and sediment control ordinance, the illicit discharge and illegal connection ordinance, the stream buffer protection ordinance, the stream buffer mitigation bank ordinance, the zoning resolution, the stormwater design manual, and all procedures, rules and policies pertaining thereto as these may be updated or amended from time to time. 
Credit means a conditional reduction allowed against the stormwater service fee charged to an individual parcel based upon the technical requirements and the design and performance standards contained in the City's stormwater credits manual, to be adopted pursuant to this article, as it may be updated or amended from time to time. 
Customer means all persons, parcels, and entities served by the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities, and activities related thereto, and persons, parcels, and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Developed land means all parcels not deemed as undeveloped land, as defined in this section. 
Direct lien means a lien enforced against an individual or parcel prior to obtaining a judgment against the individual or parcel, such as liens established by operation of law for unpaid taxes. 
Director means the City of Lawrenceville City Engineer or his designee. 
Impervious surfaces means any paved, hardened or structural surfaces, including, but not limited to, buildings, dams, decks, driveways, parking areas, patios, streets, swimming pools, tennis courts, walkways or other structures which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil. 
Parcel means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Private stormwater management systems and facilities means those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catchbasins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality, which are not public. 
Public stormwater management systems and facilities ( or City of Lawrenceville's Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System) means those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catchbasins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, public streets, curbs and gutters, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence either the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality, which are either owned by the City or over which the City has accepted an offer of dedication of an easement or other legally binding permanent right of use for stormwater drainage, and for which the City has the obligation of maintenance for stormwater drainage purposes. 
Stormwater management services may address the quality and the quantity of stormwater runoff and include all services provided by the City which relate to the: 
(1)  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the City; 
(2)  Operation, maintenance, repair, enhancement and replacement of existing public stormwater management systems and facilities; 
(3)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
(4)  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services or of stormwater management systems and facilities; 
(5)  Education of the public as to stormwater issues; 
(6)  Development plan review to require compliance with City standards; 
(7)  Inspection for water quantity and water quality to require compliance with City standards; 
(8)  Monitoring for water quantity and water quality to determine compliance with City standards, State water quality standards and stormwater management programs; and 
(9)  Other services as the Director may deem appropriate. 
Stormwater service fee means the periodic service charge imposed by the City to a parcel of developed land pursuant to this article for providing the stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities, which fees shall be used only for the purpose of funding the City of Lawrenceville stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities. Stormwater service fees shall be based on the relative contribution of each parcel to the demand for stormwater management services, shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable and shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities. The cost of operating expenses, capital investments and reserve accounts may be included in the stormwater service fees. 
Undeveloped land means a parcel that has less than 100 square feet of impervious surface. 
Water quality means the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of the State's public utilities. 
Water quantity means the volume of runoff which is not entirely confined and retained completely upon a parcel. 
(Code 2005, § 12-403) 
Sec. 38-183. - Establishment of a stormwater utility. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility within the Engineering Department which shall be responsible for providing stormwater management services, for providing stormwater management systems and facilities, and for determining labor, material and administrative fees for the operation of the stormwater utility throughout the City. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council hereby transfer responsibility for stormwater services over the existing stormwater management systems and facilities and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties upon which such facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and rights-of-access, and certain equipment to the stormwater utility. 
(c)  The stormwater utility shall provide stormwater management services, shall provide stormwater management systems and facilities and shall collect stormwater service fees and other fees as provided in this article within the City in accordance with the terms of this article, subject to funding availability and to policy determinations made in the best interest of public health, welfare and safety and the environment; provided, however, that the stormwater utility shall not be authorized to operate outside of the boundaries of the City. 
(d)  The stormwater utility shall be operated by the Stormwater Utility Authority. Said authority shall be comprised of the City Manager, the Public Works Director, the Director of Sanitation, the City Engineer, the Director of Planning and Zoning, and two citizens of the City of Lawrenceville. The quorum for conducting a regular meeting of this authority shall be fixed at five members. Except for the number of authority members and the definition of a quorum, the authority shall establish bylaws and rules for conducting its meetings and business as its first order of business. 
(Code 2005, § 12-404) 
Sec. 38-184. - Scope of responsibility for the stormwater utility. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall provide stormwater management services for existing and proposed public stormwater management systems and facilities as defined in this article, subject to funding availability and to policy determinations made in the best interest of the public health, welfare and safety and the environment. Additionally, the stormwater utility may accept the responsibility for providing stormwater management services to private stormwater management systems and facilities, acceptance of which conforms to policies established by the Mayor and Council or those persons or entities designated by the Mayor and Council to set such policies. 
(b)  The City owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow the stormwater utility to provide stormwater management services and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  Within public road rights-of-way and public road easements; 
(2)  On private property but within easements granted to and accepted by the City, or are otherwise permitted to be located on such private property by written agreements for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions; or 
(3)  On public land which is owned by the City or by another governmental entity, and with which the City has written agreements to provide stormwater management services and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(c)  Stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private property or on public property not owned by the City or leased to the City by another political subdivision of the State of Georgia, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements which have been dedicated to and accepted by the City, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the City for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management systems and facilities, shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the laws of the State and the United States. 
(d)  The stormwater utility may provide stormwater management services to privately owned stormwater management systems and facilities to ascertain that said facilities are functioning as designed and approved. The stormwater utility may provide for remedial maintenance of said private facilities based upon the severity of stormwater problems and potential hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare and the environment, and in cases where such remedial maintenance is required, the City shall bill the owner of said private facility for the costs of such maintenance. 
(e)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people, property and the environment, in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific parcel within or outside the boundaries of the City. The City expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the City, its elected officials, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(f)  If any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the City as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the City pursuant to this article or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the City, or under federal or State law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the City, its elected officials, employees or agents. 
(Code 2005, § 12-405) 
Sec. 38-185. - Compensation. 
All members of the stormwater utility shall receive compensation in an amount to be determined by the Mayor and Council. 
(Code 2005, § 12-406; Ord. of 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 38-186. - Establishment of enterprise fund. 
(a)  The City Manager shall establish a stormwater enterprise fund in the City budget and accounting system for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the stormwater utility, including, but not limited to, rentals, rates, charges, fees, and licenses as may be established by the Mayor and Council. 
(b)  Any revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater enterprise funds and all expenses of the utility shall be paid from the stormwater enterprise fund, except that other revenues, receipts, and resources not in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management operations and capital investments as deemed appropriate by the Mayor and Council, upon recommendation of the City Manager. 
(c)  The City may pledge all or any portion of all income and revenue of any nature derived from the operation of the stormwater management systems and facilities owned by the City or owned by another political subdivision of the State of Georgia and leased to the City, including periodic stormwater service charges and other charges for stormwater service, to the payment of principal of premium, if any, and interest on any revenue bonds or other obligations lawfully issued or otherwise contracted for by the City as may be provided in any resolution authorizing such bonds or obligations or in any trust instrument relating to such bonds or obligations. 
(Code 2005, § 12-407) 
Sec. 38-187. - Rates of stormwater service fees to be established. 
In order to recover the cost of providing stormwater services and stormwater management systems and facilities while fairly and reasonably apportioning the costs among developed properties throughout the City based on the use of stormwater services and stormwater management systems and facilities, the Mayor and Council shall establish by resolution a stormwater service fee rate, which shall apply uniformly throughout the area of the City that may be included within the stormwater utility pursuant to the jurisdiction granted by this article. The fee is as established from time and time and as approved by separate resolution of the Mayor and Council. 
(Code 2005, § 12-408) 
Sec. 38-188. - Effective date of stormwater service charges. 
The stormwater service fee shall accrue beginning September 1, 2007, and shall be billed periodically thereafter. 
(Code 2005, § 12-409) 
Sec. 38-189. - Credits. 
Owners of developed land may apply for and receive a stormwater service fee credit for on-site systems or facilities. The director or designee shall determine such stormwater service fee credits based on the technical requirements, design and performance standards contained in the City's stormwater credits manual, to be adopted by the director or designee pursuant to this article, as it may be updated or amended from time to time. All of the stormwater service fee credits that may be awarded pursuant to the stormwater credits manual shall not exceed 40 percent of the stormwater service fee applicable to a parcel. The Director shall establish objective standards for securing credits under this section and shall publish a written application for obtaining and calculating the credits. 
(Code 2005, § 12-410) 
Sec. 38-190. - Stormwater service fee, billing, delinquencies and collections. 
(a)  The stormwater service fee may be billed separately, or on a customer statement and collected along with other fees for services, at the City's sole discretion, provided that in no instance shall the service fee constitute a direct lien against the parcel. Unpaid stormwater service fees shall be collected by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account and by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained thereby. 
(b)  A stormwater service fee bill may be sent through the U.S. mail or by alternative means notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is under-billed or if no bill is sent for developed land, the City may back bill for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency due to the failure to send a bill or an under-billing. A ten percent per month late charge shall be assessed against the owner for the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service charge that becomes delinquent. 
(Code 2005, § 12-411) 
Sec. 38-191. - Stormwater utility inspections and enforcement. 
(a)  Every occupant of real property located in the City, and every owner, contractor or developer who holds title to undeveloped real property located in the City, shall be obligated to provide stormwater management systems and facilities sufficient to collect, convey, detain, control and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all the City ordinances and development regulations, and the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. 
(b)  The Director or designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect parcels and stormwater management systems and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(c)  If a parcel or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner, developer or contractor shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the Director or designee. 
(d)  The owner, developer or contractor shall allow the Director or designee ready access to all parts of the parcel or facility for the purposes of inspection, investigation, observation, monitoring, measurement, recording, enforcement, sampling and testing, photography and videotaping for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this article. The owner, developer or contractor shall allow the director or designee to examine and copy any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit or development permit. The director or designee shall duly notify the owner, developer or contractor of said parcel or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(e)  The Director or designee shall have the right to set up on any parcel or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the department to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of discharges. 
(f)  The owner, developer or contractor may allow the City to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner, developer or contractor and shall be installed at the expense of the City. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. Measurements, tests and analyses performed shall be completed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, unless the director or designee approves another method. 
(g)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the parcel or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner, developer or contractor at the written request of the director or designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner, developer or contractor. 
(h)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director or designee access to a facility or parcel shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(i)  If the Director or designee has been refused access to any part of a parcel or facility from which stormwater is or would likely be discharged, and the Director or designee is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued under this article, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the department may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(j)  The Director or designee may determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(k)  Any failure to meet the obligations set forth in this section shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by any damaged party or by the City in any court of competent jurisdiction. In the event a public nuisance is found by the Court to exist, which the owner, developer or contractor fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the Court, the City may enter upon the parcel and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner, developer, or contractor, if any, on a joint and several basis. From the date of the filing of such action, the City shall have lien rights, which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the General Execution Docket of the Superior Court of Gwinnett County. The City of Lawrenceville shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated elected officials and employees to enter upon private and public parcels owned by entities other than the City, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the parcel and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Code 2005, § 12-412) 
Sec. 38-192. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the City Manager or designee within 30 days of the decision that is appealed. The appeal must be on a form prepared by the City Manager and shall include such information as is reasonably necessary to understand the issue appealed as requested by the Stormwater Utility Authority. 
(2)  The Stormwater Utility Authority shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the parcel and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days of receipt. 
(3)  In response to an appeal, the Stormwater Utility Authority may adjust the stormwater service fee applicable to a parcel in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(4)  All decisions by the Stormwater Utility Authority shall be final. 
(b)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the City Manager or designee may be appealed by application for writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Gwinnett County, filed within 30 days of the date of receipt of service of the decision of the City Manager or his designee. 
(Code 2005, § 12-413) 
Sec. 38-193. - Authority to implement article. 
The Director or designee is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable rules, procedures and policies with respect to the enforcement of this article. All such rules, procedures and policies shall be consistent with the provisions of this article and shall be effective 30 days after being signed by the Director or designee and placed in the central files of the Water Department. 
(Code 2005, § 12-414) 
Secs. 38-194—38-200. - Reserved. 
Article VII. - Electric Utility Distributed Generation 

Sec. 38-201. - Distributed Generation rider. 
(a)  Availability . 
(1)  Applicable to all qualified customers in the area served by the City of Lawrenceville (City) electric system and subject to its service rules, regulations, terms, policies and procedures, as amended from time to time, which are incorporated herein by this reference, and desiring to install a Distributed Generation facility. Customer account(s) must be in good standing. The Distributed Generation system must be eligible for participation subject to terms and provision of O.C.G.A. § 46-3-50 et seq. (Georgia Cogeneration and Distributed Generation Act of 2001). 
(2)  A Distributed Generation facility must: 
a.  Be owned (or leased) and operated by an existing customer for production of electric energy; 
b.  Be connected to and/or operate in parallel with the City's distribution facilities; 
c.  Be intended primarily to offset part or all of the customer's generator's requirement for electricity; 
d.  Have peak generating capacity of not more than ten kW for residential, church, or commercial non-demand applications and not more than 125 percent of actual or expected maximum annual peak demand of the premise for commercial applications; and 
e.  Use solar photovoltaic system, fuel cell, or wind generation installed on the customer side of the meter. 
(b)  Monthly metering cost. 
(1)  Charge by type: 
a.  Bi-directional metering charge: $4.50 per month; or 
b.  Single directional: Single-phase at $4.50 per month or poly-phase at $11.00 per month. 
(2)  The City will install single directional metering or bi-directional metering depending on the customer's method of installation. All installed costs for metering and associated equipment will be paid by the customer at the time service is initiated under this policy. 
(3)  Bi-directional metering is defined as measuring the amount of electricity supplied by the City and the amount fed back to the City by the customer's distributed generation facility during the billing period using the same meter. Bi-directional metering shall be used where distributed generation facilities are connected to the City on the customer's side of the customer's meter. 
(4)  Single directional metering shall be defined as measuring electricity produced or consumed during the billing period, in accordance with normal metering practices. Single directional metering shall be used where distributed generation facilities are connected to the City's distribution system on the City's side of the customer's meter. 
(c)  Monthly capacity cost. The City requires each customer with a distributed generation facility to pay the monthly Stand-By Capacity charges based on the installed Nameplate Capacity Rating (in kW) of the customer's system. 
(1)  Residential, church, commercial non-demand, and small power at $8.00 per kW per month; 
(2)  Medium power, large power, and City at $12.00 per kW per month. 
(d)  Payment for energy. 
(1)  Bi-directional metering. 
a.  When electricity supplied by the City exceeds electricity generated by the customer's Distributed Generation, the electricity shall be billed by the City in accordance with the applicable tariff(s). 
b.  When electricity generated by the customer's Distributed Generation system exceeds electricity supplied by the City, the customer shall be billed for the customer charges as described in the standard rate for that billing period and credited for excess kWh generated during the billing period at the City's avoided energy cost. 
(2)  Single directional metering. 
a.  For kilowatt-hours generated by the customer's Distributed Generation facility, the customer shall be compensated at the City's avoided cost of energy (kWh) as described below. The City will only compensate the customer for avoided energy kWh's as determined by metered energy delivered to the City's distribution system. 
b.  The customer's net bill will be calculated using the City calculation for avoided cost of energy (as described below) credited to the customer, netted against the billing period charges for the customer's regular service (according to the applicable tariff) based on actual metered energy. 
c.  The City will only compensate the customer for avoided cost of energy kWh's as determined by metered energy delivered to the City's distribution system. 
(3)  Avoided energy cost. Credits by the City to the customer for the billing period metered avoided energy kWh's will be computed by the City in its sole discretion based on the average monthly wholesale market price as determined by the Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia (MEAG Power), the City's wholesale energy provider. 
(4)  In the event customer develops a credit balance during a billing period, the credit will be applied to the charges generated in the following billing period. In the event there is a credit balance remaining at the end of the City's fiscal year, the credit will be cleared by the issuance of a check for the credit balance to customer. Any other clearance of account credit balances will be at the City's discretion. 
(e)  Safety, power quality, and interconnection requirements. 
(1)  The customer shall be responsible for ensuring a safe and reliable interconnection with the City and all costs incurred therein. The City has available, upon request, the following documents that must be completed and approved in their entirety prior to interconnection by the customer to the City's distribution system: 
a.  Application for interconnection of distributed generation facility; 
b.  Interconnection agreement; 
c.  Electrical power exchange agreement. 
(2)  The provisions in all documents outlined above are incorporated into this rider in their entirety. For the avoidance of doubt, customer shall be deemed to have agreed to such provisions by applying for service under this rider. 
(3)  The City will only be required to purchase energy from eligible Distributed Generation facilities on a first-come, first-served basis until the cumulative generating capacity of all renewable energy sources from all customers equals the percentage of the City's annual peak demand in the previous year as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 46-3-56(a). Additional energy may be purchased by the City at its sole discretion at a cost agreed to by it and the customer provider. The City shall at no time be required to purchase energy from customers in excess of amounts required by the Georgia Cogeneration and Distributed Generation Act of 2001. 
(4)  The City reserves the right to separate the customer generator's equipment from City lines and facilities when, in the City's judgment, the continued parallel operation is unsafe or may cause damage to persons or property. Upon such separation, the City shall promptly notify the customer generator so that any unsafe condition can be corrected. 
( Ord. No. 2018-01, 1-10-2018 ) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2005 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2005 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 2005 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 