THE CODE OF RABUN COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted: March 23, 2010  Effective: March 23, 2010 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of 
RABUN COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Virgil Kilby 
Chairman 
____________ 
Tom Garrison, Vice-Chairman 
Max Watts 
Katheryn Granberg 
Will Nichols 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Jim Bleckley 
County Administrator 
____________ 
Allyn Stockton 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Debra J. Jacobs 
County Clerk/Chief Financial Officer 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Rabun County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances and resolutions adopted by the county through September 23, 2008. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance and resolution included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Code Attorney, and Ricardo Lewis, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Debbie Jacobs, County Clerk and Chief Financial Officer, and Allyn Stockton, County Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Rabun County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Rabun County, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Rabun County, Georgia. 2010. 
ORDINANCE NO. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR RABUN COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ARTICLE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Rabun County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 56, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 28, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this article. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and imprisonment not exceeding 90 days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the county to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after July 28, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This article shall become effective March 23, 2010. 
Placed on First Reading at Regular Meeting on the 23rd Day of February, 2010. 
Placed on Final Hearing and Adopted on the 23rd Day of March, 2010. 
Rabun County Board of Commissioners: 



Attest: ____________  Debra Jacobs, Clerk,  Rabun County Board of Commissioners 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - SELECTED LOCAL ACTS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS CREATED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 289), p. 4358, establishing the county board of commissioners. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Established. 
There shall be a Board of Commissioners of Rabun County as provided for in this Act. The board of commissioners shall be the successor to and continuation of the existing Board of Commissioners of Rabun County and shall continue to have the obligations and liabilities of the board of commissioners as it existed immediately prior to the effective date of this Act. The board of commissioners shall constitute the governing authority of Rabun County and shall exercise the powers, duties, and responsibilities vested in and upon said officers by the provisions of this Act. The term "board," whenever used in this Act, shall mean the Board of Commissioners of Rabun County, including the chairperson and all members. 
Sec. 2. - Board membership. 
(a)	The Board of Commissioners of Rabun County shall consist of four district commissioners and one at-large commissioner. The four district commissioners shall be residents of their respective commissioner districts described in subsection (b) of this section but shall be elected at large as provided in Section 3 of this Act. The at-large commissioner shall be elected at large as provided in Section 3 of this Act. 
(b)	For the purpose of electing members of the board of commissioners, Rabun County shall be divided into four commissioner districts. The at-large commissioner shall be designated as representing District 1; and the other four districts shall be numbered as Districts 2, 3, 4, and 5. One member of the board shall be elected for each such district. Those districts shall consist of the described territory of Rabun County described as follows: 

 
(c)	For purposes of the commissioner districts described in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)	Any part of Rabun County which is not included in any commissioner district described in subsection (b) of this section shall be included within that commissioner district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia; and 
(2)	Any part of Rabun County which is described in subsection (b) of this section as being included in a particular commissioner district shall nevertheless not be included within such commissioner district if such part is not contiguous to such commissioner district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that commissioner district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(d)	At the 2004 general election the at-large commissioner and two district commissioners from districts 2 and 3 shall be elected to be voted on by the qualified voters of the entire county. Such members of the board shall take office on the first day of January following said election. The members from districts 2 and 3 and the at-large commissioner shall serve for a term of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. Successors to such members and future successors shall be elected at the general election in the year in which their respective terms of office expire and shall take office on January 1 following said election for a term of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(e)	The two commissioners who were elected at the 2002 general election under prior law and whose terms began January 1, 2003, shall continue to serve the terms of office to which they were elected. These two commissioners, Eston Melton and Virgil Kilby, shall be deemed to be district commissioners representing districts 4 and 5, respectively, as such districts are defined in subsection (b) of this section. Successors to such two district commissioners shall be elected at the general election next preceding the expiration of their terms of office and shall take office on January 1 following said election for a term of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. In the event of a vacancy prior to the expiration of term of office of either of these existing commissioners, such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with Section 6 of this Act and by a resident of such vacated district, as such district is defined in subsection (b) of this section. 
Sec. 3. - Eligibility. 
Any person, to be eligible to serve as a member of the board, must be at least 25 years of age on the date of the election, must have resided in Rabun County for at least one year immediately preceding the date of the election, must be qualified to vote for the members of the General Assembly, and must receive the requisite number of the votes cast for that office by the electors of the entire county. Each district commissioner must be a resident of the commissioner district from which he or she offers for election. The at-large commissioner must be a resident of Rabun County. 
Sec. 4. - Oath. 
Before entering upon his or her duties as a member of the board, such member shall take an oath to faithfully perform his or her duties in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the Constitution, and the laws of the State of Georgia. Such oath shall be administered by any person authorized to administer oaths. 
Sec. 5. - Bond required. 
Before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, each member of the board and the clerk hereinafter provided for shall each give bond in the sum of $10,000.00 with a reputable surety company authorized to do business in Georgia as surety, payable to the probate judge of Rabun County, for the use of Rabun County. Such bond shall be conditioned for the satisfactory performance, by each of the members and the clerk, of the duties of his or her office and for a true accounting of all moneys and effects of said county coming under his or her custody, possession, or control. Such bond shall be filed in the office of the probate judge and shall be recorded upon his or her minutes. The premium on each bond shall be paid from the funds of Rabun County. 
Sec. 6. - Vacancy. 
In the event a vacancy occurs on the board for any reason other than the expiration of the member's term of office, such vacancy shall be filled by a special election called by the probate judge, if the vacancy occurs with more than one year left in said term. The election shall be called and held under the laws relating to special elections, but the election shall be held not more than 60 days after the vacancy occurs. If there is less than one year left in said term, the four remaining members of the board shall appoint a member to fill the unexpired term. 
Sec. 7. - Compensation. 
The four members of the board other than the chairperson shall be compensated in the amount of $450.00 per month and the chairperson shall be compensated in the amount of $600.00 per month, such compensation to be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Rabun County. Each member of the board and the chairperson shall be compensated for actual expenses incurred while on official business of the county, which reimbursement for expenses shall be approved by the board prior to payment. 
Editor's note— O.C.G.A. § 36-5-29 authorizes periodic increases in the compensation of members of a county governing authority established by local or general law. 
Sec. 8. - Chairperson; supervisor of roads. 
(a)	A chairperson shall be elected at the first meeting of the board in each year by the members of the board, and shall serve for a term of one year. 
(b)	The board shall appoint a supervisor of roads, who shall serve at the pleasure of the board, shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the board, and shall be compensated in an amount set by the board. 
Sec. 9. - Meetings. 
The board shall hold a regular meeting once each month on a specific day in such month, which day shall be set by the board at its first regular meeting of each year. The board may, at its first regular monthly meeting following approval of this Act, set the days for its monthly meetings for the remainder of the calendar year. The board may continue its meetings from day to day and may hold other meetings as deemed advisable upon the call of the chairperson or upon the call of any three of the members. The board shall maintain an office at the courthouse of Rabun County. 
Sec. 10. - Quorum. 
Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum and no action shall be taken by the board without the concurring vote of at least three members of said board. The chairperson of said board shall preside at meetings and shall perform such duties and have such powers as are or may be conferred upon him or her by law or authorized by said board and shall at each regular meeting of said board submit a report of the condition of the county affairs and make to said board such recommendations as he or she may deem proper. 
Sec. 11. - Clerk. 
The board is authorized to employ a clerk to be compensated in an amount to be determined by the board, to be paid from the funds of Rabun County in equal monthly installments. It shall be the duty of the clerk to keep the minutes and records of all proceedings of the board and to discharge such other duties as the board may prescribe. 
Editor's note— The schedule for payment of the clerk's compensation has been changed from time to time since enactment of this section and is no longer paid in monthly installments. 
Sec. 12. - Powers. 
(a)	In addition to all of the powers bestowed by the law of Georgia, the board shall have exclusive power and control over public roads and bridges; the levying and collection of taxes, fees, and penalties as allowable by law; the management, collection, control, and disbursing of county funds; the erection, repair, management, and maintenance of public buildings; the establishing, abolishing, and changing of election precincts and establishing the number and location of polling places in the several precincts; the auditing of books and records of all county officials; the settling of all claims against or for the county; the management, control, purchase, and sale of assets and property; the creation, hiring, management, and control over all county employees; and the creation of rules of procedure to govern the board, organize itself, and establish the powers and duties of the chairperson and remaining members. 
(b)	The board shall establish rules and regulations for the expenditure of all funds, for securing written reports from all other county officers, which shall contain proposed salaries and expenses for office operations on an itemized basis, and for submitting an annual budget broken down into quarterly amounts. The board shall study and act on all budget requests, making changes that are fiscally sound and in the best interests of the county. 
Editor's note— The power to change election precincts and establish the number and location of polling places within the precincts, among other powers and duties, was assigned to the Board of Elections and Registration of Rabun County by 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 495), p. 3712 [Article VII of the Local Acts]. 
Sec. 13. - County attorney. 
The board shall have the authority to employ a competent attorney at law as county attorney to advise the board and represent Rabun County in such matters as the board may direct, which county attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the board and shall be compensated out of the funds of Rabun County as approved by the board. Whenever it is deemed necessary, said board may employ additional counsel to assist the county attorney, who shall be paid such compensation out of the funds of Rabun County as approved by the board. 
Sec. 14. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the county shall begin on the first day of July and end on the last day of June of the succeeding year. The board shall have a complete and independent audit in compliance with generally accepted audit standards performed annually by a qualified external auditor in accordance with Code Section 36-81-7 of the O.C.G.A [O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7]. The audit will be accepted by the board at a regular or special meeting and made available for inspection by any interested person during regular business hours. 
Sec. 15. - Employee salaries. 
The board shall establish the salary and pay scale of all employees of Rabun County, except elected officials whose salary is set by local or general law, and shall specifically set the salary and salary scale for all clerical employees of Rabun County. The board shall, in establishing such salaries and salary scales, take into consideration the prevailing compensation for such services being paid by private industry and business in Rabun County and by other counties within the State of Georgia and the recommendations of the office holder or person having immediate supervision of such employee. The decision and determination of the board in setting and establishing such salary and salary scale shall be final. 
Sec. 16. - Insurance. 
(a)	Rabun County is authorized in the discretion of the board to become a self-insurer against all claims incurred by reason of liability to a third party or parties and losses by reason of fire, windstorm, and providential cause and other comprehensive damages to its property and for each and every other contingency against which the board may in its discretion elect to insure. 
(b)	Rabun County is authorized through the board to levy taxes for the funding and payment of costs for such self-insurance if the same is implemented and which funds may be established as continuing and perpetual reserves. 
(c)	Nothing in this Act shall be construed as waiving any immunity or privilege of any kind now or hereafter enjoyed by Rabun County or any member of the board thereof or any supervisor, administrator, employee, or other elected or appointed officer nor of any public body, board, agency, or other instrumentality of said county, so that all such immunities and privileges from liability now held by such county shall continue to be of full force and effect after the passage of this Act. 
(d)	Any self-insurance program thus inaugurated by Rabun County through the board shall be in the sole discretion of the board in all respects as to its coverage. The board is, however, specifically granted the authority to utilize such self-insurance program in providing liability insurance for members of such board, supervisors, administrators, employees, or other elected or appointed officers against personal liability as is provided in Article 2 of Chapter 9 of Title 45 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended [O.C.G.A. § 45-9-20 et seq.]. 
(e)	Such self-insurance program may be implemented by resolution of the board, which resolution shall specifically set forth the purposes for which such self-insurance is maintained; the amount of funds allocated to such program for the year in which the same is established; the intent as to the future allocation of funds for such program; the amounts or percentages of such reserve thus established to be made available for the payment of claims against such reserve including, but not limited to, any such amount or percentage which may be allocated for payment of the claim of any one individual, the payment of the claim for any one incident, and, in the discretion of the board, payment of the claim for property damage or other specific damages. 
(f)	The board may extend the provisions of such self-insurance program as to any part or all of its coverages to any other governmental agency of Rabun County including, but not limited to, the Hospital Authority of Rabun County. The board is further authorized in its discretion to participate with any such agency of Rabun County in the providing of such self-insurance program upon such basis as may be mutually agreeable between or among such participating agencies. 
(g)	Nothing in this Act shall constitute a prohibition against Rabun County or any agency thereof from the purchasing of any contract of insurance whether liability, comprehensive, official bond, or other contract. It is the intent of this subsection that Rabun County may utilize such self-insurance program to provide partial coverage of its insurance needs and may purchase contracts of insurance for a portion of its insurance needs. 
(h)	Rabun County is authorized by the General Assembly of Georgia to waive its immunity from legal complaint or claim up to the amounts of its reserve in such self-insurance program and in accordance with the limits of its coverage thereunder as set forth in its resolution establishing such program. Any such waiver of immunity must be by specific resolution of the board. 
(i)	All such funds collected by the levy of taxes or other revenue by the board setting up such self-insurance program shall become and be the funds of Rabun County unless the same are paid or disbursed in accordance with the plan of self-insurance. The board establishing such plan of self-insurance may terminate the same at any time at its sole discretion, provided that, upon such termination, there shall be retained in the reserve account of said program a sum reasonably sufficient to pay any known claims which may at the time of termination be pending against Rabun County and which are within the class of claims and limits as to amount for which such self-insurance program is maintained. Any funds retained in the reserve subsequent to termination and not paid to a claimant shall be paid into the general fund of Rabun County upon resolution of such pending claim or when such claims become barred by the statute of limitations. All funds removed from such reserve upon partial or complete termination of such program shall be paid into the general fund of Rabun County and shall be disbursed and accounted for as are other funds. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 186), p. 3003, establishing the county airport authority. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act may be cited as the "Rabun County Airport Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Rabun County Airport Authority. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Rabun County Airport Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style and title, and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the Authority or the trustee acting under the trust indenture herein provided for shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents and employees of the Authority. The Authority shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 3. - Membership. 
The Rabun County Airport Authority shall be composed of five members. The Board of Commissioners of Rabun County shall appoint the initial members of the Authority as follows: one member to a term of five years; one member to a term of four years; one member to a term of three years; one member to a term of two years; and one member to a term of one year. Thereafter, the members shall be appointed to terms of five years. Members shall serve until their successor is appointed and qualified. The initial member shall be appointed within 30 days after the effective date of this Act. 
Sec. 4. - Meetings. 
The Authority shall hold their first regular meeting after this Act becomes effective, and the first regular meeting of each year thereafter shall be in July. The Authority shall meet at such times as may be necessary to transact the business coming before it, but not less than quarterly. At its first meeting in July of each year thereafter, the Authority shall elect one of its members as its Chairman and another member as Secretary-Treasurer. Only one person shall hold the office of Secretary-Treasurer. These officers shall be elected for a term ending on June 30th of the year following the year in which they were elected or until their successors are elected and qualified. Three members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business coming before it. The members of the Authority shall receive no compensation for their services. They shall be reimbursed, however, for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
Sec. 5. - Vacancies in office. 
In the event of a vacancy on the Authority by reason of death, resignation or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original membership on the Authority, and the person so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
Sec. 6. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms have the following meanings: 
(1)	The word "Authority" shall mean the "Rabun County Airport Authority" as created by the provisions of this Act. 
(2)	The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, improvement and operation of public airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, and related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquisition of the necessary property, both real and personal, and the lease and sale of any part or all of such facilities, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance and operation of such airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, deemed by the Authority to be necessary, convenient or desirable. 
(3)	The term "cost of project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired, including the payment or reimbursement of reasonable actual costs incurred as a result of utility relocations when such relocations are made necessary by the project, the cost of all machinery, equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses, and the cost of plans and specifications, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and improving the same, and the placing of the same in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of any funds of the Authority including the proceeds from any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for any such project or projects. 
(4)	The terms "revenue bonds", "bonds", and "obligations" as used in this Act, shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-61] the Revenue Bond Law, approved February 14, 1957 (Ga. L. 1957, p. 36), as amended, amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937, approved March 31, 1937 (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761), as amended [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.]; and such type of obligations may be issued by the Authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.] and any amendments thereto, and in addition shall also mean obligations of the Authority the issuance of which are hereinafter authorized in this Act. 
(5)	Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating", if, in the judgment of the Authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the Authority therefrom and all properties used, leased and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
Sec. 7. - Powers. 
The Authority shall have the following powers: 
(1)	To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(2)	To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)	To acquire in its own name by purchase, gift or otherwise, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchise necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of, or disposition of, the same in any manner it deems to be the best advantage of the Authority; 
(4)	To appoint, select and employ officers, agents and employees including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensation; 
(5)	To make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects or lease of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and any and all persons, firms and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the State are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the Authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they may deem advisable. The said Authority is further granted the authority to make contracts and leases, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, with the United States Government or any agency or department thereof concerning the projects of the Authority, subject to the rights and interests of the holder of any of the bonds or obligations authorized to be issued hereunder, and by the resolution or trust indenture of the Authority authorizing the issuance of any of its bonds or obligations as provided in section 21 of this Act; 
(6)	To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the Authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(7)	To accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency, instrumentality or political subdivision thereof or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency, instrumentality or other source may impose; 
(8)	To accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency, instrumentality or political subdivision thereof or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency, instrumentality or political subdivision or any other source may impose; 
(9)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes, to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same, and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(10)	To exercise any powers usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which are not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this State; 
(11)	The Authority and the trustee acting under the trust indenture are specifically authorized to sell, lease, grant, exchange or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real or personal, or interest therein, not required in the normal operation of the Authority and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the Authority was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in section 2 and section 21 hereof; 
(12)	To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers especially given in this Act. 
Sec. 8. - Revenue bonds. 
The Authority, or any authority or body which has succeeded, or which may in the future succeed, to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the Authority created hereby, shall have the power, and is hereby authorized, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates as may be authorized by the Authority, shall be payable semiannually, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding forty years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the Authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity at the option of the Authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to, and in conformity with, the Revenue Bond Law, approved February 14, 1957 (Ga. L. 1957, p. 36), amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937, approved March 31, 1937 (Ga. L. 1937, p. 761), as amended [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.]. All procedures pertaining to such issuance and the conditions thereof shall be the same as those contained in said Revenue Bond Law [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.] and any amendments thereto. 
Sec. 9. - Form, denominations, registration, place of payment. 
The Authority shall determine the form of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the State. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both. The Authority may make provisions for the registration of any coupon bond, as to principal alone, or to both the principal and interest. 
Sec. 10. - Signatures, seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds, or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon, shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the Chairman of the Authority and attested by the Secretary-Treasurer of the Authority, and the official seal of the Authority shall be affixed thereto. Any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the Chairman and Secretary-Treasurer of the Authority. Any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the Authority by such persons as shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, at the actual time of the execution of such bonds, although such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office on the date of delivery and payment of such bonds. 
Sec. 11. - Negotiability, exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have, and are hereby declared to have, all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instruments law of the State. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose, and the said bonds, their transfer, and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the State. 
Sec. 12. - Sale, price. 
The Authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the Authority. 
Sec. 13. - Proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may be issued in like manner to provide the amount of any deficit for the cost of the project or projects, which, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purposes. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into a sinking fund or used for additional construction as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture. 
Sec. 14. - Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the Authority, under like restrictions, may issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 15. - Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The Authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 16. - Conditions precedent to issuance, object of issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the Authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution, providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular, special, or adjourned meeting of the Authority by a majority vote of the quorum as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 17. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Rabun County. Such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for, and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the said county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment of such bonds. All such bonds shall contain recitals on their face substantially covering the foregoing provisions of this Section. 
Sec. 18. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the Authority any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the State. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the Authority, including the proceeds derived from the sale of any surplus property of the Authority, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the property, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the Authority, both real and personal, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the Authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor, and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other monies be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this State to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the Authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the Authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Sec. 19. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
In the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, the Authority shall provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank or trust company, which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolutions or trust indentures may provide. 
Sec. 20. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, and any monies derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal, of the Authority, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the Authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust instrument may provide. Such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals, as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund. Said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; (3) the necessary charges of paying agent or agents for paying interest and principal; and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds, and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
Sec. 21. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may protect and enforce, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the Authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 22. - Refunding bonds. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue refunding bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the Authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Sec. 23. - Validation. 
Bonds of the Authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedures of the Revenue Bond Law. The petition for validation shall also make any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States Government or any department or agency of the United States Government, if subject to be sued, which has contracted with the Authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated, a party-defendant to such action. Such municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the Authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, against the Authority issuing the same, and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the United States Government if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said Rabun County Airport Authority. 
Sec. 24. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such Authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Rabun County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court, which shall have original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 25. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said Authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will adversely affect the interest and rights of the holders of any bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or authority shall be created which will compete with the Authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the State itself so compete with the Authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the State, the Authority and the holders of any such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Sec. 26. - Monies considered trust funds. 
All monies received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 27. - Purpose of authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this Act, the general purpose of the Authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, improving and operating airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, including any related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and to lease or sell any or all of such facilities, including real property, and to do any and all things deemed by the Authority to be necessary, convenient or desirable for, and incident to, the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
Sec. 28. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to prescribe, fix and collect rates, fees, tolls and charges, and to revise, from time to time, and collect such rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or subleases of its lands or facilities, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects. 
Sec. 29. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the Authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act, including the basis on which airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft shall be furnished. 
Sec. 30. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Sec. 31. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act, being for the purpose of promoting the health, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the United States, of the State of Georgia, and of the County of Rabun, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
Sec. 32. - Jurisdiction. 
All property, the title to which shall vest in said Authority, shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the county wherein such property shall lie. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1027), p. 4564, establishing a county building authority. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Rabun County Building Authority created. 
There is created a public body corporate and politic to be known as the Rabun County Building Authority, herein called "the Authority," which shall be an instrumentality and a public corporation of the State of Georgia, the purpose of which shall be to acquire, construct, and equip self-liquidating projects, including, but not limited to, buildings, sanitary and surface water sewers, streets, roads and public facilities of every nature, type and character, for use by Rabun County or the Rabun County School District for their governmental, proprietary, public, administrative and educational functions and Rabun County and the Rabun County School District are granted the right and power by proper resolution of their governing authorities to sell or lease to the Authority lands and buildings owned by them. The Authority shall not be a state institution, nor a department or agency of the state, but shall be an instrumentality of the state, a mere creation of the state, having distinct corporate entity and being exempt from the provisions of Article 2 of Chapter 17 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia State Financing and Investment Commission Act." The Authority shall have its principal office in Rabun County, and its legal situs or residence for the purposes of this chapter shall be Rabun County. 
(2010 Ga. Laws (Act #566), § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Membership. 
The Authority shall consist of five members who shall be eligible to succeed themselves and who shall be elected by the governing authority of Rabun County. The members of said governing authority of the county shall be eligible to be elected to and serve on the Authority. The members of the Authority shall hold office for terms of four years and until their successors shall have been elected; provided, however, that of the original members elected to the Authority three shall be elected to terms of one year each and two shall be elected to terms of three years. Upon the expiration of each of such initial terms, the successors shall be elected for terms of four years. Any vacancy on the Authority shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing authority of Rabun County. Immediately after their election, the members of the Authority shall enter upon their duties. The Authority shall elect one of its members as Chairman and one as Vice-Chairman. The Secretary/Treasurer of the Authority shall be the clerk of the governing authority of Rabun County, or his or her designee, who shall not be a member of the Authority. Three members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum and no vacancy on the Authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the Authority and, in every instance, a majority vote of a quorum shall authorize any legal act of the Authority, including all things necessary to authorize and issue revenue bonds. The members of the Authority shall receive no compensation for their services, but may be reimbursed by the Authority for their actual expenses properly incurred in the performance of their duties. The Authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government and shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)	The word "Authority" shall mean the Rabun County Building Authority created by this Act. 
(2)	The word "project" shall mean land, buildings, facilities, equipment, and real property and personal property of every kind and character necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of Rabun County or the Rabun County School District, or any other political subdivision or municipality of the State of Georgia located within Rabun County. 
(3)	The term "cost of project" shall include the cost of lands, buildings, improvements, machinery, equipment, property, easements, rights, franchises, material, labor, services acquired or contracted for, plans and specification, financing charges, construction costs, interest prior to and during construction; architectural, accounting, engineering, inspection, administrative, fiscal, and legal expenses; expenses incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; expenses incident to the acquiring, constructing, equipping, and operating of any project or any part thereof, and to the placing of the same in operation and to the condemnation of any property incident to such construction and operation. 
(4)	The term "revenue bonds" shall mean revenue bonds issued under the provisions of Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the Revenue Bond Law [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.], and under the provisions of this Act. The obligations authorized under this Act may be issued by the Authority in the manner authorized under the Revenue Bond Law. 
(2010 Ga. Laws (Act #566), § 2) 
Sec. 4. - Powers. 
The Authority shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Act including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it shall have the power: 
(1)	To sue and be sued; 
(2)	To adopt and alter a corporate seal; 
(3)	To make and execute with public and private persons and corporations contracts, leases, rental agreements, and other instruments relating to its projects and incident to the exercise of the powers of the Authority, including contracts for constructing, renting, and leasing of its projects for the use of Rabun County or the Rabun County School District; and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, authority is specifically granted to Rabun County and the Rabun County School District to enter into lease contracts and related agreements for the use of any structure, building, or facility or a combination of any two or more structures, buildings, or facilities of the Authority for a term not exceeding 50 years; and Rabun County and the Rabun County School District may enter into lease contracts and related agreements for the use of any structure, building, or facility, or a combination of the two or more structures, buildings, or facilities of the Authority for a term not exceeding 50 years upon a majority vote of its governing body and may obligate itself for the use of such property so leased and also obligate itself as part of the undertaking to pay debt service incurred in connection with such property, and to pay the cost of maintaining, repairing, and operating the property furnished by and leased from the Authority; and the sums agreed to be paid under the provisions of such lease contracts or related agreements may be pledged or assigned to secure the payment of revenue bonds issued hereunder; 
(4)	To acquire in its own name by purchase on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws of the State of Georgia applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, including the power to proceed as a condemning body under the provisions of Article 2 of Chapter 2 of Title 22 of the O.C.G.A.[O.C.G.A. 22-2-100 et seq.], relating to proceedings before a special master, or by gift, grant, lease, or otherwise real property or rights and easements therein and franchises and personal property necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use or disposition of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the Authority. Title to any such property shall be held by the Authority exclusively for the benefit of the public. The Authority shall be under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned as provided herein except from the funds provided therefore and, in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the Authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned; and no property shall be acquired as provided herein upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money shall be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the amount of such lien or encumbrance. If the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on lands which are subject to the control of Rabun County or the Rabun County School District, the governing authority of Rabun County or the Rabun County School District, whichever is applicable, is authorized to convey such lands to the Authority for such consideration, not exceeding reasonable value, as may be agreed upon by the Authority, as Grantee, and by such governing authority, on behalf of Rabun County or the Rabun County School District, as Grantor, taking into consideration the public benefit to be derived from such conveyance. 
(5)	To improve, extend, add to, reconstruct, renovate, or remodel any project or part thereof already acquired; 
(6)	To pledge or assign any revenues, income, rent, charges, and fees received by the Authority; 
(7)	To appoint and select, agents, engineers, architects, attorneys, fiscal agents, accountants, and employees and to provide for their compensation and duties; 
(8)	To construct, reconstruct, acquire, own, alter, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, operate, manage, and equip projects located on land owned or leased by the Authority and to pay all or part of the costs of any such project from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the Authority or any contributions, loans, or grants by persons, firms, or corporations, including the State of Georgia and the United States of America, and any other contributions, all of which the Authority is authorized to receive, accept, and use to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of and to exercise police powers over the project or projects managed or operated by the Authority; 
(9)	To accept, receive, and administer gifts, grants, loan and devises of money, material, and property of any kind, including loans and grants from the State of Georgia or the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(10)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes; and to issue revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(11)	To exercise all powers usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions which are not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; and 
(12)	Pursuant to proper resolution of the Authority to issue revenue bonds payable from the rents and revenues of the Authority and its projects, to provide funds for carrying out the purposes of the Authority, which bonds may be issued in either fully negotiable coupon form, in which event they shall have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the law of Georgia, or they may be issued in whole or in part in non-negotiable fully registered form without coupons, payable to a designated payee or to the registered assigns of the payee with such conversion privileges as the Authority may provide, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project, including the cost of constructing, reconstructing, equipping, extending, adding to, or improving such project, or for the purpose of refunding, as herein provided, any such bonds of the Authority theretofore issued. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds were issued, the surplus shall be paid into the fund provided for the payment of principal and interest on such bonds. All such revenue bonds shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the procedure of Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the Revenue Bond Law [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.], and in accordance with all terms and provisions thereof not in conflict herewith and in accordance with Code Section 50-17-1 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 50-17-1], relating to use of facsimile signatures on public securities, and, as security for the payment of any revenue bonds so authorized, any rents and revenue of the Authority may be pledged and assigned. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose, and such bonds and all income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within the State of Georgia. For the purpose of the exemption from taxation of such bonds and the income therefrom, the Authority shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
(2010 Ga. Laws (Act #566), § 3) 
Sec. 5. - Credit not pledged and debt not created by bonds. 
Credit not pledged and debt not created by bonds. Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not constitute a debt or a pledge of the faith and credit of the State of Georgia, Rabun County, or the Rabun County School District; but such bonds shall be payable from the rentals, revenue, earnings, and funds of the Authority as provided in the resolution or trust agreement or indenture authorizing the issuance and securing the payment of such bonds; and the issuance of such bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the state, county, or such school district to levy or pledge any form of taxation whatever for the payment thereof. No holder of any bond or receiver or trustee in connection with therewith shall have the right to enforce the payment thereof against any property of the state or of such county or school district nor shall any such bond constitute a charge, lien, or encumberance, legal or equitable, upon any such property. All such bonds shall contain on their face a recital setting forth substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. However, such county or school district may obligate itself to pay the amounts required under any contract entered into with the Authority from funds received from taxes to be levied and collected for that purpose to the extent necessary to pay the obligations contractually incurred under this section, and from any other source; and the obligation to make such payments shall constitute a general obligation and a pledge of the full faith and credit of the obligor but shall not constitute a debt of the obligor under the meaning of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, Article IX, Section V, Paragraph I; and, when such obligation is made to make such payments from taxes to be levied for that purpose, then the obligation shall be mandatory to levy and collect such taxes from year to year in an amount sufficient to fulfill and fully comply with the terms of such obligation. 
(2010 Ga. Laws (Act #566), § 4) 
Sec. 6. - Trust agreement. 
In the discretion of the Authority, any issue of revenue bonds may be secured by a trust agreement or indenture made by the Authority with a corporate trustee which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or without the State of Georgia. Such trust agreement or indenture may pledge and assign rents, fees, charges, revenues, and earnings to be received by the Authority. The resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds and such trust agreements or indenture may contain provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders, including the right of appointment of a receiver upon default of the payment of any principal or interest obligation and the right of any receiver or trustee to enforce collection of any rents, fees, charges or revenues for use of the project or projects necessary to pay all costs of operation and all reserves provided for, all principal and interest on all bonds of the issue, all costs of collection, and all other costs reasonably necessary to accomplish the collection of such sums in the event of any default of the Authority. Such resolution and such trust agreement or indenture may include covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition of property for and construction of the project and to the custody, safeguarding, and application of all funds and covenants providing for the operation, maintenance, repair, and insurance of the project or projects and may contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. Such trust agreement or indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in securing bonds and debentures for corporations and may contain such other provisions as the Authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such trust. 
Sec. 7. - Refunding bonds. 
The Authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue bonds of the Authority for the purpose of calling, refunding, or refinancing any revenue bonds issued under the provisions hereof and then outstanding and to include in the amount of such refunding bonds all interest and any call premiums that may be required for the redemption and refunding of such outstanding bonds. 
Sec. 8. - Venue of actions, jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions hereof or any action against the Authority brought in the courts of the State of Georgia shall be brought in the Superior Court of Rabun County, Georgia; and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions hereof shall be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 9. - Revenue bond validation. 
The petition for validation of all bonds of the Authority shall be brought against the Authority and any contracting party whose obligation is pledged as security for the payment of the bonds sought to be validated, as defendants, and the defendants shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof shall not be adjudicated to be in all respects valid and binding upon such contracting parties. It shall be incumbent upon such defendants to defend against adjudication of the validity and binding effect of such contract or contracts or be forever bound thereby. Notice of such proceedings shall be included in the notice of the validation hearing required to be issued and published by the Clerk of the Superior Court of Rabun County in which court such validation proceedings shall be initiated. 
Sec. 10. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of the Authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished, impaired, or affected in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds; and no other entity, department, agency, or authority shall be created which will compete with the Authority so as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds nor will the state itself so compete with the Authority. The provisions hereof shall be for the benefit of the Authority and the holders of any such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Sec. 11. - Revenues, earnings, rents, and charges; use. 
(a)	For the purpose of earning sufficient revenue to make possible the financing of the construction of the project or projects of the Authority with revenue bonds, the Authority is authorized and empowered to fix, revise, and collect rents, fees, and charges on each project which it shall cause to be acquired or constructed. Such rentals, fees, or charges to be paid for the use of such project or projects shall be so fixed and adjusted as to provide a fund sufficient with other revenue, if any, of such project or projects or of the Authority: 
(1)	To pay the cost of operating, maintaining, and repairing the project or projects, including reserves for insurance and extraordinary repairs and other reserves required by the resolution or trust agreement or indenture pertaining to such bonds and the issuance thereof, unless such cost shall be otherwise provided for; 
(2)	To pay the principal of and interest on such revenue bonds as the same shall become due, including call premium, if any, the proceeds of which shall have been or will be used to pay the cost of such project or projects; 
(3)	To comply with any sinking fund requirements contained in the resolution or trust agreement or indenture pertaining to the issuance of and security for such bonds; 
(4)	To perform fully all provisions of such resolution and trust agreement or indenture relating to the issuance of or security for such bonds to the payment of which such rental is pledged; 
(5)	To accumulate any excess income which may be required by the purchasers of such bonds or may be dictated by the requirements of such resolution or trust agreement or indenture or of achieving ready marketability of and low interest rates on such bonds; 
(6)	To pay any expenses in connection with such bond issue or of such project or projects including but not limited to trustees', attorneys', and fiscal agents' fees. 
(b)	Such rental shall be payable at such intervals as may be agreed upon and set forth in the rental contract or lease providing therefor and any such contract or lease may provide for the commencement of rental payments to the Authority prior to the completion of the undertaking by the Authority of any such project and may provide for the payment of rental during such times as such project or projects may be partially or wholly untenantable. 
(c)	Such rental contract or lease may obligate the tenants or lessees to operate, maintain and keep in good repair, including complete reconstruction, if necessary, the rented or leased premises and projects, regardless of the cause of the necessity of such maintenance, repair, or reconstruction. 
(d)	Such rental contract or lease may obligate the tenants or lessees to indemnify and save harmless the Authority from any and all damage to persons and property occurring on or by reason of the leased property or improvements thereon and to undertake, at the expense of the tenants or lessees, the defense of any action brought against the Authority by reason of injury or damages to persons or property occurring on or by reason of the leased premises. 
(e)	In the event of any failure or refusal on the part of the tenants or lessees to perform punctually any covenant or obligation contained in any such rental contract or lease, the Authority may enforce performance by any legal or equitable process against the tenants or lessees. 
(f)	The Authority shall be permitted to assign any rental payable to it, pursuant to such rental contract or lease, to a trustee or paying agent as may be required by the terms of the resolution or trust agreement or indenture relating to the issuance of and security for such bonds. 
(g)	The use and disposition of the Authority's revenue shall be subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or of the trust agreement or indenture, if any, securing the same. 
Sec. 12. - Sinking fund. 
The revenue, rents, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects and any and all revenue, rents, and earnings received by the Authority, regardless of whether such revenue, rents, and earnings were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged, may be pledged by the Authority to payment of the principal of and interest on revenue bonds of the Authority as may be provided in any resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or in any trust instrument pertaining to such bonds, and such funds so pledged, from whatever source received, may include funds received from one or more or all sources and may be set aside at regular intervals into sinking funds for which provision may be made in any such resolution or trust instrument and which may be pledged to and charged with the payment of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall become due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall mature, (3) the necessary charges of any trustee or paying agent for paying such principal and interest, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase; and the use and disposition of any sinking fund may be subject to such regulation as may be provided for in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument securing the payment of the same. 
Sec. 13. - Exemption from taxation. 
The exercise of the powers conferred upon the Authority hereunder shall constitute an essential governmental function for a public purpose and the Authority shall be required to pay no taxes or assessments upon any of the property acquired by it or under its jurisdiction, control, possession, or supervision or upon its activities in the operation and maintenance of property acquired by it or of buildings erected or acquired by it or any fees, rentals, or other charges for the use of such property or buildings or other income received by the Authority. The tax exemption herein provided shall not include an exemption from sales and use tax on property purchased by or for the use of the Authority. 
Sec. 14. - Immunity from tort actions. 
The Authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the State of Georgia, and the officers, agents, and employees of the Authority, when in performance of work of the Authority, shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as officers, agents, and employees of the State of Georgia. The Authority may be sued the same as private corporations on any contractual obligation of the Authority. 
Sec. 15. - Property not subject to levy and sale. 
The property of the Authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process. 
Sec. 16. - Trust funds. 
All funds received pursuant to authority hereof, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds or as revenue, rents, fees, charges, or other earnings or as grants, gifts, or other contributions, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied by the Authority, solely as provided herein; and the bondholders entitled to receive the benefits of such funds shall have a lien on all such funds until the same are applied as provided for in any such resolution or trust instrument of the Authority. 
Sec. 17. - Construction. 
This Act and any other law enacted with reference to the Authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of its purposes. 
Sec. 18. - Scope of operations. 
The scope of the Authority's operation shall be limited to the territory embraced within the corporate limits of Rabun County as the same now or may hereafter exist. 
Sec. 19. - Conveyance of property upon dissolution. 
Should the Authority for any reason be dissolved after full payment of all bonded indebtedness incurred hereunder, both as to principal and interest, title to all property of any kind and nature, real and personal, held by the Authority at the time of such dissolution shall be conveyed to Rabun County; or title to any such property may be conveyed prior to such dissolution in accordance with provisions which may be made therefor in any resolution or trust instrument relating to such property, subject to any liens, leases, or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at the time of such conveyance. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 269), p. 3878, establishing a county convention and visitors bureau authority. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Rabun County Convention and Visitors Bureau Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Definitions and references. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)	"Area" means the entirety of the geographic area of Rabun County, Georgia. 
(2)	"Authority" means the Rabun County Convention and Visitors Bureau Authority. 
(3)	"Board" means the board of directors of the Rabun County Convention and Visitors Bureau Authority. 
(4)	"Cities" means the Cities of Clayton, Dillard, and Sky Valley. 
(5)	"County" means Rabun County, Georgia. 
(6)	"Special events" means events which, in the judgment of the authority, will promote tourism in the area or privately contracted functions. 
Sec. 3. - Creation of authority, status, tax exemption, and sovereign immunity. 
(a)	There is hereby created a body public and politic to be known as the Rabun County Convention and Visitors Bureau Authority. The authority shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the state and a public corporation and, by that name, may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and bring and defend actions. The authority shall be a convention center and visitors bureau authority created by Act of the General Assembly, and is intended to be an agency and instrumentality of the city and county, and a governmental unit for purposes of Sections 103, 141, and 150 of the federal Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended [ 26 USC 1 et seq.]. The authority shall not be a state institution, nor a department or agency of the state, but shall be a creation of the state, having a distinct corporate identity. For the purposes of promotion and development of tourism as provided in Code Section 48-13-51 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51], the Rabun County Convention and Visitors Bureau Authority established by this act shall serve as a permissible, but not the exclusive, entity for the transfer of hotel and motel tax funds by the taxing entities in Rabun County. 
(b)	The authority shall have its principal office within Rabun County, and its legal situs or residence for the purposes of this Act shall be the county. 
(c)	The exercise of the powers conferred upon the authority in this Act shall constitute an essential governmental function for a public purpose. The properties of the authority, both real and personal, and the income of the authority are declared to be public properties and income used for the benefit and welfare of the people of Rabun County and not for the purpose of private or corporate benefit; and such properties, to the extent of the authority's ownership thereof or other interest therein, and all income and obligations of the authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of the state or any city, county, or other political subdivision thereof. The authority shall have all of the exemptions and exclusions from taxes as are now granted to cities and counties for the operation of properties or facilities similar to the properties and facilities to be owned or operated, or both, by the authority. 
(d)	The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the state, and the officers, agents, and employees of the authority, when in performance of work of the authority, shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as officers, agents, and employees of the State of Georgia. The authority may be sued the same as private corporations on any contractual obligation of the authority. Any action to protect or to enforce any rights pursuant to the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against the authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Rabun County, which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. The property of the authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process. The records of the authority shall be public records which are subject to Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.]. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to abridge or change the powers and duties of other authorities, departments, boards, and like agencies of the city or county. 
Sec. 4. - Directors and meetings. 
(a)	The property and business of the authority and the direction of its work shall be vested in and managed under the direction of its board of directors. The board shall have full control for setting policies, day-to-day operations, and approving annual budgets, as specified in Section 8 of this Act, subject only to the limitation specified herein. 
(b)	The board shall consist of 22 directors, who shall be natural persons at least 21 years of age and who shall be residents of the county. The city councils of the Cities of Clayton, Dillard, and Sky Valley, the county board of commissioners, and the Rabun County Chamber of Commerce shall appoint one director each, who may or may not be directors of the respective council or board of commissioners, and who shall serve two-year terms. The five initial appointees shall make 17 additional appointments, subject to confirmation by the city council of each city, the county board of commissioners, and the chamber of commerce. In order to achieve staggered terms, nine of such 17 appointments shall be designated as being for one year and eight shall be designated for two years. Thereafter, all directors shall serve for terms of two years. The terms of directors shall expire on the last day of January of the year of expiration and appointments for the succeeding two-year term shall be made in January with such appointments being effective as of the next February 1. Any director may resign at any time by filing a written notice of resignation with the chairperson of the board. Directors may be removed for cause by a majority vote of the directors of the authority. If possible, the following shall be represented on the board: 
(1)	Rabun county resort properties; 
(2)	The Dillard hotel and motel industry; 
(3)	The Clayton hotel and motel industry; 
(4)	The Rabun County bed and breakfast industry; 
(5)	Clayton merchants; 
(6)	Dillard merchants; 
(7)	State or federal government, such as the U.S. Forest Service and state parks; 
(8)	The outdoor recreation industry; 
(9)	The agricultural tourism industry; 
(10)	Environmental or conservation groups; 
(11)	Rabun County restaurants including at least one major restaurant; 
(12)	Georgia Power Company or other Rabun County utilities; 
(13)	Rabun County banking industry; 
(14)	Rabun County realtors; 
(15)	Rabun County property rental companies; and 
(16)	Major resorts in the county. 
(c)	The board shall meet at such times as may be necessary to transact the business coming before it, but not less often than monthly. Either the chairperson or any two other directors together may call a special meeting of the board. Meetings of the board shall be open to the public in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia. Written minutes of all meetings shall be kept, and within ten days following every meeting, a copy of the minutes shall be furnished to the mayor and council of each city and to the county board of commissioners. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the latest version of Robert's Rules of Order. 
(d)	At the first meeting of the board, and thereafter subsequent to the biennial new appointments, the directors shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from its voting directorship. The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the board and shall vote on all matters coming before the board except when an even number of directors are present and creates the possibility of a tie vote. In such instance, the chairperson shall not vote except to break a tie vote. The vice chairperson shall preside at meetings in the absence of the chairperson. In the absence of both the chairperson and vice chairperson, the directors present at a meeting shall elect a temporary chairperson to preside at that meeting, so long as the chairperson and vice chairperson both remain absent from the meeting. A quorum shall consist of at least 50 percent of the whole number of directors then in office for the transaction of business at all meetings. Official action may be taken by majority vote of those directors voting on a matter if a quorum is present and voting on such matter, except that the bylaws of the authority shall be initially adopted or subsequently amended only by majority vote of all directors. All directors present at a meeting, including the chairperson, vice chairperson, or any other director presiding at such meeting, shall be entitled to vote on all matters which shall come before the board. No vacancy on the board shall impair the right of a quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the authority. 
(e)	Directors shall receive no compensation for their services as directors of the authority but may be reimbursed for their proper and reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties, subject to any limitations imposed by general law upon the reimbursement of public officials and subject to any limitations which may be contained, from time to time, in the bylaws of the authority. 
(f)	(1)	As used in this subsection, the term "substantial interest or involvement" means any interest or involvement which reasonably may be expected to result in a direct financial benefit to a director, as determined by the authority directors by vote, which determination shall be final and not subject to review. 
(2)	The provisions of Code Section 45-10-3 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3] shall apply to the directors of the authority, and a director of the authority shall not engage in any transaction with the authority. The provisions of this paragraph and the provisions of paragraph (9)of such Code section shall be deemed to have been complied with and the authority may purchase from, sell to, borrow from, loan to, contract with, or otherwise deal with any director or any organization or person with which any director of the authority is in any way interested or involved, provided that: 
a.	Any interest or involvement by such director is disclosed in advance to the directors of the authority who will be voting on the matter or transaction and such disclosure is recorded in the minutes of the board; 
b.	No director having such a substantial interest or involvement may be present at that portion of any meeting of the authority during which discussion of such matter or transaction is conducted; and 
c.	No director having a substantial interest or involvement may participate in any decision of the authority directors relating to any such matter or transaction. A director who has any such substantial interest or involvement shall be entitled to participate in discussions of whether such interest or involvement is a substantial interest or involvement but shall not be entitled to vote on the question. 
(3)	Nothing contained in this subsection or in Code Section 45-10-3 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3] shall be deemed to prohibit any director from providing legal services to the authority, being paid for such services and related expenses, or participating in discussions relating to his or her engagement, scope of services, compensation, or related matters or from voting on such matters. 
Sec. 5. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the authority is to promote tourism, conventions, special events, and trade shows within the area in such manner and manners as the authority shall determine to be appropriate. 
Sec. 6. - Duty of the authority. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to promote tourism, conventions, special events, and trade shows within the area and to operate the authority and its facilities in a fiscally responsible manner. 
Sec. 7. - Powers. 
(a)	The authority shall have all powers allowed by law and consistent with the provisions of this Act as are necessary or convenient to carry out its corporate purpose, including, without limitation, the power to: 
(1)	Adopt and alter a corporate seal; 
(2)	Purchase advertising promoting tourism, conventions, trade shows, and special events; 
(3)	Encourage, solicit, promote, procure, sponsor, cosponsor, and service conventions, trade shows, and special events; 
(4)	Lend financial support through grants, contributions, or otherwise to other governmental entities in furtherance of its corporate purpose; 
(5)	Lend financial support through grants, contributions, or otherwise to private sector for profit and not for profit entities in furtherance of its corporate purpose, specifically provided that the authority determines that the residents of the area shall receive a substantial benefit and provided that it does so by written agreement; 
(6)	Conduct activities to foster better public understanding on the part of individuals and businesses of the importance of tourism and the convention and visitors industry to the economy of the cities, of the county, and of the area; 
(7)	Conduct activities to encourage and to assist the cooperation between the businesses and industries servicing tourists, conventions, trade shows, and special events; 
(8)	Engage in fundraising activities in furtherance of its corporate purpose; 
(9)	Acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(10)	Dispose of personal property in its discretion; to dispose of real property; or to acquire in its own name by purchase, upon terms and conditions and in a manner it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purpose, to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, or to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of the same. If the authority deems it expedient to acquire and construct any facility on any lands, the title to which shall then be held by the city, the county, or any other municipality incorporated in said county, the governing authority or body of the city, the county, or any of the said municipalities is authorized to convey title to such lands to the authority upon the receipt of such lawful consideration as may be determined by the parties for such conveyance or upon payment for the credit of the general finds of said county or municipalities of the reasonable value of such lands, such value to be determined by mutual consent of said county or municipality and the chairperson of the authority; 
(11)	Appoint, select, and employ an executive director, officers, agents, and employees, and independent consultants including but not limited to engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, auditors, economists, and attorneys and fix their respective compensations; and to delegate to the executive director the authority and responsibility necessary to administer properly the day-to-day business of the authority within policies set by the board and subject to its review. The powers delegated to the executive director may, at the election of the board, include the making of recommendations as to the hiring and termination of other employees and their compensation, the management of the authority's offices and properties, the making of budget recommendations, and the hiring of independent consultants. The board shall ensure that the executive director and any other employees of the authority shall be evaluated on their performance no less than on an annual basis; 
(12)	Appoint an advisory committee and other committees of persons from the public and private sectors without regard to their places of residence; 
(13)	Make contracts of every kind and character, and, without limitation, any and all persons, firms, and corporations and the state and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state, including, but not limited to, the county and the cities, are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and, without limiting the generality of the above, the authority shall be permitted to enter into the following: 
a.	Contracts under which the authority purchases administrative and financial management services from the city or county to be performed by personnel at the city's or county's cost, which shall include the costs of payroll, employee benefits, supplies, and overhead reasonably allocable to the performance of such services; and 
b.	Lease contracts relating to leases of real property, personal property, or both real and personal property; 
(14)	Accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(15)	Accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political division thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may impose; 
(16)	Sell, lease, grant, exchange, or otherwise dispose of any personal property or interest therein; 
(17)	Sue and be sued in contract and in tort and to complain and defend in all courts; 
(18)	Advise and recommend plans to other public and private sector entities for the promotion of tourism, conventions, trade shows, and special events; 
(19)	Conduct studies and develop plans for improving tourism in the area; 
(20)	Receive and disburse public funds appropriated by the city and county and to receive and disburse funds from private sources and other revenues which may be received from time to time which would assist in the accomplishment of its corporate purpose; and 
(21)	Do all things necessary or convenient to accomplish its corporate purpose and to exercise any power permitted by the laws of this state to be exercised by private corporations which will further the authority's ability to accomplish such purpose, so long as the exercise of such power is not in conflict with the Constitution or laws of this state. 
(b)	The powers enumerated in each paragraph of subsection (a) of this section are cumulative of and in addition to those powers enumerated in the other paragraphs of subsection (a) of this section and any other powers elsewhere in this Act or which may reasonably be inferred from the provisions of this Act. This Act shall be liberally construed to affect the described purposes, and in interpreting this Act, the courts are not to apply "Dillon's Rule." 
Editor's note— "Dillon's Rule" is a judicial doctrine named for a 19 th century Iowa Supreme Court justice that refers to a strict interpretation of state laws allowing local governments to possess only such powers as are specifically deleted to them by state law, as opposed to the doctrine of "home rule". 
Sec. 8. - Budget and finances. 
(a)	A budget committee consisting of the directors appointed by the governing authority of the county and by the chamber of commerce shall prepare the initial budget for the authority. Such budget shall be approved by unanimous vote of the committee, after which it shall be submitted to the full board of directors for approval by majority vote. Such initial budget shall not become effective until it has been approved by the governing authorities of the county and each city. The same process shall govern the second budget year, after which the procedures provided in subsection (b) of this section shall apply; provided, however, that if the second year budget fails to receive the required approval of the budget committee, the board of directors, or a governing authority, the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall take effect immediately. 
(b)	On or before April 30 of each year, the authority shall receive its verified audit for the prior year. Prior to October 1 of each year, the chairperson of the board shall appoint one director of the authority to confer jointly with the administrators or mayor of each city that collects hotel motel taxes and with the county administrator and to act as liaison with regard to a proposed budget for the authority for the ensuing year. Such persons shall annually be known as the Budget Committee. The Budget Committee shall produce a proposed budget for approval by the board and submission, by October 1 of each year, to the mayors and councils of the cities that collect hotel motel taxes and to the county board of commissioners. If the Budget Committee does not unanimously present a proposed budget to the board for approval and submission, then the board shall submit a continuation budget not greater than the total approved budget for the current year. The continuation budget shall include any upward or downward adjustment necessary to meet all debt service requirements. If either the cities or county, or both, shall fail or refuse to approve the budget as submitted by the board by December 31, then the continuation budget, as set forth above, shall become automatically effective in order to ensure operational continuity of the authority. Commencing Fiscal Year 2005, the cities and county shall each be required to provide funding to the authority as provided in paragraph (5.3) of Code Section 48-13-51 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51]. The continuation budget as set forth above shall remain in effect until the next budget cycle. In the event of a failure to reach budget agreement at that time or in subsequent years, then a percentage increase shall automatically apply to all line items of the budget equivalent to the percentage increase for the relevant time period as determined by the Blue Book CPI index for all consumer goods. 
Sec. 9. - Bylaws. 
The authority may, by affirmative vote of a majority of all directors, adopt bylaws to govern the authority, its employees, and operation and may, by affirmative vote of two-thirds of the directors, repeal, replace, or amend such bylaws. 
Sec. 10. - Liability limited. 
Neither the directors of the authority nor any person executing notes, leases, or other agreements or obligations on behalf of the authority shall be personally liable thereon by reason of such execution. 
Sec. 11. - Neither cities nor county bound. 
The authority shall have no power or authority to bind the cities or the county by any contract, agreement, financial obligation, indebtedness, or otherwise; and no contract, agreement, financial obligation, or indebtedness incurred by the authority shall ever be a claim or charge against the cities or county; provided, however, that both the authority and the cities or county shall be bound to each other by contracts, agreements, financial obligations, or indebtedness between themselves. 
Sec. 12. - Oversight. 
Either the mayor and council of any of the cities or the county board of commissioners, or the designees of either, shall be authorized to inspect at their pleasure the state and condition of the authority, its properties, and all books and records pertaining to the authority and its affairs, and the authority shall give them such books and records and furnish them with assistance in making such inspections. 
Sec. 13. - Dissolution. 
Should the authority, for any reason, be dissolved after full payment of all indebtedness previously incurred, both as to principal and interest, title to all property of any kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall be conveyed to the cities and to the county as tenants in common as may be appropriate; or title to any such property may be conveyed prior to such dissolution in accordance with provisions which may be made therefor in any resolution or trust instrument relating to such property, subject to any liens, leases, or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to such property at the time of such conveyance. 
ARTICLE V. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 657), p. 4912, establishing a county economic authority. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act may be referred to as the "Rabun County Economic Development Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Legislative purpose. 
The purpose of this Act is to provide for the economic development of Rabun County, to develop and promote for the public good and general welfare infrastructure, trade, commerce, business, industry, research, training support services, eleemosynary institutions, and employment opportunities and promote the general welfare of this state by creating a climate favorable to the location of new industry, trade, business, commerce, research, training support services, and eleemosynary institutions and the development of existing industry, trade, business, commerce, research, training support services, and eleemosynary institutions within Rabun County. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)	"Authority" means the Rabun County Economic Development Authority. 
(2)	"Cost of the project" or "cost of any project" means and includes: 
a.	All costs of acquisition (by purchase or otherwise), construction, assembly, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation incurred in connection with any project or any part of any project; 
b.	All costs of real property, fixtures, or personal property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project or for any facilities related thereto, including, but not limited to, the cost of all land, estates for years, easements, rights, improvements, water rights, connections for utility services, fees, franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, and certificates; the cost of securing any such franchises, permits, approvals, licenses, or certificates; and the cost of preparation of any application therefor and the cost of all fixtures, machinery, equipment, furniture, and other property used in or in connection with or necessary for any project; 
c.	All interest and other financing charges and loan fees and all interest on revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority which accrue or are paid prior to and during the period of construction of a project and during such additional period as the authority may reasonably determine to be necessary to place such project in operation; 
d.	All costs of engineering, surveying, and architectural and legal services and all expenses incurred by engineers, surveyors, architects, and attorneys in connection with any project; 
e.	All expenses for inspection for any project; 
f.	All fees of fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees for bondholders under any trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement; all expenses incurred by any such fiscal agents, paying agents, and trustees; and all other costs and expenses incurred relative to the issuance of any revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations for any project; 
g.	All fees of any type charged by the authority in connection with any project; 
h.	All expenses of or incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of any project; 
i.	All costs of plans and specifications for any project; 
j.	All costs of title insurance and examinations of title with respect to any project; 
k.	Repayment of any loans made for the advance payment of any part of the foregoing costs, including interest thereon and any other expenses of such loans; 
l.	Administrative expenses of the authority and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any project or the financing thereof or the placing of any project in operation; and 
m.	The establishment of a fund or funds for the creation of a debt service reserve, a renewal and replacement reserve, or such other funds or reserves as the authority may approve with respect to the financing and operation of any project and as may be authorized by any bond resolution, trust agreement, indenture of trust, or similar instrument or agreement pursuant to the provisions of which the issuance of any revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority may be authorized. Any cost, obligation, or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of proceeds of revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by the authority. 
(3)	"Project" means the acquisition, construction, installation, modification, renovation, or rehabilitation of land, interests in land, buildings, structures, facilities, or other improvements located or to be located within Rabun County, and the acquisition, installation, modification, renovation, rehabilitation, or furnishing of fixtures, machinery, equipment, furniture, or other property of any nature whatsoever used on, in, or in connection with any such land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, or other improvement, all for the essential public purpose of the development of trade, commerce, industry, and employment opportunities in Rabun County. A project may be for any industrial, commercial, business, office, parking, distribution, retail, eleemosynary, research, training, testing, service, agribusiness, communications, professional, transportation, or other similar use, or a public infrastructure use directly supporting the development of trade, commerce, and industry, provided that a majority of the members of the authority determine, by a duly adopted resolution, that the project and such use thereof would further the public purpose of this Act. 
(4)	"Revenue bonds" or "bonds" means any bonds of the authority which are authorized to be issued under the Constitution and laws of Georgia, including refunding bonds but not including notes or other obligations of the authority. 
Sec. 4. - Creation of authority. 
(a)	There is created the Rabun County Economic Development Authority which shall be a body corporate and politic and is declared to be a public corporation created for the economic development of Rabun County and for the improvement of the general welfare of the people of Rabun County and the State of Georgia. The authority shall have a board of directors which shall consist of the members of the Development Authority of Rabun County, created pursuant to the authority of the "Development Authorities Law," Chapter 62 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.], and activated pursuant to an activating resolution of the Board of Commissioners of Rabun County on April 27, 1971, and the chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Rabun County. The directors shall elect one of their members as chairman and another as vice chairman and shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer, either of whom may but need not be a director. The authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(b)	(1)	The provisions of Code Section 45-10-3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3] shall apply to all directors of the authority, and a director of the authority shall not engage in any transaction with the authority. 
(2)	The provisions of paragraph (9) of Code Section 45-10-3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3] and paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be deemed to have been complied with and the authority may purchase from, sell to, borrow from, loan to, contract with, or otherwise deal with any director or any organization or person with which any director of the authority is in any way interested or involved, provided (A) that any interest or involvement by such director is disclosed in advance to the directors of the authority and is recorded in the minutes of the authority, (B) that no director having a substantial interest or involvement may be present at that portion of any authority meeting during which discussion of any matter is conducted involving any such organization or person, and (C) that no director having a substantial interest or involvement may participate in any decision of the authority relating to any matter involving such organization or person. As used in this paragraph, the term "substantial interest or involvement" means any interest or involvement which reasonably may be expected to result in a direct financial benefit to such director as determined by the authority, which determination shall be final and not subject to review. 
Sec. 5. - Powers of authority generally. 
(a)	The authority shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Act, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(1)	To bring and defend actions; 
(2)	To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(3)	To make and execute contracts, agreements, and other instruments necessary or convenient to exercise the powers of the authority or to further the public purpose for which the authority is created, including, but not limited to, contracts for construction of projects, leases of projects, contracts for sale of projects, agreements for loans to finance projects, and contracts with respect to the use of projects; 
(4)	To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character, or any interest therein, in furtherance of the public purpose of the authority; 
(5)	To finance (by loan, grant, lease, or otherwise), construct, erect, assemble, purchase, acquire, own, repair, remodel, renovate, rehabilitate, modify, maintain, extend, improve, install, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate, or manage projects and to pay the cost of any project from the proceeds of revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority or any other funds of the authority, or from any contributions or loans by persons, corporations, partnerships (whether limited or general), or other entities, all of which the authority is authorized to receive, accept, and use; 
(6)	To borrow money to further or carry out its public purpose and to execute revenue bonds, notes, other obligations, leases, trust indentures, trust agreements, agreements for the sale of its revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations, loan agreements, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds, security agreements, assignments, and such other agreements or instruments as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the authority, to evidence and to provide security for such borrowing; 
(7)	To issue revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority and use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying, or loaning the proceeds thereof to pay, all or any part of the cost of any project and otherwise to further or carry out the public purpose of the authority and to pay all costs of the authority incidental to, or necessary and appropriate to, furthering or carrying out such purpose; 
(8)	To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, whether public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in furtherance of the authority's public purpose and to accept and use the same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by such federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
(9)	To enter into agreements with the federal government or any agency thereof to use the facilities or services of the federal government or any agency thereof in order to further or carry out the public purposes of the authority; 
(10)	To contract for any period, not exceeding 50 years, with the State of Georgia, state institutions, or any municipal corporation or county or authority or other political subdivision of this state for the use by the authority of any facilities or services of the state or any such state institution, municipal corporation, or county or authority or for the use by any state institution or any municipal corporation or county or authority of any facilities or services of the authority, provided that such contracts shall deal with such activities and transactions as the authority and any such political subdivision with which the authority contracts are authorized by law to undertake; 
(11)	To extend credit or make loans to any person, corporation, partnership (whether limited or general), or other entity for the costs of any project or any part of the costs of any project, which credit or loans may be evidenced or secured by loan agreements, notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds, security agreements, assignments, or such other instruments, or by rentals, revenues, fees, or charges, upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall determine to be reasonable in connection with such extension of credit or loans, including provision for the establishment and maintenance of reserve funds; and, in the exercise of powers granted by this Act in connection with any project, the authority shall have the right and power to require the inclusion in any such loan agreement, note, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, assignment, or other instrument of such provisions or requirements for guaranty of any obligations, insurance, construction, use, operation, maintenance, and financing of a project, and such other terms and conditions, as the authority may deem necessary or desirable; 
(12)	Whenever revenue bonds of the authority have been validated as provided in this Act, to issue, from time to time, its notes in anticipation of the issuance of such bonds as validated and to renew, from time to time, any such notes by the issuance of new notes, whether the notes to be renewed have or have not matured. The notes may be authorized, sold, executed, and delivered in the same manner as bonds. As with its bonds, the authority may sell such notes at public or private sale. Any resolution or resolutions authorizing notes of the authority or any issue thereof may contain any provisions which the authority is authorized to include in any resolution or resolutions authorizing bonds of the authority or any issue thereof; and the authority may include in any notes any terms, covenants, or conditions which it is authorized to include in any bonds. Validation of such bonds shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of the notes, but it shall not be required that such notes be judicially validated. Bond anticipation notes shall not be issued in an amount exceeding the par value of the bonds in anticipation of which they are to be issued; 
(13)	As security for repayment of any revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority, to pledge, mortgage, convey, assign, hypothecate, or otherwise encumber any property of the authority (including, but not limited to, real property, fixtures, personal property, contracts, rights, and revenues or other funds) and to execute any lease, trust indenture, trust agreement, agreement for the sale of the authority's revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations, loan agreement, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, assignment, or other agreement or instrument as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the authority, to secure any such revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations, which instruments or agreements may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default in any obligation of the authority, either in payment of principal, premium, if any, or interest or in the performance of any term or condition contained in any such agreement or instrument. The State of Georgia, on behalf of itself and each county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district therein, waives any right it or such county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district may have to prevent the forced sale or foreclosure of any property of the authority upon such default and agrees that any agreement or instrument encumbering such property may be foreclosed in accordance with law and the terms thereof; 
(14)	To receive and use the proceeds of any tax levied by Rabun County or any municipal corporation within Rabun County to pay the costs of any project or for any other purpose for which the authority may use its own funds pursuant to this Act; 
(15)	To make, receive, and administer gifts, gratuities, grants, and devises of money and property of any kind and to administer trusts; 
(16)	To use and operate any real property, personal property, or fixtures or any interest therein and to carry on any commercial activity in connection therewith or to rent or lease such property to or from others or make contracts with respect to the use and operation thereof, or to sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or grant options for any such property in any manner as it deems to the best advantage of the authority and the public purpose thereof; 
(17)	To acquire, accept, or retain equitable interests, security interests, or other interests in any real property, personal property, or fixtures by loan agreement, note, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, assignment, pledge, conveyance, contract, lien, or other consensual transfer in order to secure the repayment of any moneys loaned or credit extended by the authority; 
(18)	To appoint, select, and employ engineers, surveyors, consultants, fiscal advisors, architects, planners, fiscal agents, attorneys, and others and to fix their compensation and pay their expenses; 
(19)	To encourage and promote the economic development of Rabun County and to make, contract for, or otherwise cause to be made long-range plans or proposals for the economic development of Raybun County; 
(20)	To make and receive grants and incentives of money, property, or services designed to promote the growth of employment and the tax receipts in Rabun County; 
(21)	To invest its funds, from whatever source derived, in such manner as it may deem appropriate, without further restriction, including without limitation equity investments in corporations or other legal entities including, without limitation, common stock, preferred stock, convertible debentures, stock options, and warrants; 
(22)	To adopt bylaws governing the conduct of business by the authority, the election and duties of officers of the authority, and other matters which the authority determines to deal with in its bylaws; 
(23)	To exercise any power granted by the laws of this state to public or private corporations which is not in conflict with the public purpose of the authority; and 
(24)	To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers conferred by this Act. 
(b)	The powers enumerated in each paragraph of subsection (a) of this section are cumulative of and in addition to those powers enumerated in the other paragraphs of subsection (a) of this section and elsewhere in this Act; and no such power limits or restricts any other power of the authority. 
Sec. 6. - Revenue bonds. 
(a)	Revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by the authority shall be paid solely from the property (including, but not limited to, real property, fixtures, personal property, revenues, or other funds) pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated, or otherwise encumbered to secure or to pay such bonds, notes, or other obligations. 
(b)	All revenue bonds, notes, and other obligations shall be authorized by resolution of the authority, adopted by a majority vote of the directors of the authority present at a regular or special meeting. 
(c)	Revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bear such date or dates, shall mature at such time or times (not more than 40 years from their respective dates), shall bear interest at such rate or rates (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time), shall be subject to redemption on such terms, and shall contain such other terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions as the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds, notes, or other obligations may permit or provide. The terms, provisions, covenants, assignments, and conditions contained in or provided or permitted by any resolution of the authority authorizing the issuance of such revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations shall bind the directors of the authority then in office and their successors. 
(d)	The authority shall have power from time to time and whenever it deems it expedient to refund any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether or not the bonds to be refunded have matured, and may issue bonds partly to refund bonds then outstanding and partly for any other purpose permitted under this Act. The refunding bonds may be exchanged for the bonds to be refunded, with such cash adjustments as may be agreed upon, or may be sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase or redemption of the bonds to be refunded. 
(e)	There shall be no limitation upon the amount of revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations which the authority may issue. Any limitations with respect to interest rates or any maximum interest rate or rates found in Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the "Revenue Bond Law," [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.] the usury laws of this state, or any other laws of this state shall not apply to revenue bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority. 
(f)	Bonds and other obligations of the authority shall be validated under and in accordance with Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the "Revenue Bond Law" [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.]. 
(g)	Bonds issued by the authority may be in such form, either coupon or fully registered, or both coupon and fully registered, and may be subject to such exchangeability and transferability provisions, as the bond resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or any indenture or trust agreement may provide. 
(h)	Bonds of the authority shall bear a certificate of validation. The signature of the clerk of the Superior Court of Rabun County may be made on the certificate of validation of such bonds by facsimile or by manual execution, stating the date on which such bonds were validated; and such entry shall be original evidence of the fact of judgment and shall be received as original evidence in any court in this state. 
(i)	With respect to the validation of bonds, in lieu of specifying the rate or rates of interest which bonds to be issued by the authority are to bear, the notice to the district attorney or the Attorney General, the notice to the public of the time, place, and date of the validation hearing, and the petition and complaint for validation may state that the bonds when issued will bear interest at a rate not exceeding a maximum per annum rate of interest (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time) specified in such notices and petition and complaint or may state that, in the event the bonds are to bear different rates of interest for different maturity dates, none of such rates will exceed the maximum rate (which may be fixed or may fluctuate or otherwise change from time to time) so specified; provided, however, that nothing in this Act shall be construed as prohibiting or restricting the right of the authority to sell such bonds at a discount, even if in doing so the effective interest cost resulting therefrom would exceed the maximum per annum interest rate specified in such notices and in the petition and complaint. 
(j)	The terms "cost of the project" and "cost of any project" shall have the meaning prescribed in this Act whenever those terms are referred to in bond resolutions of the authority, in bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority, or in notices or proceedings to validate such bonds, notes, or other obligations of the authority. 
Sec. 7. - Authorized contents of agreements and instruments of authority generally; use of proceeds; subsequent issues. 
(a)	Subject to the limitations and procedures provided by this Act, the agreements or instruments executed by the authority may contain such provisions not inconsistent with law as shall be determined by the board of directors of the authority. 
(b)	The proceeds derived from the sale of all bonds, notes, and other obligations issued by the authority shall be held and used for the ultimate purpose of paying, directly or indirectly, as permitted by this Act, all or part of the cost of any project, or for the purpose of refunding any bonds, notes, or other obligations issued in accordance with this Act. 
(c)	Issuance by the authority of one or more series of bonds, notes, or other obligations for one or more purposes shall not preclude it from issuing other bonds, notes, or other obligations in connection with the same project or with any other projects; but the proceeding wherein any subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations are issued shall recognize and protect any prior loan agreement, mortgage, deed to secure debt, trust deed, security agreement, or other agreement or instrument made for any prior issue of bonds, notes, or other obligations, unless in the resolution authorizing such prior issue the right is expressly reserved to the authority to issue subsequent bonds, notes, or other obligations on a parity with such prior issue. 
Sec. 8. - Obligations of authority not public debt of state or political subdivision thereof. 
No bonds, notes, or other obligations of, and no indebtedness incurred by, the authority shall constitute an indebtedness or obligation of the State of Georgia or any county, municipal corporation, or political subdivision thereof, nor shall any act of the authority in any manner constitute or result in the creation of an indebtedness of this state or any county, municipal corporation, or political subdivision thereof. No holder or holders of any such bonds, notes, or other obligations shall ever have the right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of the state or county, municipal corporation, or political subdivision thereof, nor to enforce the payment thereof against the state or any such county, municipal corporation, or political subdivision. 
Sec. 9. - Constitutional authority for enactment of act; tax exemption. 
This Act is enacted pursuant to authority granted the General Assembly by the Constitution of Georgia. The authority is created for nonprofit and public purposes; and it is found, determined, and declared that the creation of the authority and the carrying out of its corporate purposes is in all respects for the benefit of the people of this state and that the authority is an institution of purely public charity and will be performing an essential governmental function in the exercise of the power conferred upon it by this Act; and for such reasons the state covenants with the holders from time to time of the bonds, notes, and other obligations issued under this Act that the authority shall not be required to pay any taxes of any kind or assessments imposed by this state or any counties, municipal corporations, political subdivisions, or taxing districts thereof upon any property acquired by the authority or under its jurisdiction, control, possession, or supervision or leased by it or others or upon its activities in the purchase, use, sale, disposition, operation, or maintenance of any such property or on any income derived by the authority in the form of fees, recording fees, rentals, charges, purchase price, installments, or otherwise; provided, however, that the leasehold interests of private parties leasing property from the authority shall be subject to the taxes or assessments imposed by this state or any counties, municipal corporations, political subdivisions, or taxing districts, unless they are specifically exempted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the directors of the authority and the affirmative vote of the Board of Commissioners of Rabun County. The bonds, notes, and other obligations of the authority, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall at all times be exempt from taxation within this state. Deeds to secure debt and similar instruments given and recorded to support or to secure the bonds, notes, or obligations of the authority or to support or to secure obligations pledged in support of the bonds, notes, or obligations of the authority shall be exempt from all intangibles, intangibles recording, and other taxation within this state. 
Sec. 10. - Construction of Act; applicability of the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973" [O.C.G.A. § 10-5-1 et seq.]. 
This Act shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. The offer, sale, or issuance of bonds, notes, or other obligations by the authority shall not be subject to regulation under Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the "Georgia Securities Act of 1973" [O.C.G.A. § 10-5-1 et seq.]. 
ARTICLE VI. - JOINT WATER AND SEWER AUTHORITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1170), p. 6403, establishing a joint county-city water and sewer authority. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Clayton-Rabun County Water and Sewer Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Clayton-Rabun County Water and Sewer Authority. 
(a)	There is created a public body corporation to be called the Clayton-Rabun County Water and Sewer Authority and by such name, style, and title, such body may contract and be contracted with, bring and defend actions, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority or the trustee acting under any trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of its officers, agents, or employees. 
(b)	The authority shall consist of six members, three of whom shall be appointed by the governing authority of the City of Clayton, Georgia, and three of whom shall be appointed by the governing authority of Rabun County. All authority members shall reside in Rabun County. All appointees of the governing authority of the City of Clayton shall reside within the City of Clayton, unless the Mayor and all City Council members approve a Rabun County resident who does not live within the City of Clayton. All appointees of the governing authority of Rabun County shall reside in Rabun County. With respect to the initial appointments by the governing authority of the city, one member shall be appointed for a term of three years, one member shall be appointed for a term of two years, and one member shall be appointed for a term of one year. With respect to the initial appointments by the governing authority of the county, one member shall be appointed for a term of three years, one member shall be appointed for a term of two years, and one member shall be appointed for a term of one year. Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for terms of three years and until successors are appointed and qualified. If a member misses three consecutive meetings unexcused, said member may be removed by the governing authority which appointed him or her. 
(c)	Immediately after the passage of this Act and the appointment of the members by the governing authorities of the City of Clayton and Rabun County, the members of the authority shall enter upon their duties, and as soon as it is practicable thereafter, they shall hold an organizational meeting. Every year, the members of the authority shall elect one of their number as chairman and another as vice chairman. In odd-numbered years, the chairman shall be one of the appointees of the governing authority of the City of Clayton and the vice chairman shall be one of the appointees of the governing authority of Rabun County. In even-numbered years, the chairman shall be one of the appointees of the governing body of Rabun County and the vice chairman shall be one of the appointees of the governing body of the City of Clayton. The members shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer, or a secretary-treasurer, who need not be members of the authority. Four members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the authority of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and powers of and perform all of the duties and obligations of the authority, except for the rights and powers and duties and obligations listed in subsection (d) of this section which shall require a unanimous decision by all six authority members. The appointing governing authorities may provide by joint resolution for compensation for the services of the members of the authority in such amounts as they may deem appropriate; provided, however, that such members shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority may make rules and regulations and adopt bylaws for its own government. The authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(d)	Any decision made by the authority shall be made by unanimous vote of all six members if the issue to be decided involves one or both of the following: 
(1)	Any decision to borrow money; or 
(2)	Any decision to provide water and/or sewer service outside the boundaries of Rabun County. 
(e)	Any project proposed by the authority shall first be approved by the governing authority of the City of Clayton, if such project is to be financed in whole or in part by the authority increasing its monthly fee to produce water by any amount which would cause the City of Clayton to have to raise its own water and/or sewer rates or to otherwise secure new funding to pay the authority's increased monthly fee. 
(f)	If any project of the authority involves construction of new water or sewer pipelines after January 31, 2009, and if such project is to be paid for entirely by fees paid by the City of Clayton, then the City of Clayton shall own such project and shall have the power to determine which parties may receive service from such project. Similarly, if any project of the authority involves construction of new water or sewer pipelines after January 31, 2009, and if such project is to be paid for entirely by fees paid by Rabun County, then Rabun County shall own such project and shall have the power to determine which parties may receive service from such project. 
(2009 Ga. Laws (Act No. 331), p. 4360) 
Sec. 3. - Vacancies. 
Any vacancy in the membership of the authority shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the governing authority of the county or municipality which appointed the member who has vacated his or her membership on the authority. 
Sec. 4. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)	"Authority" means the Clayton-Rabun County Water and Sewer Authority created by Section 2 of this Act. 
(2)	"Cost of the project" means and embraces the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment; financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for one year after completion of construction, the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal, and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expense; and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this Act, the construction of the project, the placing of the same in operation, and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. The cost of any project may also include a fund or funds for the creation of a debt service reserve, a renewal and replacement reserve, and such other reserves as may be reasonably required by the authority with respect to the financing and operating of its projects and as may be authorized by any bond resolution or trust agreement or indenture pursuant to the provisions of which the issuance of any bonds may be authorized. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(3)	"Project" means and includes the acquisition and construction of systems, plants, works, instrumentalities, and properties: (A) used or useful in connection with the obtaining of a water supply and the conservation, treatment, distribution, and sale of water for public and private uses; or (B) used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment, and disposal of sewage and waste; together with all parts of any such system, plant, work, instrumentality, and property and all appurtenances thereto, including lands, easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights, franchises, approaches, dams, reservoirs, generating stations, sewage disposal plants, intercepting sewers, trunk-connecting and other sewers and water mains, filtration works, pumping stations, and equipment. 
(4)	"Revenue bonds" and "bonds" means revenue bonds authorized to be issued pursuant to this Act, and revenue bonds may be issued by the authority as authorized in this Act without any other actions or proceedings. 
(5)	"Self-liquidating" means any project which, in the sole judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom, including but not limited to any contractual payments, and all properties used, leased, and sold in connection therewith, together with any grants, will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued for the cost of such project or projects. 
Sec. 5. - Powers. 
The authority shall have the power: 
(1)	To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(2)	To acquire by purchase, lease, gift, or otherwise, and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)	To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority, the authority being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act; and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the action or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, provided no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(4)	To enter into an agreement with the City of Clayton or Rabun County or with any other political subdivision or municipal corporation of the state with respect to acquiring a source of water supply; providing sewerage service, preparing engineering data, plans, and specifications for a water and sewerage system; extending water mains; apportioning the costs of constructing, extending, and maintaining a water or sewerage system, or both; providing for the testing and inspection of facilities constructed; providing for rates to be charged for water and sewerage services furnished to users of such system; providing for the reading of meters and keeping of pertinent records; or apportioning or designating the responsibility for any functions normally maintained by a water and sewerage system at the most reasonable cost possible; 
(5)	To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(6)	To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient thereto, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and any and all persons, firms, and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state and all special districts and all municipal corporations located in Rabun County are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and without limiting the generality of this paragraph, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations, special districts, and counties and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of water and sewerage service and facilities or either of them by the authority to such municipal corporations, special districts, and counties to the authority for a term not exceeding 50 years. As to any political subdivision, department, institution, or agency of this state and all special districts and municipal corporations located in Rabun County which shall enter into an agreement under the authority granted in this paragraph or in paragraph (4) of this section, the obligation to perform and fulfill such agreement shall constitute a general obligation of such entity for which its full faith and credit shall be and is pledged; 
(7)	To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects, as defined in this Act, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from such proceeds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof; 
(8)	To make loans with, and accept grants or loans of money or materials or property of any kind from, the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(9)	To make loans with, and accept grants or loans of money, materials, or property of any kind from, the State of Georgia or any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision may impose; 
(10)	To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes, to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(11)	To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to make short-term loans and to approve, execute, and deliver appropriate evidence of any such indebtedness, provided no such power is in conflict with the Constitution or general laws of this state; 
(12)	To investigate the conditions of the City of Clayton's and Rabun County's water and sewer plant and facilities, necessary improvements for each system and the costs of same, and the costs of expanding the systems in the future; and 
(13)	To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Sec. 6. - Financing projects. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created in this Act, shall have power and is authorized at one time, or from time to time, to borrow money for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost, as defined in this Act, of any one or more projects and to provide by resolution for issuance of negotiable revenue bonds for that purpose. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided in this Act for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. The interest rate or rates to be borne by any bonds and the time of payment of such interest shall be fixed, and with respect to any interest rate which floats in response to a variable, the method of calculation shall be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of all bonds. Any bonds issued by the authority shall be exempt from all laws of the State of Georgia governing usury or prescribing or limiting interest rates to be borne by bonds or other obligations. 
(1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 758), p. 4072) 
Sec. 7. - Revenue bonds—Form; denominations; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine, and provision may be made for registration, conversion, and exchangeability privileges and for rights of redemption and may contain such other terms, covenants, assignments, and conditions as the resolution or resolutions authorizing the issuance of such bonds may provide. 
Sec. 8. - Same—Signatures; seals. 
All such bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairman or vice chairman of the authority and the attesting manual or facsimile signature of the secretary, assistant secretary, or secretary-treasurer of the authority, and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto, either manually or by facsimile. The signature of one of such officers shall be placed manually on each bond. Any coupons attached thereto shall bear the manual or facsimile signatures of the chairman or vice chairman and the secretary, assistant secretary, or secretary-treasurer of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signature of and may be manually signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the authority by those persons who at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of issuance of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bond or on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes, the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. 
Sec. 9. - Same—Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to negotiable instruments. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
Sec. 10. - Same—Sale; price. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be in the best interest of the authority. 
Sec. 11. - Same—Proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit, which, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to pay from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be used for paying the principal of and the interest on such bonds. 
Sec. 12. - Same—Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 13. - Same—Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 14. - Same—Conditions precedent to issuance; object of issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular, special, or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of the quorum as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 15. - Same—Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the State of Georgia, the City of Clayton, or Rabun County nor a pledge of the faith and credit of such state, municipality, or county, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this Act, and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate such state, municipality, or county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the provisions enumerated in this section. 
Sec. 16. - Same—Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank inside or outside the state having the powers of a trust company. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, charges, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of the project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys; may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority and shall be satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor; may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depositary of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers; and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depositary and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of private corporations. In addition, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Sec. 17. - Same—To whom proceeds of bond shall be paid. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in any trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who or any agency, bank, or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes of this Act, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Section 18. - Same—Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, charges, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, tolls, charges, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated together with any grant funds, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal of and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust indenture may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: (1) the interest on such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest; and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in any trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or of any trust indenture, surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds, and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall immediately be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
Sec. 19. - Same—Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holders of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given in this Act may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by any trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted under this Act or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 20. - Same—Refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of refunding bonds of the authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon, and to refund any revenue bonds issued by any city, county, or authority with respect to any facilities to be acquired by the authority from any such city, county, or authority. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the provisions of this Act insofar as such provisions may be applicable. 
Sec. 21. - Same—Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Rabun County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in such court, which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 22. - Same—Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure provided for in Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law," [O.C.G.A. § 82-36-60 et seq.] as now or hereafter amended. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or any other party which has contracted with the authority to furnish or receive the services and facilities of the water and sewerage system for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated, and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality or other party shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds when validated and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, against the authority issuing the same, and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, instrumentality, or other party contracting with the authority. 
Sec. 23. - Same—Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of the authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Act shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Sec. 24. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as proceeds of short-term loans, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, fees, and earnings shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 25. - Purpose of the authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this Act, the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, equipping, constructing, maintaining, and operating adequate water supply, treatment, and distribution facilities and sewerage collection, treatment, and distribution facilities; making such facilities and the services thereof available to public and private consumers and users located in the City of Clayton and Rabun County and its environs, including municipalities inside or outside such county, and to adjoining counties; extending and improving such facilities; and doing all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient, and desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation for such type of undertakings. 
Sec. 26. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The authority is authorized to prescribe, fix, and collect rates, fees, tolls, or charges and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls, or charges for the services, facilities, or commodities furnished, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as provided in this Act to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of the water and sewerage system, and to pledge to the punctual payment of such bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
Sec. 27. - Tax-exempt status of authority. 
The properties of the authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the State of Georgia and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any city, county, or the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
Sec. 28. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act. 
Sec. 29. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The provisions of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized by this Act and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Sec. 30. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act, being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of this state and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to affect the purposes of this Act. 
Sec. 31. - Other existing powers and authority. 
This Act does not in any way take from the City of Clayton or Rabun County or any municipality located in Rabun County or in any adjoining county the authority to own, operate, and maintain water systems or issue revenue bonds as is provided by Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law" [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.]. 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 495), p. 3712, establishing a county board of elections and registration. The absence of a subsequent history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Rabun County Board of Elections and Registration created; powers and duties generally.] 
Pursuant to subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40(b)], there is created the Board of Elections and Registration of Rabun County, hereinafter referred to as "the board." The board shall have the powers and duties of the former Rabun County Election Superintendent relating to the conduct of primaries and elections and shall have the powers and duties of the Rabun County Board of Registrars relating to the registration of voters and absentee balloting procedures. 
Sec. 2 - [Definitions.] 
The terms "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," and "public office" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code," unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act, and the term "commissioners" means the Board of Commissioners of Rabun County and "county" means Rabun County. 
Sec. 3. - [Membership: Composition; qualifications; appointment procedure.] 
(a)	The board shall be composed of three members, each of whom shall be an elector and a resident of Rabun County. All members of the board shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Rabun County. The Rabun County Board of Elections and Registration shall select a chairperson from among its members. 
(b)	The initial terms of office of two members, as designated in their appointment, shall begin on the first day of the month following the month in which this Act is approved by the Governor or in which it becomes law without such approval and shall expire December 31, 2010, and upon the appointment and qualification of their respective successors. The initial term of office of the remaining member of the board shall begin on the first day of the month following the month in which this Act is approved by the Governor or in which it becomes law without such approval and shall expire December 31, 2008, and upon the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. Successors to members of the board whose terms of office are to expire shall be appointed to take office on the first day of January immediately following the expiration of such terms of office and shall serve for terms of four years each until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. The board shall take no official action until all members have been certified to the Clerk of the Superior Court of Rabun County. 
Sec. 4. - [Supervisor of elections.] 
The board shall appoint a person to serve as the Supervisor of Elections of Rabun County. Such position shall be fulltime and such person shall be paid a salary to be set by the board and payable from county funds. The supervisor of elections shall generally direct and control the administration of elections and voter registration in Rabun County. The supervisor of elections shall be supervised by the board and shall be subject to removal from office by the board, with or without cause. The supervisor of elections shall not be a member of the board or an elected official. 
Sec. 5. - [Terms of members; reappointment, resignation or removal.] 
Each member of the board shall: 
(1)	Serve for a term of four years and until a successor is appointed and qualified, except that initial terms of office shall be as provided in subsection (b) of Section 3 of this Act; 
(2)	Be eligible to be reappointed to succeed such member and shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of such resignation to the commissioners and to the Clerk of the Superior Court of Rabun County; and 
(3)	Be subject to removal from the board at any time for cause, after notice and hearing, by the Judge of the Superior Court of Rabun County. 
Sec. 6. - [Appointment time limit; certification and recording; issuance of commissions.] 
(a)	The appointment of each member, except the initial members, shall be evidenced by the appointing authority filing an affidavit with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Rabun County no later than 30 days preceding the date on which such member is to take office stating the name and residence address of the person appointed and certifying that such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. The appointment of the initial members of the board shall be evidenced by the appointing authority filing an affidavit with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Rabun County immediately following that appointment stating the name and residence address of the person appointed and certifying that such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. The Clerk of the Superior Court of Rabun County shall be notified of interim appointments and shall record and certify such appointments in the same manner as the regular appointment of members. 
(b)	The Clerk of the Superior Court of Rabun County shall record each certification on the minutes of that superior court and shall certify the name of each member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members as provided by law for county registrars. 
Sec. 7. - [Vacancies.] 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any member before the expiration of a term, by reason of removal, death, resignation or otherwise, the appointing authority which is required under Section 3 of this Act to make the appointment to the office upon the expiration of the term shall appoint a successor to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner set forth in Section 3 of this Act. 
Sec. 8. - [Oath of office.] 
(a)	Before entering upon the duties of office, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for county registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
(b)	The board shall take no official action until all members have been certified to the clerk of the Superior Court of Rabun County. 
Sec. 9. - [Powers and duties of board.] 
(a)	The Board of Elections and Registration of Rabun County shall be empowered with all the powers and duties relating to the conduct of primaries and elections as election superintendents pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code." 
(b)	The board is empowered with all the powers and duties relating to the registration of voters and absentee balloting procedures as boards of registrars pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)	This Act is intended to implement the provisions of subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40(b)] and shall be construed liberally so as to effectuate that purpose. 
Sec. 10. - [Eligibility of candidates for service.] 
No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member of the board during the term of such elective public office, and the position of membership of any member shall be deemed vacant upon such member's qualifying as a candidate for an elective public office. 
Sec. 11. - [Conflicts.] 
Any rule or regulation promulgated by a county executive committee of a political party under the provisions of subsection (c) of Code Section 21-2-111 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-111(c)] with regard to the conduct of primaries shall be null and void if in conflict with a valid rule or regulation of the board. 
Sec. 12. - [Joint primaries; board to serve as registrar.] 
(a)	Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require or prohibit joint primaries or to require or prohibit the commissioners or any other public agency to bear any expense of conducting primaries not otherwise required by law. 
(b)	The board shall have the authority to serve as municipal registrar and to conduct municipal elections and primaries for any municipal corporation located within Rabun County if such municipal corporation has entered into a contract for that purpose with the Board of Commissioners of Rabun County. 
Sec. 13. - [Expenditure of public funds.] 
With the approval of the commissioners, the board shall be authorized to expend public funds for the purpose of preparing and distributing material solely to inform and instruct electors of the county adequately with regard to elections. No material distributed by the board shall contain or express, in any manner or form, any commentary or expression of opinion or request for support with respect to any political issue or matter of political concern. 
Sec. 14. - [Organization; majority decisions.] 
(a)	The board shall be authorized and empowered to organize itself, may elect from among its membership a vice chairperson, shall determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such actions as are appropriate to the management of its affairs; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with general law. 
(b)	Action and decision by the board shall be by majority vote of the members of the board. 
Sec. 15. - [Procedures and meetings; record maintenance for inspection.] 
(a)	The board shall fix and establish by appropriate resolution entered in its minutes directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall have meetings in the election offices. Any specially called meetings held pursuant to the bylaws adopted by the board shall be held only after notification of the time and place of the holding of such meeting has been communicated in writing to the supervisor of elections to provide public notice of the meeting as required by law. All meetings of whatever kind of the board shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.], relating to open and public meetings. 
(b)	The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions that shall be amended Cannot read include additions or deletions. Such written record shall be subject to Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.], relating to inspection of public records. 
Sec. 16. - [Chairperson of board, duty and function; compensation of board members.] 
(a)	The chairperson of the board of elections and registration shall chair all meetings of the board and be the spokesperson for the board. 
(b)	The members of the board shall receive such compensation for their services as members of the board as may be determined by the Board of Commissioners of Rabun County. In addition thereto, they shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(c)	All amounts payable under this section shall be paid from the funds of Rabun County. 
Sec. 17. - [Offices; clerical assistants and employees; compensation of administrative personnel.] 
Subject to appropriation of funds by the commissioners, the board shall be authorized to expend public funds to provide for such proper and suitable administrative offices and for such clerical assistants and other employees as the board shall deem appropriate. Compensation for such administrative personnel shall be paid by the board under the county personnel system wholly from county funds. The section shall not be construed so as to require the board to expend any funds simply because they are authorized to do so under this Act. Employees of the board shall be considered county employees for pay, benefits, personal leave, and for other purposes. 
Sec. 18. - [Succession.] 
On the first day of the month following the month in which this Act is approved by the Governor or in which it becomes law without such approval, the Election Superintendent of Rabun County and the Board of Registrars of Rabun County shall be relieved of all powers and duties to which the board succeeds by the provisions of this Act; and they shall deliver thereafter to the chairperson of the board, upon his or her written request, the custody of all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities of every kind pertaining to such powers and duties. 
Sec. 19. - [Voting Rights Act preclearance required.] 
The governing authority of Rabun County shall, through its legal counsel, cause this Act to be submitted for preclearance under the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended; and such submission shall be made to the United States Department of Justice or filed with the appropriate court no later than 45 days after the date on which this Act is approved by the Governor or otherwise becomes law without such approval. 
LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the local acts of the Georgia General Assembly that the county has elected to include, as well as any amendments to those acts. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation of Code; citation. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Rabun County, Georgia," and may be so cited. This Code may also be referred to by the shortened form "Rabun County Code." 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances for regulation of matters for which no provision has been made by general law, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; duty to codify ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
As used in this Code, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings indicated unless otherwise specifically provided, and the following rules of construction shall be applied: 
Applicability. In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of the section may be repugnant thereto. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Board of commissioners. The term "board of commissioners" means the governing authority of Rabun County, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" refers to The Code of Rabun County, Georgia. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first and last day shall be counted. If the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday, and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by any of the conjunctions "and," "or," "either…or," or "neither…nor," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided that in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)	The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)	The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	The terms "either…or" and "neither…nor" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Rabun County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the county court. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the county to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Department; board; agency. The name or title of any department, board, or agency, unless otherwise specifically stated otherwise, shall be read as though the term "of the County of Rabun, Georgia," was added thereto. 
Fee schedule or schedule of fees and charges. The term "fee schedule" or "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated lists of rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners and encompassed in chapter 18. 
Gender. A word importing, the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Governing authority, governing body. The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the board of commissioners of Rabun County, Georgia. 
Incorporated limits or unincorporated areas implied to the county. The term "incorporated limits or unincorporated areas implied to the county" means all areas of the county that are not situated within the territorial limits of an incorporated town or city. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Joint authority. Whenever joint authority is given to three or more persons or officers, it shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them. 
Judge. The term "judge" means the judge of the county court. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, as the term "person" is defined herein, whether acting by themselves or through an agent or employee. 
Law. The term "law" means and denotes applicable federal law, the state constitution and statutes, this Code, ordinances and resolutions of the county, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations that may be promulgated thereunder. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. 
(1)	The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. 
(2)	In all interpretations, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the board of commissioners, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil to be prevented, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(3)	All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the board of commissioners may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be constructed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." refers to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the terms "swear" or "sworn." 
Officials, boards, commissions, departments, officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments or other municipal agents by title only, such reference shall be read as though followed by the words "of Rabun County, Georgia." 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or to land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group action as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as hereinafter defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard, or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned, and any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or to congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or reasonable notice. The term "reasonable time" or "reasonable notice" means only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the county board of commissioners of a special or temporary character. 
Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved area between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Statute. The term "statute," unless otherwise specifically stated, refers to the indicated portion of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, allay, viaduct or bridge, and the approaches thereto, within the county. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or to land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing and written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of statutory definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; general statutory definition, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines, notes, and references. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, not as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(b)	The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are intended merely to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, Charter references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)	All references to chapters, articles, divisions, sections or subsections are to chapters, articles, divisions, sections or subsections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of Code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal or expiration of Code sections. 
(a)	The repeal of a Code section or an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)	When any ordinance repealing a former Code section, ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former Code section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of commissioners. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. Charter amendments may be included in like manner. 
(b)	In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; 
but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of Rabun County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That The Code of Rabun County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows: …." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, with reference to the subject matter, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying, or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-8. - Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code, nor be deemed a part hereof. 
Sec. 1-9. - Form of Code; repository; maintenance. 
A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the office of the county clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or his designee to insert in their designated places all resolutions, general resolutions and ordinances that indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make the same a part of this Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from this Code all provisions that may be from time to time repealed by the board of commissioners. A copy of this Code shall be available in the office of the county clerk for examination by all persons. 
State Law reference— Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; requirements for publication of code, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-10. - Responsibility of county personnel with respect to assigned copies of Code. 
Each county official or employee assigned a copy of this Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each such copy shall remain the property of the county and shall be turned over by the official or employee having custody thereof, upon expiration of his term of office or employment, to his successor or to the county clerk, in case he shall have no successor. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations, violations as public nuisance. 
(a)	In this section, the phrase "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared to be an unlawful act, an offense, or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor, an offense, or an unlawful omission by ordinance, rule, or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	The phrase "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a county officer or county employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context of this Code that it is the intent of the county to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the county officer or employee. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided in this Code, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or work on the streets or public works for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, or any combination thereof. 
(d)	All sentences may be in the alternative, and fines may be imposed with the alternative of the other punishment in the event the fines are not paid. 
(e)	Except as otherwise provided in this Code, each day that a violation of this Code continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)	Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. Further, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the county as provided by law. 
(g)	The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit equitable relief to include stop work orders and temporary restraining orders or injunctions when applicable. 
(h)	The imposition of a penalty does not prohibit revocation or suspension of a license, permit, or franchise or the imposition of other administrative sanctions. 
(i)	All fines shall be paid into the county treasury. 
(j)	In the event community service is substituted for a fine, the monetary rate for hourly work shall be the federal minimum hourly wage. 
(k)	If it is deemed by a court of competent jurisdiction that a punishment imposed under this Code conflicts with state law, the punishment shall be the maximum permitted by law. 
State Law reference— Maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5. 
Sec. 1-12. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-14. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any rates, fees or charges consistent with this Code; 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the county; 
(3)	Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, such as prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(4)	Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code fixing salaries of, or providing policies and programs for, providing retirement, disability or death benefits for, officials, officers or employees of the county; 
(5)	Any budget ordinance or appropriation ordinance; 
(6)	Any ordinance levying any tax; 
(7)	Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution; 
(8)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the county; 
(9)	Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the county; 
(10)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(11)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision within the county; 
(12)	Any zoning ordinance or any ordinance regulating subdivisions or any ordinance regulating signs or any ordinance regulating building design standards; 
(13)	Any ordinance or resolution adopted for purposes that have been consummated; 
(14)	Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; and 
(15)	Any resolution of the county not in conflict with this Code. 
All such ordinances or resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-15. - Severability of parts of Code. 
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code. 
State Law reference— Severability of state legislation, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-16. - Conflicting regulations. 
(a)	If the provisions of different chapters conflict with each other, the provisions of each individual chapter shall control all issues arising out of the events and persons intended to be governed by that chapter. 
(b)	If the provisions of different sections of the same chapter conflict with each other, the provision which is more specific in its application to the events or persons raising the conflict shall control over the more general provision. 
(c)	If any of the provisions hereof conflict, and the conflict cannot be resolved by application of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the more stringent regulation shall apply and the specific provision shall prevail over the general. 
Sec. 1-17. - Enforcement authority. 
The county marshal is and shall continue to be authorized to enforce each and every provision of this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-60-1 et seq., 36-80-2 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties, municipalities, and other governmental entities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-1 et seq.; authority of county officers to issuance citations for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-17; ordinances for governing and policing unincorporated areas of a county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-19. - References to local act. 
As used in this chapter, all references to the act establishing the board of commissioners shall mean that certain act designated as 2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 289), p. 4358. 
Sec. 2-20. - Exercise of governmental authority. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code or by state law, the governmental powers of the county shall be exercised by the board of commissioners in the manner provided by state law, by the legislative act creating the board of commissioners, and by the provisions of this chapter, all as may be amended from time to time. 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of county governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1. 
Sec. 2-21. - Composition of board; qualifications; oath; bond; vacancies; compensation. 
The county board of commissioners shall consist of five members as provided in the act creating the board. Each member shall meet the qualifications provided in the act and, before entering upon his duties as a board member, shall take the oath and provide the bond required by the act. Each member shall receive the compensation provided in the act. Vacancies in office shall be filled as provided in the act. 
State Law reference— Qualifications for public office, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 et seq.; official oaths of public officers, O.C.G.A. § 45-3-1 et seq.; official bonds of public officers, O.C.G.A. § 45-4-1 et seq.; vacancies in office of county governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-21; compensation of county governing authorities and chief executive officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-24; cost of living or general performance based increases in compensation of county governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-28 et seq.; periodic increases in compensation of county governing board members established by general or local law, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-29. 
Sec. 2-22. - Authority of board. 
The board of commissioners shall have all power conferred on it by the act establishing the board, state statute, and state constitution, as they may be amended from time to time. 
Secs. 2-23—2-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Open meetings and notice of meetings required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; meetings of governing bodies of counties and municipalities to be open, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1; conduct of members of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62A-1 et seq.; procedure for closing meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4. 

Sec. 2-48. - Regular meetings; calling special meetings; open to public. 
(a)	Regular meetings. The board of commissioners shall hold regular meetings on the fourth Tuesday of each month in the courtroom of the Rabun County Courthouse located at 25 Courthouse Square, Clayton, Georgia. 
(b)	Special meetings. The chairperson or any three members of the board of commissioners may convene the board whenever the chairperson or the two members deem that the public business demands it. 
(c)	Work sessions. The board of commissioners may conduct work sessions at its pleasure for the purpose of reviewing matter brought to its attention, which shall be open to the public. 
(d)	Open to public. All meetings at which official actions are to be taken shall be open to the public. 
Sec. 2-49. - Rules of procedure. 
The board of commissioners recognizes and respects the rights of citizens to attend meetings and to address and/or discuss actions and considerations of the board. As the elected governing authority of the county, the board has a duty to all of the people of the county, including those who may not be present. To promote an orderly and businesslike atmosphere in which to conduct the county's business, the board has adopted the following rules of procedure: 
(1)	Call to order. The chairperson, or, in the chairperson's absence, the vice-chairperson, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special or called meeting, and shall immediately call the board to order. 
(2)	Agenda. 
a.	Anyone requesting to be placed on the agenda must contact the board of commissioners' office at least one week prior to the day of the meeting. The cutoff to be added to the agenda will be 5:00 p.m. on Monday prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting. An agenda request application must be completed either in person or via the telephone. 
b.	Departmental items to be considered for the agenda must include a completed county department agenda request form by the department head. These forms are available in the county clerk's office and must be completed and submitted to the county clerk at least one week prior to the day of the meeting. 
c.	A special time will be allowed before adjournment of the meeting for citizens' comments. This is an opportunity for the citizens to be heard. However, the board of commissioners will not take any action. 
d.	Items brought before the board of commissioners for the first time and asked to be voted upon at that same meeting will be subject to public comment prior to the vote. 
(3)	Attendance record. The county clerk shall enter in the minutes the names of commissioners who are present and those who are absent. 
(4)	Quorum. A majority of all the members elected to the board of commissioners shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting, and an affirmative vote of a majority of the board shall be sufficient to permit the conduct of all business. A majority of the board comprises three or more members. 
(5)	Approval of minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a meeting is requested by a commissioner, such minutes may be approved without a reading if the county clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy not later than the Friday preceding the next meeting. 
(6)	Reports by committees. Any business coming before the board may be referred to a committee of one or more commissioners or to a department head for further study. It shall be the duty of each such committee to make a timely report on matters referred to it. 
(7)	Addressing the board. 
a.	Statements and comments will be addressed to the board of commissioners. Questions shall be directed to the chair. 
b.	Anyone addressing the board shall stand and state his name and address for the record. In cases of large attendance, participants or speakers may be asked to come to the front when recognized by the chair. 
c.	Statements will be limited to three minutes. Any followup statement will be limited to one minute; provided, however, in zoning questions, each side is allotted ten minutes. 
d.	When a person finishes a statement or question, the person shall be seated. 
e.	A person shall not speak more than twice on an item before the commission unless that person is directly involved in the matter before the board. 
f.	A group or association shall designate a spokesperson. 
g.	The chair shall restate motions prior to calling for a vote. 
h.	No further discussion from the audience will be permitted following a call for the vote. 
i.	The chair or a commissioner can terminate discussion of any item or statement at any time it is deemed irrelevant or repetitious. 
(8)	Recording vote. The yeas and nays of the board of commissioners present shall be recorded on the minutes on any vote taken. 
(9)	Ordinances, resolutions and actions of board. 
a.	Any requested action or resolution shall be presented in writing to the clerk of the board of commissioners and shall be subject to the same cutoff dates as mentioned in subsection (2) of this section for distribution to the board, county administrator and county attorney. 
b.	Any resolution or ordinance proposed for codification shall be written in ordinance form. 
c.	Copies of any proposed ordinance, other than a zoning amendment, shall be made available to each board member, the county attorney, county administrator and the county clerk, and be available for public inspection at least 15 days prior to adoption. 
(10)	Meetings; consent agenda setting. Routine agenda items may be placed on the consent agenda for the regular meeting to be held on the fourth Tuesday of each month. All such items placed upon the consent agenda may be acted upon at one time by motion, second, and unanimous vote of the board of commissioners at its regular meeting. Any item that may require discussion may be removed from the consent agenda and added as a discussion item on the agenda. 
(11)	Rezone presentation procedures. The following order will be observed: 
a.	All individuals wishing to address the board of commissioners are required to sign up in advance of the meeting. 
b.	The use of a spokesperson representing specific groups is encouraged to speed proceedings. Those identified as such will be allowed to speak in advance of other individuals at the appropriate time. 
c.	Rezone petition presentation by the planning staff shall have unlimited time. 
d.	Presentation by the applicant and comments from the public for the rezone petition shall be ten minutes. 
e.	Comments from the public against the rezone petition shall be ten minutes. 
f.	Rebuttal by the applicant. Time is included as part of the ten-minute allotment for petition. 
g.	Should proponents or opponents of a rezone issue utilize less than ten minutes of their allotted ten-minute time frame, the chair shall have the discretion to open the floor for additional speakers. 
h.	At the conclusion of the ten-minute time allocation for proponent and opponent speakers, subsequent speakers shall be restricted to one minute each. The chair shall have the discretion to terminate repetitious comments or comments that are deemed not to be germane and to provide an equal time allocation to each side. 
i.	Questions by the board of commissioners of the planning staff, the applicant and/or public. 
j.	Vote by the board of commissioners on the rezone petition. 
(12)	Meetings; general conduct and management. The chair is responsible for the conduct of the meetings of the board of commissioners, and as such may exercise reasonable and appropriate discretion in the management of the meeting to maintain decorum, fairness, and allocation of time. 
(Mo. of 3-14-1977) 
State Law reference— Meeting agenda required, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-50. - Adoption of ordinances, resolutions, contracts and agreements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and agreements of the county shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the following manner: 
(1)	Preparation. All ordinances shall be prepared by the county attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the board of commissioners unless ordered by a majority vote of a quorum of the board, or requested in writing by the chairperson, or by the county attorney on such attorney's own initiative. 
(2)	Administrative staff approval. All ordinances, resolutions, contract documents and agreements, before presentation to the board, shall have been approved as to form and legality by the county attorney. 
(3)	Introduction. Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the board of commissioners must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the board, except that the county attorney may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the board, and any commissioner may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters, or subjects be adopted. 
(4)	Adoption. The adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or other action of the board shall require a majority affirmance of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-51. - Minutes. 
The board of commissioners shall appoint a county clerk, who shall keep a proper and accurate book of minutes. The book of minutes of the board of commissioners shall contain all the acts, orders, and proceedings of the board of commissioners in chronological order. The minutes books of the board of commissioners shall be open to the public for inspection at all times during regular office hours; and certified copies of any entries in the minutes books shall be furnished by the clerk to any person requesting same upon payment of a reasonable fee, to be paid into the county treasury as are other funds, to be assessed by the board of commissioners in an amount sufficient to defray the cost of preparing same. 
State Law reference— Minutes of county governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-25. 
Secs. 2-52—2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CHAIRPERSON 

Sec. 2-76. - Election; term. 
At the first annual meeting of the board of commissioners each year, the board shall elect from its members a chairperson of the board of commissioners, who shall serve for a term of one year. 
Secs. 2-77—2-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local referenda for abolishing local offices or shortening or lengthening term, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-11. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-96. - Duties and responsibilities of officers. 
Each officer shall perform all duties required of the office by state law, the act establishing the board of commissioners, or county ordinance, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 2-97. - Employee policy and procedure manual adopted. 
The county has compiled and maintains a manual representing a compilation of employee policies and procedures, the provisions of which, as amended from time to time, are incorporated in this article as if fully set forth herein. 
Sec. 2-98. - Compensation of county employees. 
The board of commissioners shall establish salaries and pay scales of all county officers and employees, except elected officials whose salaries are set by local or general law. In establishing county salaries and salary scales, the board shall take into consideration the prevailing compensation for similar services being paid by private industry and business in the county and by other counties within the state and the recommendations of the office holder or person having immediate supervision of the employee or class of employees. The decision and determination of the board in setting and establishing county salaries and salary scales shall be final. 
Sec. 2-99. - Employment of county clerk. 
The board of commissioners is authorized to employ a clerk to be compensated in an amount to be determined by the board, to be paid from county funds. It shall be the duty of the clerk to keep the minutes and records of all proceedings of the board and to discharge such other duties as the board may prescribe. 
Sec. 2-100. - Employment of county attorney. 
The board of commissioners shall have the authority to employ a competent attorney-at-law as county attorney, and whenever it is deemed necessary, the board may employ additional counsel to assist the county attorney, to advise the board and represent the county in such matters as the board may direct, which county attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the board and shall be compensated from county funds as approved by the board. 
Secs. 2-101—2-128. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COUNTY DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-129. - Authority regarding organization of county government. 
The internal organization of the county government shall be established and altered by the board of commissioners. Existing departments may be abolished and their functions transferred to other departments, additional departments may be created, and any two or more departments may be consolidated. 
Sec. 2-130. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
All department heads shall: 
(1)	Be immediately responsible to the county administrator, specifically, and to the board of commissioners, generally, for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)	Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and initiate, with the approval of the board of commissioners, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the county and to the public; 
(3)	Submit reports quarterly or as otherwise required by the board of commissioners of the activities of their respective departments to the board of commissioners; 
(4)	Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for property control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the board of commissioners; 
(5)	Prepare budgets annually, or as otherwise directed, as required by the board of commissioners; 
(6)	Have power to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinate employees; 
(7)	Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all county property and equipment used in their respective departments; and 
(8)	Be responsible for ensuring the preservation and accurate supplementation of any copy of this Code assigned to the department supervised by the department head. 
Sec. 2-131. - Departmental cooperation. 
Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the board of commissioners, any other department such service, labor and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of the department. 
Secs. 2-132—2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-161. - Legislatively created boards and authorities. 
Certain boards and authorities for the county, individually or in association with other local government units, have been created by legislative acts, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Rabun County Airport Authority, created by 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 186), p. 3003, as subsequently amended; 
(2)	Rabun County Economic Development Authority, created by 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 657), p. 4912, as subsequently amended; 
(3)	Rabun County Building Authority, created by 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1027), p. 4564, as subsequently amended; 
(4)	Clayton-Rabun County Water and Sewer Authority, created by 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1170), p. 6403, p. 3563, as subsequently amended; 
(5)	Rabun County Convention and Visitors Bureau Authority, created by 2005 Ga. Laws (Act No. 269), p. 3878, as subsequently amended); 
(6)	Rabun County Board of Education, created by 1978 Ga. Laws (Act No. 883), p. 3430, as subsequently amended; 
(7)	Rabun County Board of Elections, created by 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 495), p. 3712. 
The acts creating the authorities specified herein are included in Part I of this Code. 
Secs. 2-162—2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.; city and county development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; municipal business improvement districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.; redevelopment authority of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1; county and municipal urban development, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; training for members of local development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62A-21; exception to training requirements for directors of downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62A-22. 

Sec. 2-191. - Creation; purpose and intent. 
Pursuant to the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq., the county has created a development authority for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in the county thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry and, in the furtherance of that purpose, to finance projects for air and water pollution control facilities by industries. 
(Res. of 4-27-1971) 
Sec. 2-192. - Composition; terms. 
The development authority shall be composed of not less than seven nor more than nine members appointed from time to time by the board of commissioners. Two members of the authority shall be appointed for two-year terms, two members of the authority shall be appointed for four-year terms, and three members of the authority shall be appointed for six-year terms. Each member shall serve until his successor is qualified. 
(Res. of 4-27-1971; Res. of 2-9-1976; Res. of 12-17-2013 ) 
Sec. 2-193. - Organization; rules of procedure. 
The development authority shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the this Code and state law, as they now exist and as are amended or modified from time to time. 
(Res. of 4-27-1971; Res. of 2-9-1976) 
Secs. 2-194—2-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— County and municipal hospital authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq. 

Sec. 2-225. - Creation; purpose and intent. 
Pursuant to the Hospital Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq., the county has created a hospital authority for the purpose of providing medical services and facilities needed by county citizens and developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare, trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in said county thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry and, in the furtherance of that purpose, to finance such hospital facilities. 
Sec. 2-226. - Composition; terms. 
The hospital authority shall be composed of five members, each of whom shall be taxpayers of the county and none of whom shall be an officer or employee of the county, appointed by the board of commissioners. Two members of the authority shall be appointed for two-year terms, two members of the authority shall be appointed for four-year terms, and three members of the authority shall be appointed for six-year terms. Each member shall serve until his successor is qualified. 
Sec. 2-227. - Organization; rules of procedure. 
The hospital authority shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the this Code and state law, as they now exist and as are amended or modified from time to time. 
Sec. 2-228. - Compensation. 
Each member of the hospital authority shall receive a per diem reimbursement for attendance at each regular and special board meeting in the amount established from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
Secs. 2-229—2-249. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES FOR THE ELDERLY AUTHORITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Residential care facilities for the elderly authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-110. 

Sec. 2-250. - Creation; purpose and intent. 
Pursuant to the Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly Act, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-110 et seq., the county has created a resident care facilities for the elderly authority for the purpose of providing special services and facilities needed by elderly persons and developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare, trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in said county thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry and, in the furtherance of that purpose, to finance residential care facilities for the elderly. 
(Res. of 11-22-1983) 
Sec. 2-251. - Composition; terms. 
The residential care facilities for the elderly authority shall be composed of seven members, each of whom shall be taxpayers of the county and none of whom shall be an officer or employee of the county, appointed by the board of commissioners. Two members of the authority shall be appointed for two-year terms, two members of the authority shall be appointed for four-year terms, and three members of the authority shall be appointed for six-year terms. Each member shall serve until his successor is qualified. 
(Res. of 11-22-1983) 
Sec. 2-252. - Organization; rules of procedure. 
The residential care facilities for the elderly authority shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the this Code and state law, as they now exist and as are amended or modified from time to time. 
(Res. of 11-22-1983) 
Secs. 2-253—2-282. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS 

Sec. 2-283. - Existing boards. 
The county has established certain boards, which shall have the duties as may be provided from time to time by the board of commissioners, including, but not limited to: 
(1)	The county library board, consisting of eight members appointed by the board of commissioners for terms of three years. 
(2)	The county tax assessor board, consisting of three members appointed by the board of commissioners for terms of three years. 
(3)	The county board of health, consisting of seven members appointed by the board of commissioners for terms of three years. 
(4)	The county parks and recreation advisory board, consisting of five members appointed by the board of commissioners for terms of three years. 
(Ord. of 1-3-1972; Ord. of 1-10-1983) 
Secs. 2-284—2-314. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-315—2-331. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-332. - Created; composition; qualifications; terms. 
The county has established a county planning commission that consists of five members. Each member of the commission shall be a resident of the county. Members shall be appointed by the board of commissioners for four-year terms. 
(Res. of 4-3-1972, § 1) 
Sec. 2-333. - Compensation. 
All members of the planning commission shall be compensated in the amount of $20.00 per meeting held. 
(Res. of 4-3-1972, § 1) 
Sec. 2-334. - Vacancies; removal of members for cause. 
Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the board of commissioners who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. 
(Res. of 4-3-1972, § 1) 
Sec. 2-335. - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
The planning commission shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the county. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. 
(Res. of 4-3-1972, § 2) 
Sec. 2-336. - Limitation on expenditures. 
The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 4-3-1972, § 2) 
Sec. 2-337. - Powers and duties. 
From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then the planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-70-3. 
(Res. of 4-3-1972, § 3) 
Secs. 2-338—2-362. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; standards for city and county audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-8; officer responsible for political subdivision investments, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-4; public works bidding, O.C.G.A. § 26-91-1 et seq.; political subdivision audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1; limitations on use of purchasing and contract procedures, O.C.G.A. § 34-4-3.1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-363. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the county shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of the succeeding year. 
State Law reference— Fiscal year required to be established by ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-364. - Indigent funeral assistance policy. 
The county shall assist with the expenses of indigent funerals within the county to the extent set forth in this article and only if the following requirements are met: 
(1)	The deceased must have been a resident of the county at the time of death and have no property or personal possessions in his name at the time of death valued over $1,000.00. 
(2)	The spouse of the deceased, if any, must have no property or personal possessions in his name valued over $1,000.00. 
(3)	Before payment by the county can be made, written certification must be made by the surviving spouse or relative verifying that the deceased, and the deceased's surviving spouse, if any, meet the requirements of this section. If there is no surviving spouse or relative, the funeral home director in charge of burial may certify to compliance with this section. 
(4)	The county will pay an indigent funeral expenses up to $750.00 or the amount provided by governing statute, whichever is less, upon certification as required herein and receipt of proper invoice from the funeral home director. 
State Law reference— County appropriations for burial of paupers, O.C.G.A. § 36-12-5. 
Sec. 2-365. - Budget. 
The procedures for budget preparation, submission to the board of commissioners, review by the board of commissioners, public review, notice, and hearings shall be provided in O.C.G.A. 36-81-1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Annual budget generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3 et seq.; adoption of budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; duty to adopt and to operate under annual balance budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-366. - Annual audit. 
The board of commissioners shall have a complete and independent audit in compliance with generally accepted audit standards performed annually by a qualified external auditor in accordance O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7. The audit will be accepted by the board at a regular or special meeting and made available for inspection by any interested person during regular business hours. 
Secs. 2-367—2-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDIGENT DEFENSE SERVICES 

Sec. 2-391. - Application; form. 
Any person lacking financial ability to provide for himself legal representation in his defense in any criminal proceeding in any court in the county may submit an application to the county requesting indigent defense representation. The application shall be in the form prescribed by the board of commissioners, shall set forth specific facts supporting the request and need for indigent representation, and shall be filed with the clerk of the court in which representation is sought. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 2-392. - Application fee; waiver. 
(a)	Each applicant for indigent defense services shall pay an application fee in the amount provided in the county fee schedule to the clerk of the court in which indigent representation is being sought. Such fee must be paid either at the time the application is submitted or at the time the representation is provided. 
(b)	The application fee provided for in this section may be waived only upon order of the presiding judge scheduled to hear the case in which the applicant seeks waiver of the application fee. The presiding judge may order a waiver of the fee only upon a finding that the defendant is unable to pay the fee or that paying the fee would cause undue hardship to the defendant. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 2-393. - Collection and disposition of funds. 
Within ten days after the end of each month, the clerks of the courts in receipt of application fees required by this division shall remit the total of all application fees collected during the previous month to the county. All such funds shall be maintained by the county in a separate fund for indigent defense services and shall be expended only for the purpose of providing legal representation to indigent defendants pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. of 2-22-2005, §§ 4, 5) 
Secs. 2-394—2-414. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.; county records as public property; duty to adopt records management plan, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99; maintenance of county records, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-5; disposal of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102; inspection and copying of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.; records management programs for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99; disposal of public records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102. 

Sec. 2-415. - Coordinantor designated. 
The county clerk shall be the coordinator of the county's records management plan and authorized to act for and on behalf of the county council in directing and coordinating all records management matters under the Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq., the records retention schedules approved by the state, and the provisions of this article, except as limited in this article. 
(Res. of 10-9-1986) 
Sec. 2-416. - destruction of records. 
(a)	No record shall be destroyed except as authorized by the state records retention schedule. Records shall maintained for at least the retention period provided in the state records retention schedule, but may be maintained for such longer period as is deemed necessary or advisable by the county clerk. 
(b)	In no event shall any county record maintained under this section be destroyed without the express approval of the county clerk. 
(Res. of 10-9-1986) 
Secs. 2-417—2-443. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ETHICS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Ethics in Government Act, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-444. - Policy and intent. 
It is the policy of the county that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all county officials is adopted. 
Sec. 2-445. - Purpose. 
(a)	This article has the following purposes: 
(1)	To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by county officials; 
(2)	To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the county; 
(3)	To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in manners affecting the county; and 
(4)	To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(b)	The provisions of this article shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
Sec. 2-446. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the chairman of the board of commissioners containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within 90 days of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
County official or member of the governing body means member of the county board of commissioners and any member appointed to any other board, authority, committee, or commission of the county. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the governing body as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the county. A member of the governing body shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)	Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)	Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)	Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)	Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
Sec. 2-447. - Prohibited conduct. 
No member of the governing body shall: 
(1)	By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of official acts; 
(2)	Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties, except: 
a.	An occasional non-pecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
b.	An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
c.	A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; 
d.	Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with state law; 
(3)	Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his official position for his or another person's private gain; 
(4)	Use his official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
(5)	Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering or services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to a member of the governing body who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required herein are made to the board or chairperson 30 days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed; 
(6)	Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him by virtue of being a member of the governing body; 
(7)	Use his position to request or require an employee to: 
a.	Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a county interest; 
b.	Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
c.	Purchase goods or services to be used for person, business, or political purposes; and 
d.	Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation; 
(8)	Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, or direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; 
(9)	Use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or persons having an interest. 
Sec. 2-448. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
An appointed member of the governing body who has an interest that he has reason to believe may be affected by his official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing body shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement 30 days prior to the governing body's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the governing body shall disclose the nature of any interest he has at the time such matter is presented to board of commissioners for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes or the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he has an interest. 
Sec. 2-449. - Disqualification. 
A member of the governing body shall disqualify himself from participating in any official act or action of the county which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
Sec. 2-450. - Prohibited contracts. 
The county shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing body or with a business in which a member of the governing body has an interest, provided that this section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)	The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for county funds; 
(2)	The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
(3)	Contracts entered into in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6; 
(4)	Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency; 
(5)	Contracts entered into with a member of the governing body, or with a business in which a member of the governing body has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver or the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the county administrator following disclosure. 
Secs. 2-451—2-468. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-469. - Purpose; alternate designation of article. 
(a)	The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. Pursuant to 16 CFR 681.1, the purpose of this article is also to establish a process by which the county will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the county has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)	This article may be referred to as the county's identity theft prevention program or ITPP. 
Sec. 2-470. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Covered account means: 
(1)	An account that a creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)	Any other account that the creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
Creditor means any person or entity who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. For the purposes of this article, the county is a creditor. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Department head means any department head who works at the discretion of the county board of commissioners, any elected official, and any individual appointed to manage a department on a permanent or temporary basis. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using the identifying information of another person without authority. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to the county by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 USC 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the county of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the county provided to request the consumer report and the address in the agency's file for the consumer. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, and bank account information and, for a natural person, includes their social security number, mother's birth name, drivers' license information and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the county. 
Sec. 2-471. - Findings. 
The county board of commissioners has found as follows: 
(1)	The county is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of county services include water, sewer, solid waste, and stormwater. 
(2)	The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, and making payments for property taxes and other services have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(3)	The county limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. 
(4)	The county determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways, if any: 
a.	Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
b.	Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
c.	Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
d.	Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
Sec. 2-472. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)	As a precondition to opening a covered account with the county, each applicant shall provide the county with personal identifying information of the customer in the form of a valid government-issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account with written confirmation of being the authorized agent for the entity. The applicant shall also provide any other information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created. The information shall be entered directly into the county's records system and held in a secure storage area with access limited to those county personnel with the need to know. 
(b)	For each customer account for which the county may now or hereafter provide individual customer access to the customer's account information, such account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The county may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
Sec. 2-473. - Password required for access to covered account information. 
Access to any customer account that includes personal identifying information shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized county personnel. Passwords shall be changed by the head of the department providing the service for which the covered account is created, or by such other county employee authorized to carry out the provisions of this article, on a regular basis. The password shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
Sec. 2-474. - Report of unauthorized access. 
Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the appropriate department head and the password changed immediately. 
Sec. 2-475. - Customer information confidential; report of requests for access. 
Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand that specifically asks for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the applicable department head or other person authorized by the county board of commissioners to carry out the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 2-476. - Credit card payments. 
(a)	In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)	All credit card payments made over the telephone or the county's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer database. 
(c)	Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
Sec. 2-477. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)	Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.	A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.	A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report, or a notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
c.	Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as a recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries, an unusual number of recently established credit relationships, a material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships, or an account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)	Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.	Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.	Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.	An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)	Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.	Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor, such as instances in which the address does not match any address in the consumer report or the social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's death master file. 
b.	Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.	Personal identifying information or a phone number or address is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.	Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.	The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.	The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.	The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.	Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.	The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)	Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.	Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the county receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.	A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud as in instances where the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.	An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account, such as instances where there is nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments or a material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.	An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used, taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors. 
e.	Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.	The county is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.	The county is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.	The county is notified by a customer, law enforcement personnel or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
i.	Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
Sec. 2-478. - Procedure regarding existing covered accounts. 
(a)	In the event that any county employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. 
(b)	If, in his discretion, the employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, the employee shall immediately report such red flags to his department head. 
(c)	If, in his discretion, the employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to his department head, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. 
(d)	If the department head in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a county employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the department head: 
(1)	Contact the customer; 
(2)	If, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account, change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or close the account; 
(3)	Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer for the covered account in question and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)	Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)	Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)	Take other appropriate action as determined by the department head to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
Sec. 2-479. - Procedure regarding new covered accounts. 
(a)	In the event that any county employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, the employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. 
(b)	If, in his discretion, the employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, the employee shall immediately report such red flags to his department head. 
(c)	If, in his discretion, the employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to his department head, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. 
(d)	If the department head in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a county employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the department head: 
(1)	Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)	Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)	Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)	Take other appropriate action as determined by the department head to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
Sec. 2-480. - Updating the program. 
The county board of commissioners shall annually review this article and, if deemed necessary, make changes with regard to any needed amendments, including amendments of the designation of red flags, in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the county and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the county board of commissioners shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)	The county's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)	Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)	Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)	Updates in the types of accounts that the county offers or maintains; and 
(5)	Updates in service provider arrangements. 
Sec. 2-481. - Program administration. 
(a)	The county board of commissioners is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation, including, but not limited to, reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with making material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the county board of commissioners, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. 
(b)	Department heads shall report to the county board of commissioners at least annually on compliance with the red flag requirements. The department head reports will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
(1)	The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the county in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
(2)	Service provider arrangements; 
(3)	Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
(4)	Recommendations for material amendments of this article. 
(c)	The county's department heads are responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of this article. 
Sec. 2-482. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the county engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the applicable department head shall exercise his discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with the policies and procedures in this article, as agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
Sec. 2-483. - Annual report to county board of commissioners. 
An annual report will be submitted to the county board of commissioners on such annual date as is established by the county board of commissioners. The report will include a summary of department head reports and recommendations for any amendment to this article. The annual report will be prepared by the clerk or such other person as may be designated by the county board of commissioners. 
Secs. 2-484—2-499. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 2-500. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
In the event that the county receives a notice of address discrepancy, the county employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the county service or account sought by the consumer shall verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer or compare the information in the consumer report with: 
(1)	Information the county obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information Program rules implementing 31 USC 5318(l); 
(2)	Information the county maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
(3)	Information the county obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant county employee. 
Sec. 2-501. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)	In the event that the county reasonably confirms that an address provided to the county by a consumer is accurate, the county is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the county received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)	The county is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the county requested the report; 
(2)	The county establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)	The county regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)	Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the county to such agency for the reporting period in which the county establishes a relationship with the customer. 
Sec. 2-502. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The county employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through verifying the address with the consumer, reviewing the county's records to verify the consumer's address, verifying the address through third-party sources, or using other reasonable processes. 
Secs. 2-503—2-520. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - COUNTY BUILDINGS 

Sec. 2-521. - Use for public governmental purposes only. 
All county-owned buildings, offices, properties and other facilities shall be used for public governmental purposes only and no private or commercial business, profession or other enterprise shall be conducted upon such public properties. 
(Ord. of 3-13-1978) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 22, 2011, amended ch. 4 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 4, §§ 4-1—-4-201, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 4, 1989; an ordinance adopted Dec. 23, 2002, §§ 1, 4—30, 32; an ordinance adopted Apr. 22, 2003; and an ordinance adopted Apr. 27, 2010. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; regulation of alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq.; authority of local authorities to license and regulate alcoholic beverage sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; local regulation of sales on Sundays, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; prohibited acts on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq.; local licensing requirements for sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; requirements for sale of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate parking means one parking space for each 100 square feet of customer service area within the premises of an applicant. 
Administrator means the county clerk or county marshal or their designee. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
Bar means a business open to the public which sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises which is not a restaurant. 
Building code means and includes all building, plumbing and electrical codes and any similar technical code of the county. 
Business area means any street length between intersections where 50 percent or more is in use for business purposes. 
Church means any permanent building which houses the main sanctuary in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is publicly designated as a church, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes. The term "church" shall not include the temporary housing of a religious group in an otherwise commercial center. 
County community center means those county-owned events facilities which are made available for payment rental and use by the general public. 
Distance means the measurement in horizontal lineal feet as defined in section 4-24. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Family means any person related to the holder of such license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
Good moral character means the propensity of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner. 
(1)	A judgment in a civil action shall not be used in and of itself as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that: 
a.	At the current time he or she has the ability to, and is likely to, serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner; and 
b.	He or she is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former civil action is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he or she seeks a business license or business permit. 
(2)	The following criminal records shall not be used, examined or requested by the county in a determination of good moral character when used as a requirement to obtain a business license or business permit: 
a.	Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction. 
b.	Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction. 
c.	Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner. 
Indoor recreation establishment means an indoor facility that contains regulation-size courts or alleys where physical sporting activity takes place and equipment related to the activity is available for rent or sale. 
License means the authorization by Rabun County to engage in the sale or consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
Licensee means a person, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or with a hotel with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 20. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Park means any public lands owned or controlled by the county or any county of the state, in and upon which play facilities are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. The term "premises" shall also include any privately owned or leased courtyard or patio which is architecturally visibly defined. 
Private club or bona fide private club means any nonprofit association organized under state law that: 
(1)	Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)	Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)	Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.	Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.	Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)	Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one nor more than three families customarily reside and shall not include an apartment house having facilities for housing four or more families; or any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve non-prepackaged meals for its guests. At least one meal per business day shall be served and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted and sales of prepared, cooked, and non-prepackaged meals must be equal to or more than 60 percent of total sales. 
Retail means retail sales packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises. 
School means any state, county, church or other private school that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall include the adjacent open land or fenced areas used for school purposes but this shall not include any portion of a private school, where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Service area means that in the event a lounge, private club or restaurant is located adjacent to an indoor recreational establishment and within the same building or structure, the recreational area is defined as being within the service area of such lounge, private club or restaurant and the consumption of alcoholic beverages within the recreational area is permitted. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine can be given free of charge or for a fee. 
Wholesaler means any person, firm or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale any alcoholic beverages. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of: 
(1)	Promoting the health and general welfare of the community; 
(2)	Establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)	Protecting and preserving schools and churches; 
(4)	Giving effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable consideration being given, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values; and 
(5)	Protecting against the evils of concentration of the retail outlets for alcoholic beverages in one area or ownership or to prevent undesirable persons from engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-3. - Compliance with chapter required. 
No person holding a license for the sale of beer and wine shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the state alcoholic beverage code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq., as presently enacted or as the same shall be amended or any of the laws of the United States concerning the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages. All licensees shall prohibit any employee or agent from being in violation of the law or amendments thereto and the failure of any licensee to properly ensure compliance with this provision shall be sufficient grounds for the denial of the issuance of any license under this chapter or the revocation of any existing license. 
Each applicant for a beer, wine and/or distilled spirits license shall, upon the issuance of the license, be furnished with a copy of this chapter and shall acknowledge in writing that he has received the same and has full knowledge of its contents and will instruct all employees to fully comply with the terms hereof. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-4. - Penalties; revocation of license. 
(a)	Upon conviction in the magistrate court of any violation of any provision of this chapter, unless otherwise provided, the punishment shall be as follows: 
(1)	First offense, a minimum fine of $500.00; 
(2)	Second offense, if within 12 months of the first offense, a minimum fine of $750.00 and/or the suspension of any licenses issued under this chapter for three months; 
(3)	Third offense, if within 12 months of the second offense, a minimum fine of $1,000.00 and the suspension of any licenses issued under this chapter for 12 months; or 
(4)	Otherwise punishment shall be as set by the magistrate court judge as allowed by the state law. 
(b)	In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section, a license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended, revoked or placed on probation by the board of commissioners for the following reasons: 
(1)	Failure to pay excise fees or any other fees or taxes required by the county. 
(2)	Disorderly conduct of the establishment. 
(3)	Acts of disturbance on the establishment premises. 
(4)	Violence on the establishment premises. 
(5)	Gambling on the establishment premises. 
(6)	Conviction of violating this chapter by any court with jurisdiction. 
(7)	Charges of or conviction of a felony by the licensee. 
(8)	Creation or maintenance of a nuisance on the establishment premises. 
(9)	Any false statement or material misrepresentation given in the application for the license. 
(10)	For any and other just cause. 
(c)	If it comes to the attention of the board of commissioners or administrator that the licensee has violated any provisions of this chapter, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)	The administrator or his designee shall issue a notice of objection to the board of commissioners, which shall include the address of the location and the specific allegations as to the violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of this Code. The notice of objection shall also include the recommended action to be taken by the board of commissioners, which may include probation, suspension, or revocation of the license, as well as conditions for maintenance or reinstatement of the license, including and not limited to mandatory responsible sales and server training, with an approved provider, for the licensee, managers, employees, and servers of the licensed establishment. Further, any license under this chapter may be temporarily suspended by the administrator in his notice of objection for any reason outlined in subsection (b) of this section if it is determined that suspension is in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The administrator shall then notify the licensee in writing by certified mail or by personal service that a notice of objection has been filed and of any applicable temporary suspension of the license. The notice to the licensee shall include a copy of the notice of objection, and the time, place, and date for a hearing before the board of commissioners on the matter. The hearing shall be within 30 days of the date of the notice to the licensee. Continuances and necessary investigations will be granted and conducted at the discretion of the board of commissioners. 
(2)	At the hearing, the county and the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and examine witnesses. After this hearing, the board of commissioners shall issue a notice of decision at which time the board of commissioners will dismiss or affirm the objection and/or temporary suspension, and in case of affirmation, the board of commissioners may suspend, revoke or place on probation the license of the licensee. 
(3)	The decision of the board of commissioners shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for their decisions and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(4)	The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final but may be appealed to the appropriate court within 30 days of the date of the written decision. 
(5)	The decision of the board of commissioners shall be binding upon the retail party or holder of the license. 
(d)	When the license of any establishment has been revoked, no further license shall be issued under this chapter to the same person, firm or corporation at that location for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation. 
(e)	Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the county license to manufacture or deal in those products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the county. 
(f)	All owners or officers of establishments licensed under this chapter shall be responsible for any violation of this chapter by an employee, agent, or representative of the licensed establishment, and the owners and officers may be subject to appropriate administrative action related to such violation, including and not limited to suspension and revocation of the license, in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-5. - License required. 
(a)	No malt beverages, wines, distilled spirits or any other alcoholic beverages shall be stored, delivered, sold or manufactured in the county except under a license issued pursuant to this chapter and then only for the specific beverage and manner of sale provided in the license. 
(b)	The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code and if other provisions of this Code conflict with this chapter then this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-6. - Types of licenses; number of licenses; renewal. 
(a)	Licenses which may be issued under this chapter include: 
(1)	Wholesale: 
a.	Malt beverages. 
b.	Wine. 
c.	Distilled spirits. 
(2)	Retail: 
a.	Malt beverages. 
b.	Wine. 
c.	Ancillary wine sampling license. 
d.	Distilled spirits. 
(3)	Consumption on the premises only: 
a.	Malt beverages. 
b.	Wine. 
c.	Distilled spirits. 
(4)	Any combination of the above at the same location provided no retail or wholesale license shall hold any consumption on the premises license for the same location and no license for retail package sales of distilled spirits may be combined with any other license other than retail package sales of beer and wine. 
(5)	Farm winery: A license issued to a farm winery in the county pursuant to this article shall include the right and authority to produce and manufacture wine and to maintain and operate a tasting room on the premises of the farm winery, in conformity with this chapter and state law. 
(b)	A person doing business at more than one place shall take out and pay for a separate license for each place of business. 
(c)	Except as otherwise specifically provided in this title, all licenses issued pursuant to this title shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of each year and application for renewal shall be made annually on or before November 1, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-2-7. Any renewal application not filed on or before the last county business day prior to December 15 shall be assessed a late filing penalty of ten percent of the cost of the license. 
(d)	No license may be renewed if the licensee could be denied a new license under this chapter, except as provided in section 4-25. 
(e)	The license year for all licenses except licenses for the wholesale distribution of beer and/or wine shall begin on January 1 of each calendar year and end on December 31 of the following year. There shall be no proration of the cost of a license for a partial year. The license year for the wholesale distribution of beer and/or wine shall be as provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011; Ord. of 4-22-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-7. - Application procedure. 
The following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	All applications for new licenses under this chapter shall be accompanied by a payment in cash, cashier's check, money order or by certified check, for all the minimum fees and occupational taxes provided for in this Code for the classification into which the applicant falls. 
(2)	The county application shall include a photostatic or other copy of all the appropriate state applications and other application forms developed by the administrator. 
(3)	The applicant shall agree to an examination of his past criminal record, if any, and shall provide to the county a complete set of fingerprints and complete information as to the whereabouts of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the making of the application. 
(4)	The application to be completed by the applicant shall request full details and information as to the ownership of the establishment where the license is to be used and all other information necessary for the administrator to determine if the applicant and the geographical location is in compliance with the laws of this state and the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)	Any false statement, or material misrepresentation in any application under this chapter, shall be grounds for the revocation of any license granted under this article. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-8. - Surrender of license upon sale, transfer, or closing of licensed business. 
Any license issued under this chapter shall be immediately surrendered to the county clerk upon sale, transfer, or closing of the licensed business. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-9. - Qualifications of applicant. 
No license shall be granted pursuant to this chapter where the application or the evidence shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)	The applicant is of bad moral character or has a bad reputation in the community or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. 
(2)	The applicant has had any license issued under the police powers of any county or other governmental subdivision previously suspended or revoked in the preceding 12 months. 
(3)	An applicant, or a corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, shareholder, general partner or managing agent, is delinquent in payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to the county, the county or to the state. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-10. - Person and geographical location licensed. 
(a)	Any license issued under the provisions of this article is issued jointly to the individual making the application for any license and to the geographical location on which the privileges granted by the license shall be exercised. The failure to comply with the laws of this state or the provisions of this article of either the individual making the application or the geographical location of the license shall be sufficient grounds to deny the issuance of any the license provided for herein or to revoke the same. 
(b)	Licenses for the retail sale of beer and/or wine and/or distilled spirits shall be issued only to the owner or principal manager of any place of business seeking the license and no license shall be issued to a nominal employee or relative of the manager if not actively engaged in the operation of the business. 
(c)	In the event the place of business, exclusive of real estate, is owned by a person other than the applicant, the fact shall be made known upon the application for license and the owner of the place of business shall also comply with all of the provisions set fourth herein. 
(d)	No license for the retail sale of beer and/or wine and/or distilled spirits is transferable from one geographic location to another, nor is the same transferable from one person to another. 
(e)	There shall be only one license per place of business. In the event there is presently outstanding a valid beer and/or wine and/or distilled spirits license for the place of business for which an application is presently being made, then the application shall not be considered as approved until the time as the existing license is surrendered to the board of commissioners by the named licensee or his designated and authorized agent. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011; Ord. of 4-22-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-11. - Prohibition against issuance to persons with criminal convictions. 
(a)	No license under this chapter shall be issued, renewed or transferred to any person, partnership or corporation where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any felony or convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any misdemeanor relating to drugs or any alcoholic beverage business or any state law, county or municipal ordinance violation relating to any alcoholic beverage business. 
(b)	The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty or nolo contenders or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime or the suspension or revocation of any alcoholic beverage license owned in whole or in part by persons listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-12. - Residency requirements; registered agent. 
(a)	Residency; citizenship. No person shall be granted a license unless the person demonstrates that he or his registered agent has established residency in the county and been a U.S. citizen for more than at least one year prior to applying for the license. 
(b)	Licenses for the retail sale of beer, wine and/or distilled spirits shall be issued to individuals or entities that have established residency in the county or who have designated a resident or registered agent within the county to be responsible for any matter relating to the license to be issued. 
(c)	If any registered officer shall cease to be the registered agent of the licensee corporation or shall cease to be a resident of the county or in any manner ceases to meet the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, the licensee shall notify the administrator in writing of such event and shall nominate a new registered officer within five days after such event occurs. Such new registered officer shall meet the requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section and must be approved by the administrator. 
(d)	The county shall charge a fee of $100.00 for a change of the corporation's registered officer; however, if the licensee corporation fails to notify the county and nominate a new registered officer within the five-day period, then the county shall charge a fee of $200.00 for a change of the corporation's registered officer and/or revoke the licensee's license. The application process includes submitting a revised application, fingerprinting of the applicant, criminal history investigation. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-13. - Police investigation; tax record search. 
(a)	The administrator shall cause an inquiry to be made into the county records to determine if the applicant or other parties with an interest in an application for a license under this chapter has any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent against his property or any other monies owing to the county. No license shall be issued or renewed until such debts are paid in full. 
(b)	As a prerequisite to the issuance of any such permit or license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints. 
(c)	If the administrator determines that the application is not in order, the administrator shall then notify the applicant of the reasons for not approving the. 
(d)	All applicants shall furnish all reasonable data, information and records requested of them by the administrator and failure to furnish such data, information, contracts, documents, financial statements and other records within 30 days of the request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. 
(e)	The county may require 30 days for processing any application for a license required under this chapter. The administrator may extend the 30 days' processing period according to the licensee's compliance should he or she deem it necessary. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-14. - License pending completion of building. 
Where a building in which any person intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of the application for the license, not in existence or not yet completed, a conditional license may be issued. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-15. - Minimum lighting requirements. 
No geographical location shall be provided a license unless the location has complied with article IV of this chapter, providing minimum lighting requirements for the premises. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-16. - Denial of license application. 
(a)	The administrator must take action to consider an application for a license required by this chapter within 45 days of the administrator receiving a complete application. 
(b)	The administrator may deny a county license under this chapter on any of the following grounds: 
(1)	Failure to meet state requirements for state license; 
(2)	Failure to pay required fees and taxes; 
(3)	Failure to provide valid information, documents and the like required by this chapter; 
(4)	False information in the application or attached documents; 
(5)	Improper residency of applicant, owner or registered agent; 
(6)	Failure to pass review by the administrator; 
(7)	Failure to post and maintain proper signs and advertisements required in this chapter; 
(8)	Failure to meet distance, location exterior surface or building requirements; 
(9)	Prior convictions as provided in this chapter; or 
(10)	Failure to meet any other requirements in this chapter for a license of the class applied for. 
(c)	All decisions denying a license shall be in writing, with the reasons for denial stated and shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant. 
(d)	The applicant has 30 days from the date of written notice of the denial of a license application within which to petition for reconsideration by the board of commissioners. The applicant will be granted an opportunity to present additional information, evidence and cross examine witnesses before the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners' decision will be final. 
(e)	An application which has been denied shall not be resubmitted for 12 months after the denial unless there is a substantial change therein which would affect the reason for denial originally. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-17. - New and renewal applicants. 
(a)	New applicant. An applicant for a place of business not holding a valid license or who has not operated as a business within 180 days immediately preceding the date of the application shall be considered a new applicant and no license shall be issued pursuant to a renewal application. 
(b)	Applicant to change person to who licenses is issued. An application to change only the individual to whom the license is issued and not the place of business where any privileges so issued will be exercised shall be considered a renewal application. 
(c)	Renewal applicants. Any applicant for a license for the sale of beer and/or wine who has been the holder of a valid beer and/or wine license within the immediately preceding 12 months of the date of the application shall be considered a renewal applicant and it shall not be necessary for any renewal applicant to complete the approved application and pay the necessary application fee prior to presenting his application to the administrator. 
(d)	Grounds for denial of renewal. A renewal application can only be denied upon a finding that the applicant has violated the terms of this article, the state alcoholic beverage code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq., or any of the laws of the United States concerning the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages or has been convicted of any felony, crime of moral turpitude or a misdemeanor concerning laws relating to alcohol or drugs. 
The applicant has 30 days from the date of written notice of the denial of a license application within which to petition for reconsideration by the board of commissioners. The applicant will be granted an opportunity to present additional information, evidence and cross examine witnesses before the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners' decision will be final. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-18. - Inspections. 
Upon the issuance of a license under this chapter, the named licensee shall, by accepting the license, be deemed to grant full and complete authority to the county marshal and to all other law enforcement officers to enter the place of business wherein the business is operated at any time during regular business hours and at any other time when the business is occupied by one or more persons for the purpose of inspecting the business as to the sale of beer and/or wine and as to any other business or activity being conducted therein. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-19. - Open containers prohibited. 
(a)	No bottle or other container of alcoholic beverages shall be opened or consumed by any person on the premises, upon which the place of business is conducted and licensed under this chapter, whether the bottle or other container so opened or consumed was bought or obtained at that place of business or elsewhere unless the premises is licensed for consumption on the premises under this chapter. Any place of business for which a license is issued for package beer and wine and/or distilled spirits only shall at all times prohibit the consumption of beer and wine and distilled spirits on the premises of the place of business. 
(b)	No establishment licensed under this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages shall allow a person to leave those premises with alcoholic beverages in an open cup, bottle, can or other open container. It is prohibited for any person to take any alcoholic beverages outside of a premises licensed for consumption on the premises only. Also, it is prohibited for any person to take an open container out of an establishment licensed for consumption and/or retail package. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011; Ord. of 4-22-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-20. - Hours and days of operation. 
(a)	Permitted hours. All places of business holding a license for the sale of beer, wine and/or distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be closed from 12:00 midnight each night until 7:00 a.m. the following day, and shall further be closed from 12:00 midnight on each Saturday night until 7:00 a.m. the following Monday. 
All places of business holding a license for the sale of distilled spirits for package only shall be closed from 12:00 midnight each night until 7:00 a.m. the following day, and shall further be closed from 12:00 midnight on each Saturday night until 7:00 a.m. the following Monday. 
(b)	Prohibited hours. The hours from 12:00 midnight of each night until 7:00 a.m. the following day and from 12:00 midnight each Saturday night until 7:00 p.m. the following Monday shall be prohibited hours of operation. All the businesses shall be completely empty as to customers at 12:00 midnight and no person shall remain in the business after 12:00 midnight except regular employees of the business who shall remain therein solely for the purpose of closing the business for the day and the cleaning and other work as is reasonably necessary. 
(c)	Employee identification. All employees remaining in the premises after 12:00 midnight shall wear name tags, uniforms, or other easily recognizable identification as employees to aid in the policing of the premises. 
(d)	Exception for certain restaurants. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, any restaurant which holds a license for consumption of beer, wine and/or distilled spirits on the premises may be open during the described prohibited hours of subsection (b) of this section on Sunday so long as no alcoholic beverages are being served, sold or consumed on the premises during the prohibited hours, and so long as the restaurant's annual inventory expense for alcohol (beer and wine) is less than 40 percent of its total yearly inventory expense, that is to say at least 60 percent of the restaurant's total yearly inventory expense must be for food or other nonalcoholic items. 
(e)	Sunday alcohol sales. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is authorized on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011; Amend. of 4-24-2012; Ord. of 4-22-2014 ) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays, election days, and Christmas Day generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20; local regulation of Sunday sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7. 
Sec. 4-21. - Certain places and hours where drinking is prohibited. 
(a)	Notwithstanding any other provisions governing the hours of operation of a licensed establishment, no person, firm or corporation owning or operating a place of business licensed under this chapter shall permit any person to drink any distilled spirits, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage upon the business premises between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
(b)	No person shall possess, consume, or transport an open container containing any distilled spirits, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage while upon the streets, sidewalks, or public places of the county, or upon or within any vehicle upon the premises of any business establishment holding a license under this chapter, or in any adjacent parking area of any business establishment holding a license under this chapter. The provision of this subsection pertaining to public places only shall not apply to special events that have been approved in advance and in writing by the administrator's office according to the procedures set forth under section 4-26 of this chapter, such as motorcycle "bike nights," car shows, and similar events which may take place in the parking area of a business establishment holding a license under this chapter. 
(c)	Violations of this section shall be subject to the issuance of a citation by a certified peace officer with jurisdiction over the venue, returnable to the magistrate court of the county. Any persons found in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment of not more than 60 days. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-22. - Drive-in, curb service prohibited. 
(a)	Curb service by retail or consumption on the premises licensees under this chapter or delivery of any alcoholic beverages off the licensed premises, other than by wholesalers licensed under this chapter or by the state, is prohibited. 
(b)	Drive-in service windows at premises licensed under this chapter are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-23. - Offenses involving minors. 
(a)	No person under 21 years of age shall buy or allow to be bought for him any alcoholic beverage from any place where these beverages are kept. 
(b)	No person in charge of, or employed in, any place of business where alcoholic beverages are kept, shall permit any person under 21 years of age to buy or allow to be bought for any person under 21 years of age any alcoholic beverages in or from the place of business or to frequent or loiter about the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(c)	No person shall furnish or serve any person under 21 years of age with any alcoholic beverage. A valid driver's license may be reasonably accepted by the person hereunder as sufficient evidence of age. 
(d)	No person under 21 years of age shall falsely represent his age, in any manner whatever, for the purpose of illegally obtaining any alcoholic beverages. 
(e)	No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. However, the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(f)	No person who is under 21 years of age shall have in his possession, or under his control, at any place whatever in the county, any alcoholic beverage. 
(g)	Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an offense under this chapter and shall be punishable in the magistrate court; provided, violation of this section by persons who have not yet reached the age of 17 shall be handled as provided by the juvenile court code of the state. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-24. - Location restrictions. 
(a)	Distance measurements. The linear measurements as to location provided for in this section shall be from the nearest point of the residence, the school or church to the nearest point of the place of business, building or structure for which the license is sought, with the distance to be verified by the county marshal prior to issuance of the license. 
(b)	Proximity to school or church. No license for the sale of beer and/or wine and/or distilled spirits, either for package sales or for consumption on the premises, shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 100 yards of any school or church. 
(c)	Proximity to occupied residence. In addition to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, no license for the retail sale of beer and/or wine and/or distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any place of business located within 100 yards of an occupied residence unless the location of the business was properly zoned for retail business purposes or held a valid license on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. Any residence owned by the same owner as the business seeking a beer and/or wine license shall likewise be exempt from the distance requirement. 
(d)	Except for a farm winery located on land zoned for agriculture, no license permitted under this chapter shall be issued to any location which is not properly zoned for retail business purposes by an appropriate zoning ordinance or other authority for the county. Renewal applications for those who held a license on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be exempt from this provision. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011; Ord. of 4-22-2014 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-25. - Existing licensed business; compliance. 
(a)	To prevent an unconstitutional taking of property, all licensees for alcoholic beverages within the county in compliance with county ordinance requirements involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure in effect at the time of first receiving the license and continuing to be in compliance herewith shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure. Renewals of such licenses shall also be deemed in compliance under this section to the extent provided in this subsection. 
(b)	Transfers of business ownership at the same location shall be deemed in compliance under this section with regard to the county Code requirements involving distance, location, parking and type of building structure, provided that such business complied with such requirements at the time a license was first issued for such business and further provided that such business has continuously been in compliance with such requirements. These transfers may be approved by the administrator, provided the transferee meets all of the license requirements for a new license. 
(c)	Business transfers to new locations and new licenses must comply with all requirements of this chapter and must be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-26. - Temporary permit for special event in parking lot of licensed establishment. 
(a)	The licensee or owner of a business establishment holding a current license under this chapter allowing consumption of alcohol on the premises may be issued a special event permit to conduct a special event in the parking lot of the licensed establishment, under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)	Applications for special event permits must be in writing on forms provided by the marshal and must be received with the applicable fee, as established by the board of commissioners, at least 30 days prior to the date of the scheduled special event. Application forms are available in the commissioner's office. 
(2)	Special events must take place entirely within the private parking lot of the licensed establishment and shall only permit the sale and consumption of beer and/or wine. 
(3)	Special events shall comply with all applicable provisions of state and local law pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages and all zoning and land use regulations. 
(4)	The presence, location, or concentration of persons, animals, structures, vehicles, displays, or other items incident to the conduct of the event shall not interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrians and vehicles entering and exiting the property. 
(5)	The presence, location, or concentration of persons, animals, structures, vehicles, displays, or other items incident to the conduct of the event shall not interfere with access to the event area or contiguous areas by law enforcement, fire, ambulance, or other emergency vehicles. 
(6)	The administrator or his designee may deny or immediately revoke any special event permit if it is determined that the special event violates any provision of state or local law or if it is determined that the sale, distribution, or consumption of alcoholic beverages at the event may endanger the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(b)	No licensed establishment shall be permitted to host more than three special events under this chapter in any calendar year. 
(c)	The special events described under this section shall have a duration of no more than three consecutive days and shall be otherwise governed by the opening and closing time restrictions contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-27. - Display of license. 
Holders of licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall display them prominently and in plain view at all times on the premises for which said licenses were issued. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-28. - Manufacture of distilled spirits. 
(a)	The manufacture of distilled spirits within the unincorporated areas of Rabun County shall be allowed, as provided in this section and as permitted and regulated by state and federal law. 
(b)	Rabun County shall issue annual license(s) for manufacturing distilled spirits to qualified applicants. The licensee must meet all requirements of this chapter, unless otherwise noted in this section, for the issuance of the license for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)	A licensee for the manufacture of distilled spirits shall be exempt from the food sale requirements provided for in this chapter. 
(d)	Before a license for the manufacture of distilled spirits may be issued, the property upon which the proposed distillery is to be located must lie in an area zoned as follows: 
(1)	A commercial district zoned pursuant to article IV of chapter 56 of the Rabun County Code of Ordinances; 
(2)	An industrial district zoned pursuant to article V of chapter 56 of the Rabun County Code of Ordinances; or 
(3)	An agricultural district zoned pursuant to article VI of chapter 56 of the Rabun County Code of Ordinances. 
(e)	A manufacturer or distiller issued a license pursuant to this chapter may provide educational and promotional tours. 
(f)	A manufacturer or distiller issued a license pursuant to this chapter which provides educational and promotional tours, may include free tastings on the premises by members of the public of tax-paid varieties of distilled spirits manufactured by such distiller. 
(g)	As used in this code section, the term: 
(1)	"Free tastings" means the provision of complementary samples of distilled spirits to the public for consumption on the premises of a distiller. 
(2)	"Sample" means one-half of one ounce of distilled spirits. 
(h)	No distiller conducting free tastings under this code section shall provide, directly or indirectly, more than one sample to a person in one calendar day. Free tastings shall be held in a designated tasting area on the premises of the distiller, and all opened bottles shall be visible at all times. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2012) 
Secs. 4-29—4-80. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-81. - Fees. 
(a)	Application fee. All material, information, petitions or other data required by this article or required by the board of commissioners shall be provided and furnished by the applicant and license holder at the cost of the applicant. There will be a nonrefundable application fee in the amount provided in the county fee schedule. 
(b)	Criminal history fee. In addition to the application fee, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable criminal history fee in the amount specified in the county fee schedule to defray the costs of processing the applicant's fingerprints and obtaining the required criminal history. 
(c)	License fee. In addition to application and criminal history fees, the applicant shall submit with his application the first annual license fee in the amount provided in the county fee schedule. In the event issuance of the license is denied, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(d)	Renewal fees. Licenses issued hereunder are renewable annually upon payment of the renewal fee provided in the county fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Secs. 4-82—4-103. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-104. - Servers limited to employees. 
Drinks shall be served only by employees of the establishments licensed for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-105. - Lewd dancing prohibited. 
No licensee under this division shall permit professional belly dancers, strip dancing, exotic dancing or any exhibitions of any like kind by whatever name called in connection with the operation of a restaurant, lounge or private club. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-106. - Dangerous weapons prohibited. 
(a)	No person, either employee or patron, shall have on his person any firearm or other dangerous weapon while on any premises licensed under this article. 
(b)	It shall be the responsibility of the owners, operators, managers and their employees to immediately report all violations of this section to the police department. Failure to report these violations shall be a violation of this section. 
(c)	This section shall not apply to county law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Secs. 4-107—4-130. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-131. - Penalties and revocation. 
(a)	Any licensee who fails to pay the taxes imposed in this division by the county, or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the county, within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent per month of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof. 
(b)	The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at a rate of one percent per month. Interest shall be assessed for each month, or fraction thereof, from the day of the month that the amount or any portion thereof should have been paid until the date of payment. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-132. - Malt beverages. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale of malt beverages within the county as follows: 
(1)	Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax pursuant to the fee schedule on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; and 
(2)	Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax pursuant to the fee schedule per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-133. - Wine. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale or use of wine by the package an excise tax pursuant to the fee schedule per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-134. - Distilled spirits. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the package an excise tax pursuant to the fee schedule per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(Ord. of 4-22-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-135. - Same—Consumption. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the amount of three percent of the charge to the public for the beverage. This tax does not apply to the sale of fermented beverages. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-136. - Payment of tax; records and reports; penalty. 
(a)	All taxes, except those levied in section 4-135, shall be imposed on the wholesale dealer, computable and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping or delivering alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer in the incorporated areas of the county, whether delivered to the dealer's place of business for resale, shall, as a condition to the privilege of carrying on such business in the county: 
(1)	Keep true and correct records of all sales, shipments and deliveries of such alcoholic beverages to each retail declare; and such records shall be preserved for a period of one year and shall be made available on request for inspection by any duly authorized representative of the county. 
(2)	Collect from each retail dealer at the time of delivery of the alcoholic beverages the amount of tax due under the terms of this division and hold the same in trust for the county until such amount is remitted to the county as next provided. 
(3)	On or before the 20th of each calendar month make a verified and comprehensive report to the administrator which shall correctly show all sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages made to or for retail dealers in the county for the month immediately preceding the report. The report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount collected under the terms of this chapter, including copies of all sales invoices to each retail dealer, and such other information as may be called for by the board of commissioners. The report shall be accompanied by remittance to the administrator of all taxes collected or due as shown on the report. 
(b)	Failure of the wholesale dealer or distributor to remit the taxes required in this division will result in a penalty of ten percent of the tax due in addition to the tax due. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-137. - Distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)	The tax imposed on retail consumption dealers by section 4-135 shall be payable as provided in this section. 
(b)	Every licensee shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverages served shall be itemized separately. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefore at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(c)	Every licensee or its agent is authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed in this division from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink sold within its licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the administrator to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(d)	All taxes collected by any licensee or agent under this division shall be due and payable to the county on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective calendar month, as set forth in this division. 
(e)	On or before the 20th day of the month, a return for the preceding calendar month shall be filed with the administrator in such form as the administrator may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax under this division. The return shall be accompanied by remittance to the administrator of all taxes collected or due as shown on the return. 
(f)	All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink; amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the county administrator. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-138. - Requirements of wholesalers generally. 
All wholesalers shall comply with this chapter before they can sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any establishment in the county. Deliveries shall be made in a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as set out in this division, and shall be subject to inspection by duly authorized authorities of the county at all times when deliveries are made. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-139. - Failure to collect taxes at delivery; failure to report or remit. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any wholesale dealer or distributor, person, firm or corporation to delivery any alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer within the incorporated areas of the county without collecting the taxes provided for in this division at the time of delivery. 
(b)	If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports provided for in this division, the county council shall notify the party in writing, and if the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of the notice, the board of commissioners may withdraw from the wholesale dealer or distributor the privilege of doing business in the county by notifying the state revenue commissioner of the failure and by notifying the retail dealer that further acceptance of deliveries from the wholesaler, until the taxes are paid, may subject the retail dealer to penalty for violation of section 4-140. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-140. - Unpaid taxes, sales are violation. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation to sell at retail within the incorporated areas of the county any alcoholic beverages on which the taxes provided for in this division have not been paid. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-141. - Suspension, revocation or prohibition of retailer's license. 
A violation of this division or other sections of this chapter shall authorize the board of commissioners to suspend, revoke or place on probation, with or without conditions, the license of any retail party or holder in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in section 4-4. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Secs. 4-142—4-151. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-152. - Off-site event permits. 
Rabun County shall be authorized to issue off-site event permits for those businesses licensed pursuant to this chapter to sell beer and wine for consumption on the premises only, to provide for beer and wine sales to be held at off-site events, for events lasting no more than three consecutive days so long as the permit applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the county the following: 
(1)	The applicant contracts to indemnify the county and provide general liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 for the specific event; 
(2)	The applicant provides adequate assurance to the county that no underage persons will be served through an appropriate program of identification and restriction of the area of service; 
(3)	No alcoholic beverages purchased off-site may be brought into the area of the event for consumption and no opened alcoholic beverages shall be removed from the area of service by the consuming public; 
(4)	All persons serving beer and wine at said event would be retail dealers licensed pursuant to Georgia Law and pursuant to the requirements herein to sell beer and wine for retail consumption on premises; 
(5)	The applicant shall reimburse the county for any additional public safety personnel for event security and furthermore consent in writing to venue and jurisdiction being in Rabun County, Georgia, for collection purposes and for any other disputes between the parties; 
(6)	The applicant for the permit fully complies with all sections of this chapter; 
(7)	The applicant pays a per-event fee of $100.00; and 
(8)	No permit shall be issued for an off-site event if the proposed site of the off-site event is located within 100 yards of any school or church as provided for under subsection 4-24(b) and as measured from the nearest point of the school or church to the nearest point of the off-site location area for which the off-site permit is sought, with the distance to be verified by the county marshal prior to issuance of the off-site permit. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Sec. 4-153. - Parking lot lighting required. 
No person, individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, non-profit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit shall in any manner operate an establishment pursuant to a license given for the purpose of allowing the sale and service of alcoholic beverages upon the premises for consumption on the premises until and unless the establishment shall have installed minimum lighting in the outdoor parking area as provided in this article. 
(1)	Penalties for violation. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to the following: 
a.	Revocation of any license issued by the county for the purpose of selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; 
b.	Subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00; 
c.	Subject to confinement of not more than 30 days; 
d.	Injunctive relief commenced by the county board of commissioners through the superior courts of the county to enjoin the operation of any establishment by any person for sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises without first have obtained, maintained and supplied the minimum lighting required in this article; 
e.	Subject to civil penalties which may be levied by any court of appropriate jurisdiction within the county, for violation of ordinances. 
(2)	Any parking space, lot or area where a car may be parked upon a premises licensed under this chapter by the county shall provide for outdoor lighting sufficient to illuminate any open or sheltered parking area with an illumination at the surface of no less than three foot candles. Such minimum lighting shall be installed, maintained and operational during all business hours. 
(3)	No person shall be authorized to apply for or receive a license for the purpose of serving alcoholic beverages on the premises unless the minimum lighting provided for by this section shall be first installed and certified operational by the utility company servicing the area with electrical power. 
(4)	Any person shall be exempt from the provisions of this article for minimum lighting if the utility which serves the area in which the business is located certifies to the county board of commissioners that it would be economically impractical to install the minimum lighting provided for in this article on or upon the premises now operated by any the person. The exemption shall include current operating businesses only and in no event shall any person be awarded or granted a new license unless the minimum lighting provisions of this article shall first have been provided and complied with pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 3-22-2011) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to restrict adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; state regulation of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.; state regulation of billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq.; authority of county to regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2; state regulation of carnivals, circuses and itinerant entertainers, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-15. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 6-19. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-1) 
Sec. 6-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means a person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The county may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)	Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)	Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)	Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)	Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)	Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)	Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)	Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)	Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-2) 
Sec. 6-21. - Erotic adult/dance or entertainment establishment regulations. 
The following regulations shall apply to erotic adult/dance or entertainment establishments: 
(1)	No person shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic adult/dance or entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment certificate/license issued pursuant to this section. Application for license shall be made to the county clerk and accompanied by the certificate/license fee in an amount provided in the county fee schedule. 
(2)	No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic adult/dance or entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the county clerk showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(3)	An erotic adult/dance or entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(4)	No erotic adult/dance or entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(5)	No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to any erotic adult/dance or entertainment establishment. 
(6)	An erotic adult/dance or entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. Monday through Saturday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on Sunday or Christmas Day. 
(7)	No erotic adult/dance or entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(8)	Any erotic adult/dance or entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all certificates required by this article. 
(9)	All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(10)	No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(11)	No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(12)	No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(13)	No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(14)	All areas of an establishment licensed under this article shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-3) 
Sec. 6-22. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-4) 
Sec. 6-23. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-5) 
Sec. 6-24. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-6) 
Sec. 6-25. - Location. 
(a)	No adult business or use restricted under the provisions of this article shall be located: 
(1)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined under this article is located; 
(4)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
(5)	On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage on a county- or state-owned road, street or highway. 
(b)	For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-7) 
Sec. 6-26. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)	Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee, shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)	Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, such person shall file a notice with the county clerk of his intended employment on forms supplied by the county clerk and shall supply receive approval of such employment from the county clerk within 15 days. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the licensing officer requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular county or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of the denial, apply to the county clerk for a hearing. The decision of the county clerk after the hearing may be appealed to the county commission which may issue such order as is proper under the circumstances. Administrative, investigative, and criminal history fees as may be required by the county fee schedule shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the county clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)	Suspension; revocation of certificate. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the county, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the county shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of his certificate. 
(d)	Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-8) 
Sec. 6-27. - Change of location or name. 
(a)	No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the county commission, has been deposited with the county and approval has been obtained from the county administrator. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the applicable provisions of this Code have been met. 
(b)	No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)	Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-9) 
Sec. 6-28. - Appeal—Procedure. 
(a)	The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the county clerk. 
(b)	The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the commission and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the commission and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)	The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for commission action. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-10) 
Sec. 6-29. - Same—Commission determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the commission agenda, the commission may take either of the following actions: 
(1)	Set a hearing date before the county commission and instruct the county clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; or 
(2)	Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for the hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-11) 
Sec. 6-30. - County commission hearing. 
Whenever the county clerk has scheduled an appeal before the county commission, at the time and date set therefor, the commission shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from county staff. The county commission may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the county commission shall be final. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-12) 
Sec. 6-31. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-13) 
Sec. 6-32. - Traditional rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The county commission and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-14) 
Sec. 6-33. - Hearing officer—Report. 
(a)	The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the commission. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state the findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the county clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the county clerk, with additional copies furnished to the county administrator and sheriff. 
(b)	The county clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed meeting not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-15) 
Sec. 6-34. - Same—Action by county commission. 
The county commission may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the commission does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)	Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; 
(2)	Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-16) 
Sec. 6-35. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under the provisions of this article, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a certificate granted under this article. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-17) 
Sec. 6-36. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-18) 
Sec. 6-37. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the county clerk. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-19) 
Sec. 6-38. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the county marshal on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the county marshal shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the county marshal may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The county marshal shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe," as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-20) 
Sec. 6-39. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-21) 
Sec. 6-40. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine, as approved by the county commission and kept on file in the office of the county clerk, or by imprisonment, or both. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the certificate issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-22-2007, § 10-22) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing and registration of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-3; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; disposal of diseased, disabled, or dead animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1; dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq.; animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; cruelty to dogs; authorized killing of dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the position of animal control officer, to establish regulations for animals in order to protect the public health and welfare, to comply with provisions of state law, to regulate the treatment and protection of animals, to provide for enforcement and penalties, and for other purposes. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-20) 
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means any domesticated dog or cat has have been placed upon public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or attendant of the private property and is unattended or uncared for. A domesticated dog or cat shall also be considered as abandoned, if it has been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of the animal for a period of time in excess of 36 hours unattended and without proper food and water. 
Animal means all domesticated dogs and cats, male and female, singular and plural, actually in, or intended to be in, the custody and control of an owner. For this purpose, the term "animal" does not include any wild animal or horse, goat, pig, fowl or any livestock. 
Animal control officer means any officer, agent or employee of the county (or of an organization associated with the county) designated by the county to perform the duties of an animal control officer as provided for in this chapter, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22, as amended from time to time. 
Animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, kennel, animal exhibition or animal shelter, except the term "animal establishment" shall not include veterinary medical facilities, licensed research facilities, facilities operated by government agencies, or licensed animal dealers regulated by the United States Department of Agriculture under the provisions of 7 USC 2131 et seq. 
Animal shelter means a facility designated or recognized by the county for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals. 
Authority means an animal control board or local board of health, as determined by the governing authority. 
Board of health means the county board of health. 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to this chapter. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement or military officer's official duties. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense under O.C.G.A. Chapter 5 of Title 16. 
Dangerous dog. The term "dangerous dog" means any dog that: 
a.	Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph. 
b.	Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
c.	While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal, provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-21, 4-8-41. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon verbal approval command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which it is located. 
Humane manner means care of animal to include, but not be limited to, adequate heat, ventilation and sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Kennel means an establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling or boarding dogs or cats or engaging in the training of dogs or cats. 
Mail means to send by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
Neutered means rendered permanently incapable of reproduction. 
Nuisance means an animal which: 
(1)	Damages, soils or defecates on private property other than the owner's or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner; 
(2)	Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noise making; 
(3)	Chases vehicles or molests, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public or private property.The term "domestic animal" includes a dog, cat, horse, goat, pig, fowl and livestock. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that, without provocation, bites a human being on public or private property; provided, however, that the term "potentially dangerous dog" does not include the following: 
(1)	A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties; and 
(2)	A dog that inflicts an injury within the meaning of this chapter if the injury was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-21, 4-8-41. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or vicious dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state or local court; or records of a dog control officer as provided for in this chapter and by the laws of the state. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), §§ 10-21, 10-22; Ord. of 6-24-2014, §§ 1, 2 ) 
Secs. 8-3—8-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-23. - Animal control unit; authority for contracts for animal control services. 
(a)	The county has created the county animal control unit. The animal control unit shall be staffed with such personnel as may from time to time be authorized by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	The board of commissioners shall be authorized to enter into an agreement with one or more other governing authorities to provide joint animal control services pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as provided by state law. 
(c)	Likewise, the board of commissioners shall be authorized to enter into an agreement with non-governmental entities to provide joint animal control services pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-38(1)) 
Editor's note— The county has entered into an agreement with Boggs Mountain Humane Shelter for certain animal control services. 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction and duty of local governments, appointment of dog control officer, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22; animal control board authorized, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(d). 
Sec. 8-24. - Authority of animal control officers. 
An animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. All law enforcement agencies of the board of commissioners shall cooperate with the animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-38(2)) 
Sec. 8-25. - Interference with animal control officer, vehicle, and shelter prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to: 
(1)	Interfere with or fail to cooperate with the animal control officer or other officer acting pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)	Take or attempt to take any animal from a county vehicle used to transport an animal pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)	Take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control shelter or other impounding area used by the animal control unit for the purposes of this chapter without lawful authority. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-38(3)) 
Sec. 8-26. - Authority of animal control officer to destroy animal posing immediate threat. 
The animal control officer may destroy any animal which presents a threat of immediate harm to public health or safety or other innocent animals and which cannot be taken for impoundment without threat of serious harm to the animal control officer or his agents. The destruction shall be in the most humane method available to the officer on scene. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-38(4)) 
Sec. 8-27. - Authority of animal control officer to conduct canvasses. 
The animal control officer is authorized to make canvasses of the county, including homes and businesses, as is deemed necessary for the purpose of ascertaining that all animals of proper age are vaccinated against rabies with a current vaccination, and are properly tagged. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-38(5)) 
Sec. 8-28. - Right of entry to investigate suspected violations. 
The animal control officer shall be authorized to enter either public or private property to impound any animal he has reasonable cause to believe is in violation of this chapter. The animal control officer can if applicable, in lieu of impoundment, issue a summons for violations. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-38(6)) 
Sec. 8-29. - Summons. 
Upon information known to, or a complaint lodged with, any officer or member of the animal control unit, or a law enforcement agency employee of the board of commissioners that any owner or possessor of an animal is in violation of this chapter, the animal control officer or any law enforcement officer may, after investigation, issue a summons requiring the owner or possessor of such animal to appear before the judge of the magistrate's court of the county on a day and time certain to stand trial for the violation. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-39) 
Sec. 8-30. - Parent responsible for compliance of minor animal owners. 
If the owner of an animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-25(2)) 
Sec. 8-31. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating any part or section of the animal control ordinance, except provisions relating to dangerous or vicious dogs shall be subject to the imposition of a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for up to 60 days or both, for a first offense. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-40(1); Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 3 ) 
Secs. 8-32—8-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 8-51. - Vaccination required. 
No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat over four months of age within the jurisdiction of the county unless such animal is vaccinated for rabies. Further, all animals will be required to acquire all subsequent vaccinations required pursuant to the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-23(1)) 
State Law reference— Responsibility for control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1. 
Sec. 8-52. - Certification of vaccination and vaccination tag. 
A certificate of vaccination for rabies shall be issued to the owner of each animal vaccinated, along with a vaccination tag indicating the year in which it was issued. It is assumed that any animal has not had a rabies vaccination if proof cannot be provided for the administration of such vaccination. The rabies tag shall be secured to a collar on the animal in a manner that it cannot be easily removed or lost by the animal. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-23(2), (3)) 
Sec. 8-53. - Killing or releasing animal under observation for rabies prohibited. 
It is unlawful for anyone, other than a licensed veterinarian or animal control officer, to kill or release any animal under observation for rabies or suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal which has bitten a human being, or to remove such animal from the county without written permission from an animal control officer and the board of health. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-23(5)) 
Secs. 8-54—8-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-70. - Dog vaccination tag and identification tag required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or controls any dog to allow such animal to run free or roam unrestricted by chain, leash or fence within the county unless such animal shall have and wear a collar or harness complete with current vaccination tag from a licensed veterinarian and an identification tag. The identification tag must contain at least the name, address, and telephone number of the dog's owner. 
(b)	No owner or custodian of any dog in heat shall permit the dog to roam or run free beyond the limits of his or her property. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1996(1); Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 4 ) 
Sec. 8-71. - Vaccination tag and collar or harness required for dog exhibitions. 
The owner shall provide a collar or harness and current rabies tag for each dog participating in a dog show, exhibition, field trial, herding, or training for these events. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1996(1)) 
Sec. 8-72. - Removal of tags and certain collars; restitution; exemption. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to remove identification from any animal other than the person's own animal. 
(b)	No person shall remove an electronic or radio transmitting collar used to track the dog without permission from the dog's owner with the intention of preventing or hindering the owner from locating such dog, and if such dog is lost or killed as a result of the violator's removal of such collar, the violator shall be required to pay the dog's owner restitution in the amount of the actual value of the dog and any associated veterinary expenses. 
(c)	This Code section shall not apply to an owner or lessee of real property who removes a collar from a dog caught on his or her owned or leased property while such dog remains on such property if such owner or lessee gives notice of such action within 24 hours to the animal control unit. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-25(4); Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 4 ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 24, 2014, § 4 , changed the title of § 8-72 from "Removal of collars and tags prohibited" to read as set out. 
Sec. 8-73. - Pet abandonment prohibited. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal to knowingly abandon the animal within the jurisdiction of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1996(2); Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-27) 
Sec. 8-74. - Cruelty to dogs; authorized killing of dogs. 
No person shall perform a cruel act on any dog; nor shall any person harm, maim, or kill any dog, or attempt to do so, except that a person may: 
(1)	Defend his or her person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by a dog: or 
(2)	Kill any dog causing injury or damage to any livestock, poultry or pet animal. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-26; Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 4 ) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 24, 2014 , § 4, changed the title of § 8-74 from "Cruelty to animals prohibited" to read as set out. 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5. 
Sec. 8-75. - Keeping of stray animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the actual consent of the owner, to harbor, feed, keep in possession by confinement, or otherwise have any animal which does not belong to him unless he has, within 24 hours of the time the animal came into his possession, notified the department. Upon receiving such notice, the department may take the animal and deal with it accordingly. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-37) 
Sec. 8-76. - Sanitation. 
Any owner, custodian or possessor of any domesticated animal who fails to maintain in a clean and sanitary condition and free from extreme and unreasonable objectionable odor all structures, pens, yards and areas adjacent thereto wherein any animal is kept shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-28) 
Sec. 8-77. - Responsibility to report animal bites. 
Any person within the jurisdiction of the county who is aware of any animal bite inflicted upon a human by any animal shall be required to report the bite to the animal control officer or a public health official pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-25(3)) 
State Law reference— Animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4. 
Secs. 8-78—8-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS 

Sec. 8-90. - Abandonment of dead animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or is caring for an animal which has died or has been killed to abandon the animal, its parts or blood. Such person shall dispose of the dead animal as provided for in this division. Under no conditions may dead animals be abandoned in wells or open pits of any kind on private or public land or in any type of waterway. 
Sec. 8-91. - Disposal on certain property prohibited; county approval required. 
No person shall dispose of an animal, its parts or blood by burial on the land of another without permission of the owner of the land. Arrangements for proper burial must be made with a county official in order to dispose of a dead animal in a county landfill or by an approved method. 
Sec. 8-92. - Removal and disposition of dead animals within rights-of-way. 
Any other provision of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, it shall be the duty of the animal control unit to remove and dispose of the carcasses of all dead animals found within the rights-of-way of all county roads maintained either totally or in part from county funds. Such carcasses or parts of carcasses shall be disposed of in a manner consistent with this division. 
Sec. 8-93. - Method of disposal of dead animals. 
Methods that can be used for disposal of dead animals are burial and incineration in a county-approved incinerator. Disposal of animal carcasses by either of the approved methods must be completed within 12 hours after death or discovery of the carcass. If incineration is chosen, the entire carcass must be reduced to ashes in the incineration process. Carcasses which are buried must be buried at least three feet below the ground level, but not more than eight feet and have not less than three feet of earth cover over the carcass. 
State Law reference— Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et. seq. 
Secs. 8-94—8-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NUISANCE ANIMALS 

Sec. 8-111. - Dog or cat nuisance subject to impoundment; summons to owner. 
Any animal that is declared a nuisance animal by the definition appearing within section 8-2 shall be impounded if the owner of said animal is not known. If the owner is known, a summons may be issued. The animal will be held at an animal shelter unless the owner redeems the animal in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-24) 
Sec. 8-112. - Duties of animal owners to prevent nuisance. 
It shall be the duty of all animal owners to prevent their animals from constituting a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-25(1)) 
Secs. 8-113—8-137. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 8-138. - Property owner or injured party may impound. 
Any person finding any animal upon his property to his injury or annoyance may take it and remove it to any private or other animal shelter that will take possession of it. If no such shelter is available, he may hold the animal in his own possession, and as soon as possible notify the animal control officer of this custody, giving a description of the animal and the name of the owner if known. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-29) 
Sec. 8-139. - Owner liable for costs of impoundment. 
The owner of an animal impounded under the authority of this chapter shall be liable for the cost of maintenance of the animal during such impoundment as provided in the county fee schedule, together with any veterinary costs incurred by the county in providing care for the animal. Impoundment costs shall be payable upon redemption of said animal. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-30) 
Sec. 8-140. - Disposition of animals impounded by the county for violations. 
Any animal not redeemed within 72 hours after the owner is notified may be disposed of by euthanasia or adoption. All animals adopted must be neutered pursuant to the laws of the state. The owner of the hospital or shelter is made an agent of the county for this purpose, and his actions in this regard are declared to be for a governmental purpose. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-31(1)) 
Sec. 8-141. - Animals not to be used for experimentation, testing, or research. 
No animal subject to impoundment shall be sold, surrendered, transferred, donated to or adopted by any person, corporation or entity that conducts experimentation, testing or research on animals. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-31(5)) 
State Law reference— Sterilization of dogs and cats, O.C.G.A. § 4-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-142. - Voluntary surrender of animals to shelter for impoundment. 
Any person not a resident of the county who surrenders an animal to the shelter shall be charged the fee provided in the county fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-36) 
Sec. 8-143. - Disposition of animals surrendered to shelter for impoundment. 
(a)	At no time may any person who surrendered an animal for adoption retrieve the animal. 
(b)	All animals surrendered to the shelter may be placed for adoption or destroyed after five days. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2008(1), § 10-31(2), (3)) 
Secs. 8-144—8-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESPONSIBLE DOG OWNERSHIP LAW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 24, 2014, § 5 , repealed the former Art. VII, §§ 8-170—8-181, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to dangerous dogs and derived from an ordinance adopted May 24, 2008, §§ 10-32—10-35, 10-40, 10-41. 
State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Mercedes' Law (vicious dog control), O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq. 

Sec. 8-170. - Procedures for classifying dangerous and vicious dogs; notice; hearing. 
(a)	Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(b)	When a dog control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the authority on the dog control officer's determination within 15 days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall also provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. 
(c)	When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with subsection (b) of this Code section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the authority for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the healing, the authority conducting the hearing shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the authority conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
(d)	Within ten days after the healing, the authority which conducted the hearing shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to Code section 8-171, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(e)	Judicial review of the authority's final decision may be had in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-13-19. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-171. - Euthanasia conditions. 
(a)	The judge of any superior court of competent jurisdiction within this state may order the euthanasia of a dog if the court finds, after notice and opportunity for hearing as provided by Code section 8-170 that the dog has seriously injured a human or presents a danger to humans not suitable for control under this article and: 
(1)	The owner or custodian of the dog has been convicted of a violation of any state criminal law and the crime was related to such dog; or 
(2)	Any local government authority has filed with the court a civil action requesting the euthanasia of the dog. 
(b)	A dog that is found, after notice and opportunity for hearing as provided by Code section 8-170 to have caused a serious injury to a human on more than one occasion shall be euthanized; provided, however, that no injury occurring before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall count for purposes of this subsection. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-172. - Certificate of registration required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this county a classified dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provision of this Code section. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)	No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-173. - Requirements for registration of a dangerous dog. 
Unless otherwise specified by this Code section, a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)	The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the dangerous dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dangerous dog from leaving such property; and 
(2)	Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-174. - Requirements for registration of a vicious dog. 
Except as provided in subsections (5) and (6) of this Code section, a certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)	The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property; 
(2)	Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)	A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog: and 
(4)	The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog. 
(5)	No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious dog. 
(6)	No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
a.	A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1. 
b.	The felony of dog fighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
c.	A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1. 
from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his or her sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-175. - Certificates of registration renewed annually. 
Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a vicious dog, a dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with provisions of this article. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this article. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-176. - Notice required if owner moves. 
(a)	The owner of a classified dog who moves from one residence to another within the county shall notify the dog control officer of the change of address within ten days. 
(b)	The owner of a classified dog shall notify the dog control officer if the owner is moving out of the county. 
(c)	The owner of a similarly classified dog who moves into this county shall register the dog as required in Code section 8-172 within 15 days of becoming a resident. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-177. - Notice is required if dog is unconfined, has attacked, died or euthanized. 
The owner of a classified dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose or has attacked a human and shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog has died or has been euthanized. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-178. - Vicious dog transfer, sell or donation prohibition. 
A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a government facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-179. - Restrictions for permitting a dangerous dog off owner's property. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be off the owner's property unless: 
(1)	The dog is restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary: or 
(2)	The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate. 
(3)	The dog is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-180. - Restrictions for permitting a vicious dog off owner's property. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be: 
(1)	Outside an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog while on the owner's property or outside a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property unless: 
a.	The dog is muzzled and restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; or 
b.	The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate. 
(2)	Unattended with minors. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-181. - Grounds for confiscation of dangerous or vicious dogs. 
(a)	A dog control officer or law enforcement officer shall immediately impound a dog if the officer believes the dog poses a threat to the public safety. 
(b)	A dangerous or vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by any dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation of this article. A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)	The owner of any dog that has been confiscated pursuant to this article may recover such dog upon payment of reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this article. Fees for confiscation of dangerous or vicious dogs shall be as provided in the county fee schedule. All fines and all charges for services performed by a law enforcement or dog control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the dog. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(d)	In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner and the owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-182. - Prior classification of potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog amended. 
(a)	Any dog classified prior to the effective date of this ordinance as a potentially dangerous dog in this county shall on and after that date be classified as a dangerous dog under this article. 
(b)	Any dog classified prior to the effective date of this ordinance as a dangerous dog shall on and after that date be classified as a vicious dog under this article. 
(c)	The owner of any dog referred to in subsection (a) and (b) of this Code section shall come into compliance with all current provisions of this article within six months of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-183. - Penalties. 
(a)	Except as otherwise specified in this article, any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	A person who violates section 8-180 of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature. 
(c)	An owner with a previous conviction for a violation of this article whose classified dog causes serious injury to a human being under circumstances constituting another violation of this article shall be guilty of a felony and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than one nor more than ten years, a fine of not less than $5,000.00 nor more than $10,000.00 or both. In addition the classified dog shall be euthanized at the cost of the owner. 
(d)	Any irregularity in classification proceedings shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this article so long as the owner of the dog received actual notice of the classification and did not pursue a civil remedy for the correction of the irregularity. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Sec. 8-184. - Liability for damages. 
(a)	The owner or, if no owner can be found, the custodian exercising care and control over any dog which while off the owner's or custodian's property causes injury, death, or damage directly or indirectly to any livestock, poultry, or pet animal shall be civilly liable to the owner of the livestock, poultry or pet animal for injury, death, or damage caused by the dog. The owner or, if no owner can be found, the custodian exercising care and control over any dog shall be liable for any damage caused by such dog to public or private property. The liability of the owner or custodian of the dog shall include consequential damages. 
(b)	This Code section is to be considered cumulative of other remedies provided by law. There is no intent to eliminate or limit other causes of action which might inure to the owner of any livestock, poultry, or pet animal. 
(c)	Under no circumstances shall the board of commissioners or any employee or official of the board of commissioners which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of the chapter be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been classified as being a dangerous dog or vicious dog or by a dog that the board of commissioners has failed to classify as a dangerous dog or vicious dog or by a dog which has been classified as being a dangerous dog or vicious dog, but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in this article or by a dangerous dog or vicious dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in this article. 
( Ord. of 6-24-2014, § 5 ) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; building trade contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; enforcement of adopted codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; state minimum standards codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; minimum standard codes to have uniform application throughout the state, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-25, 8-2-28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	Failure to secure a permit as required in this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law like other misdemeanors as provided by state law. 
(b)	The board of commissioners may at their option seek injunctive relief in the various courts of the state to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	Remedies stated herein may be pursued singularly or cumulatively and the failure of one shall not deny the other providing the facts and circumstances shall permit the implementations of some fine, penalty or relief. 
(d)	Alleged violations of this chapter shall be heard and considered by the chief county magistrate provided that in no event shall any fine rendered by the chief magistrate exceed the chief magistrate's lawful jurisdiction. 
(e)	Any violations of this chapter which shall continue unabated for 24 hours shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter and if proven shall constitute multiple and continued violations of this chapter subject to fine or injunctive relief but in no event shall any fine exceed $500.00 per day for any such continued violation. 
(Ord. of 7-23-2002, § 5) 
Secs. 10-2—10-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 10-24. - Liability of county. 
The permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this Code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the county nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, that may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
Sec. 10-25. - Conflict of regulations. 
Where in any specific case sections of the technical codes, of this Code of articles, and of state or federal law or regulation specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
Sec. 10-26. - Appendices to technical codes. 
Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
Sec. 10-27. - Referenced standards. 
Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
Sec. 10-28. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this Code or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the administrative officer. 
Sec. 10-29. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the administrative officer. The administrative officer shall approve any such alternate, provided the administrative officer finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The administrative officer shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
Sec. 10-30. - Existing buildings to comply. 
Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The administrative officer shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
Sec. 10-31. - Change of occupancy. 
If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the administrative officer. 
Sec. 10-32. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the administrative officer to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
Sec. 10-33. - High efficiency requirements for toilets, shower heads, faucets, and other high efficiency plumbing fixtures. 
High efficiency plumbing fixtures, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3, shall be required whenever plumbing fixtures are installed during new construction work and shall also be required when plumbing fixtures are replaced during all alteration, repairs or rehabilitation work. 
( Ord. of 2-25-2014 ) 
Secs. 10-34—10-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-53. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative officer means the representative appointed by the board of commissioners and assigned the responsibility of administering this chapter and issuing building permits associated thereto. 
Altering building or repairing building means any alteration or augmentation of the existing structure such as increasing square footage or any additions which may result in the increase of the fair market value. This excludes general maintenance, repairs and upkeep, including but not limited to wallpapering, painting or replacing an existing portions of the structure such as windows, doors or the roof with similar material. 
Building means any structure, either permanently installed or mobile, having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of occupation by persons and/or animals. 
Electrical utility means any corporation, company, cooperative or individual usually and customarily in the business or providing electrical power to buildings. 
Health department means the county board of health and the appropriate officials charged with the authority of enforcing any rules and regulations of the county board of health. 
Planning commission means the county planning commission. 
(Ord. of 7-23-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 10-54. - Permit required. 
No person, corporation, company, cooperative or individual shall construct, repair or alter any building within the county unless they first shall obtain from the appropriate administrative officer a building permit. Applications for building permits may and shall be submitted on a form required by the administrative officer. 
(Ord. of 7-23-2002, § 3(a)) 
Sec. 10-55. - Connection of electric service prohibited without permit. 
No electrical utility corporation, company, cooperative or individual shall connect temporary or permanent electricity to a new, repaired or relocated building until the owner has applied for and received a building permit as provided for in this chapter. For the purpose of this article, the term "owner" may include a contractor, builder, attorney or other agent of the owner, provided that such agency shall be evidenced in writing, but in no event shall any electrical service be connected or provided until the appropriate building permit is issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 7-23-2002, § 3(b)) 
Sec. 10-56. - Requirements for permit; fees. 
No person, corporation, company, cooperative or individual shall be issued a building permit for the construction, alteration, repair or installation of a building within the county unless the following acts are completed: 
(1)	The owner or an agent for the owner has applied for and received a permit for an individual sewage disposal system intended to adequately dispose of sewage for the intended building and in accordance with the appropriate rules and regulations of the county health department. This subsection shall not apply to those buildings which shall be serviced by a sewage disposal system owned or operated by a city or county. 
(2)	The electrical apparatus intended for use to supply any electrical service to the building shall be constructed or installed in compliance with such minimum requirements as demanded or required by the supplier of the electric service. 
(3)	Sufficient information, plans and specifications for the intended building shall be presented to the administrative officer to sufficiently inform the officer that the building and its intended use complies with the rules and regulations of the county zoning ordinance, health department regulations and this article. 
(4)	The owner supplies to the administrative officer such other evidence or information as may reasonably be required by the administrative officer to allow a proper determination under this article. 
(5)	The owner or the owner's agent pays a building permit fee in the amount provided in the county fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 7-23-2002, § 4) 
Sec. 10-57. - Compliance with code provisions required. 
No person, corporation, company, cooperative or individual shall be issued a building permit by the administrative officer unless it is first determined that the applicant for the building permit has complied with and is currently in compliance with any applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-23-2002, § 6) 
Sec. 10-58. - Work begun before issuance of permit. 
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
Sec. 10-59. - Permit to be posted on property; providing copy to owner. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, any person or entity which is issued a permit which authorizes improvements to new or existing residential or commercial real property shall be required to post a copy of such permit in a conspicuous place in the vicinity of such property where such improvements are being undertaken or deliver a copy of the permit to the property owner within ten days after the permit is received. 
Sec. 10-60. - Work authorized. 
A building permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. 
Sec. 10-61. - Minor repairs. 
Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the administrative officer without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the codes. 
Sec. 10-62. - Information required. 
Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the administrative officer on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building; or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the administrative officer. 
Sec. 10-63. - Time limitations. 
An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 12 months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 360 days each may be allowed by the administrative officer for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
Secs. 10-64—10-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 10-88. - Requirements. 
When required by the administrative officer, one copy of specifications, and of drawings with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
Sec. 10-89. - Site drawings. 
Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The administrative officer may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
Secs. 10-90—10-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXAMINATION OF DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 10-109. - Plan review. 
The administrative officer shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicted and described is in accordance with the requirements of all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
Secs. 10-110—10-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ISSUANCE OF PERMITS 

Sec. 10-136. - Action on permits. 
The administrative officer shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the administrative officer is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
Sec. 10-137. - Refusal to issue permit. 
If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws or ordinances, the administrative officer shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
Sec. 10-138. - Contractor's responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with his license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
Secs. 10-139—10-163. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONDITIONS OF PERMITS 

Sec. 10-164. - Permit intent. 
A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the ordinances, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the administrative officer from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 12 months after its issuance. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 360 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the administrative officer. 
Secs. 10-165—10-271. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-272. - Enforcement by planning and zoning department; duties. 
The planning and zoning department, under the supervision of the administrative officer, shall enforce the provisions of this article. Authorized agents of the planning and zoning department are vested with the power necessary for the purpose of issuing charges and prosecuting persons charged with violating this chapter. In carrying out its duties under this chapter, the planning and zoning department shall have the following specific duties, in addition to such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the board of commissioners: 
(1)	The planning and zoning department shall receive applications and issue permits. 
(2)	The planning and zoning department shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of this chapter are met. 
(3)	The planning and zoning department shall enforce all ordinances relating to the construction, alteration, repair, installation, erection, removal, demolition, use, location, and maintenance of properties, buildings, equipment, appliances, or systems, except as may be otherwise provided for in other ordinances or regulatory measures. 
(4)	The planning and zoning department shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the interests of the county so require, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this chapter and render written reports on the same. 
(5)	The planning and zoning department shall issue notices or orders as may be necessary to enforce compliance with this article, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions or to secure the necessary safeguards. 
Sec. 10-273. - Coordination of enforcement. 
Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive responsibility of the planning and zoning department. 
Sec. 10-274. - Civil liability. 
No officer or member of the board of commissioners or employee of the county charged with the enforcement of this chapter in the discharge of duties, shall be rendered liable personally; and such officer, member, or employee is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this chapter. 
Sec. 10-275. - Contents and service of notice. 
The notice of violation shall include the following: 
(1)	An enumeration of conditions which the planning and zoning department has determined are in violation of this chapter. 
(2)	An enumeration of remedial action required for each determined violation. 
(3)	A specified period of time within which such remedial action shall be completed, such period of time for completion to be determined by the planning and zoning department as the period of time reasonably required under the known circumstances for the completion of the remedial action. 
(4)	A statement adequate to notify the person served that a failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter within the time specified in the notice is unlawful and the penalty for such failure. 
a.	A copy of such notice shall be filed in the office of planning and zoning. 
b.	Notice shall be deemed perfected if served upon the owner or occupant as may be appropriate in person or by certified mail with return receipt attached and posting a copy of the notice upon the property. 
c.	Whenever the planning and zoning department determines that property, buildings, or any work in connection therewith that is covered by this article is being erected, installed, altered, repaired, stored, maintained, or demolished in violation of this article, the building department shall serve a written notice upon the person responsible therefore directing the discontinuance of such illegal action and the remedying of the condition that is in violation. 
d.	A purchaser, transferee, lessee, or mortgagee who has actual or constructive knowledge of the issuance of a notice shall be bound by such notice as of the date of such sale, transfer, lease, or mortgage. 
Sec. 10-276. - Inspections. 
(a)	Inspections required under the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the planning and zoning department. Upon evidence of probable cause and presentation of proper credentials, authorized agents of the planning and zoning department may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure, or premises in the county in order to enforce this chapter. 
(b)	Any property, building, equipment, appliance, or system installed, constructed, erected, altered, repaired, maintained, or used in the county shall be subject to inspection by the planning and zoning department. 
(c)	No official or employee of the planning and zoning department making inspection of properties for the purpose of determining the necessity for repairs or corrections shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any repairs or corrections which may be required by this article. 
Sec. 10-277. - Records. 
The planning and zoning department shall keep comprehensive records of applications received, permits and certificate issued, inspections made, reports rendered, and notices or orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection at office hours observed by the planning and zoning department but shall not be removed from the office of the planning and zoning administrative officer. 
Sec. 10-278. - Stopping work. 
Whenever the planning and zoning department determines defective or illegal work is performed in violation of a provision or requirement of this article, it shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped until such defective or illegal work is corrected. 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND LICENSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Commerce and trade generally, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-1 et seq.; professions and businesses generally, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.; county authority to impose business regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8(a); exclusion of certain veterans and blind persons from county regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; authority for imposition of punishment for failure to comply with regulatory fee ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8; county authority to levy occupational taxes, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6(a), 48-13-7; imposition of regulatory fees by local governments on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8 et seq.; issuance of local business licenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; investigation of business for issuance of county or municipal license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Tattooing the body of any person under the age of 18 prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-71; piercing the body of any person under 18 prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 16-71.1; tattooing within areas near the eye prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-5. 

Sec. 12-116. - Established, sanitary location required. 
All persons conducting and performing the services of body art, including but not necessarily limited to tattooing, body piercing (with exception of piercing the outer perimeter and lobe of the ear), branding, and scarification or implants under the skin shall perform such services in an established sanitary environment upon premises operated in compliance with state law and administrative rules and regulations. The applicant for a body art establishment registration shall be required to register as provided herein, to provide fingerprints and consent to the conduct of criminal background check, and to pay the administration, investigative, any regulatory fee, and occupational taxes as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-23-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 12-117. - Minimum sanitary requirements; health department approval required. 
All body art establishments shall meet minimum sanitary establishment requirements to assure the client and operator of a clean, hygienic environment and such establishment shall be approved by the county health department. 
(Ord. of 4-23-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 12-118. - Adoption of Model Body Art Code. 
The regulatory provisions of the most recent edition of the National Environmental Health Association (NEHA) Body Art Model Code and Guidelines shall be followed, and are adopted hereunder as if fully set forth herein verbatim. 
(Ord. of 4-23-2002, § 3) 
Sec. 12-119. - Adoption of state law. 
O.C.G.A. § 16-5-71 et seq., is adopted as if fully set forth herein verbatim. 
(Ord. of 4-23-2002, § 4) 
Secs. 12-120—12-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURERS 

Sec. 12-137. - Occupation tax on life insurers based on percentage of gross premiums. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1, each life insurance company writing life, accident, and sickness insurance within the unincorporated areas of the county shall pay an annual tax equal to one percent of gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year, except as to those companies that qualify for the reduction provided O.C.G.A. § 33-8-5. For purposes of this section, the term "gross direct premiums" means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. 
State Law reference— Authority for county levy of occupation tax on life insurers, allocation of taxes, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 12-138. - Gross premiums tax on insurance other than life insurance. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax upon each insurer other than life insurers doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). The term "gross direct premiums" shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. 
(Res. of 9-2-1983, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority for county levy of occupation tax on insurers other than life insurers, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Secs. 12-139—12-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 22, 2012, amended Art. IV to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 12-160—12-172, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance adopted June 1, 1987, §§ 1—6, 9; an ordinance adopted Mar. 24, 1998; an ordinance adopted Sept. 22, 1998; and an ordinance adopted Sept. 25, 2001. 
State Law reference— Excise tax on rooms, lodgings, and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-160. - Registration fee. 
There is hereby set and levied for the calendar year 2001 and for each successive calendar year thereafter, upon any person or legal entity, operating a public accommodation facility, such as a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, bed and breakfast, tourist cabin, campground or any other place in which rooms, lodging or accommodations are regularly furnished for rental or use value for periods of time of 95 days or less, registration and administrative fees in the amount provided in the county fee schedule for each separate public accommodations facility operated and maintained within the county. For purposes of this section, single-family rental homes which are rented for periods of time of 95 days or less and are not being rented as a primary residence by a full-time Rabun County resident are considered a separate public accommodation subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 12-161. - Location restrictions. 
No registration shall be issued to any public accommodation unless the land on which the accommodation is located is properly zoned for the business operated according to county zoning regulations. However, single-family rental homes which are periodically rented for periods of time of 95 days or less and are not being rented as a primary residence by a full-time Rabun County resident may be located in any residential zoning district. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 12-162. - Tax levied. 
In addition to registration fees established in this division, there is hereby set and levied for the remainder of calendar year 1987 beginning June 1, 1987, and for each successive calendar year thereafter, upon any person or legal entity operating a public accommodations facility, such as a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, bed and breakfast, campground or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for rental or use value for periods of time of 95 days or less, an excise tax equal to five percent of the charge to the public for said accommodations or furnishings, exclusive of the state use and sales taxes. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
State Law reference— Authority for levy by county to levy excise tax on rooms, lodgings, and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 12-163. - Exception to tax levy. 
No tax shall be levied hereby upon the charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished to the same person for periods of time greater than 95 days, nor for the cost of use of meeting rooms, or other facilities other than lodging rooms. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 12-164. - Due date and required reports. 
Each person or legal entity liable for the tax provided herein shall, on or before the 20th day of each month, transmit returns and pay the appropriate tax to the county or its designated agent showing the gross rental charges from all rentals subject to this tax during the preceding calendar month. The county, upon application, may permit a return to be filed on a quarterly or semi-annually basis if found advisable by the county. The returns required by this section shall be made upon forms prescribed, prepared, and furnished by the county. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 12-165. - Extension of time for filing return. 
The county for good cause may extend the time for making any returns under provisions of this article for not more than 60 days. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 12-166. - Collection of tax. 
Persons and legal entities operating public accommodations facilities subject to this division are hereby authorized to collect the tax provided for herein on behalf of the county and transmit the same to the county. Such persons or legal entities collecting the said tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if and provided said amount is not delinquent at time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 12-167. - Delinquent returns or payment; fraudulent returns; penalties. 
(a)	When any person or legal entity subject to this tax fails to make any return or pay the full amount of the tax required by this division, there shall be imposed, in addition to other penalties provided by law, a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than 30 days, and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional 30 days or fraction of 30 days during which the failure continues. 
(b)	The penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater. 
(c)	If the failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the county in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, the return may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. 
(d)	In the case of a false or fraudulent return or the failure to file a return, where willful intent exists to defraud the county of any tax due under this division, a specific penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed in addition to the tax and other lawful penalties. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 12-168. - Estimated taxes upon failure to file return or filing of fraudulent return. 
In the event any person or legal entity subject to this tax fails to make a report and pay the tax as provided by this article or makes a grossly incorrect report or a report that is false or fraudulent, the county shall make an estimate for the taxable period of charges for use of accommodations subject to this article. Based upon this estimate, the county shall assess and collect tax, interest, and penalty, as accrued, on the basis of the assessments. The county's assessment shall be considered prima facie correct and the burden to show the contrary shall rest upon the person or legal entity subject to the tax. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 12-169. - Records retention required. 
(a)	Each person or legal entity subject to the tax levied in section 12-162 shall keep and preserve for at least three years: 
(1)	Suitable records of the charges for accommodations taxable under this article. 
(2)	Other books of account which are necessary to determine the amount of tax due. 
(3)	All invoices and other records of charges subject to this article. 
(4)	Other information as required by the county. 
(b)	All books, invoices, and other records required to be kept by this section shall be open to examination at all reasonable hours to the county or any of its duly authorized agents. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 12-170. - False information prohibited. 
It is a violation of this article for any person, or agent thereof knowingly to give false or incomplete information on any report herein required to be filed. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 12-171. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, any person, who shall conduct business within the county limits without having obtained a registration therefor as required by this article, or who shall violate any other provision of this article, shall, upon conviction therefor, by punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment of not more than 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)	The tax levied by this division may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the county and state. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
Sec. 12-172. - Exempt establishments. 
No tax shall be levied or collected by the county from any establishment located in any portion of the county in which a similar tax is being levied and collected by a municipality. If any establishment is exempted under this section upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and any such municipality shall subsequently repeal or stop levying and collecting the municipal tax, then this article will be of full force and effect within that municipality and the exemption shall not be applicable. 
(Amend. of 5-22-2012) 
Secs. 12-173—12-197. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUILDING CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 12-198. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business as it relates to building contractors means a contractor that, regardless of the location of his principal office or offices, provides construction activities in the unincorporated areas of the county, expressly including, but not limited to, the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto. 
State of emergency shall have the meaning set forth in section 14-19. 
Subsequent recovery period shall have the meaning set forth in section 14-19. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(1), § 2) 
Sec. 12-199. - Standard registration required. 
No person shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, construction, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, building, structures or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the board of county commissioners and having paid fees for standard builder contractor registration as provided in the county fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(1), § 1) 
Sec. 12-200. - Special building contractor registration during emergency or subsequent recovery period. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency, which is related to or arises out of the cause of the state of emergency, or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the board of county commissioners or other person designated by the board of county commissioners at the county courthouse or other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the board of county commissioners with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. The application shall be accompanied by fees for special building contractor registration as provided in the county fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(1), § 3) 
Sec. 12-201. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this article is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(1), § 6) 
Sec. 12-202. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(1), § 7) 
Sec. 12-203. - Revocation; suspension; notice and opportunity to be heard. 
(a)	Each certification granted under this article is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this article or any other county, state or federal law. 
(b)	If, after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(1), § 8) 
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; authority to promulgate local rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28; mutual aid, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; dispatch centers to have trained communications officers on staff, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-19; mutual aid, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; war on terrorism local assistance, O.C.G.A. § 36-75-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT OFFICE 

Sec. 14-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this article from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. Emergency functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Essential officers and employees; nonessential employees means and refers to the mayor, constitutional officers, the police chief, policemen, police and other dispatchers, emergency medical service providers, road department employees and code enforcement personnel. All other city personnel are nonessential employees. 
Exempt individuals , unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, includes those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, at the discretion of the board of commissioners, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to the portion of the county zoning ordinance concerning registration and licensing of building and repair services during a state of emergency, and performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
Fees means any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, variances, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, services or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency , pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), means a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official county action. 
Temporary dwelling means any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle, manufactured home, industrialized building or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning ordinance in a particular zoning district. 
(Res. of 3-10-1983, § I; Ord. of 6-26-2001(2), § 2(a), (b); Ord. of 6-26-2001(3), § 2(a)—(c); Ord. of 6-26-2001(4), § 2(a), (d)) 
Sec. 14-20. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order or resolution made pursuant to this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Res. of 3-10-1983, § VI) 
Sec. 14-21. - Emergency management office; appointment of director and coordinator. 
In agreement with the governing officials of cities and towns within the county, there is hereby established the Rabun County Emergency Management Office. The county board of commissioners, with concurrence of officials of cities and towns within the county, have nominated, for appointment by the governor, a director and coordinator of emergency management for the entire county. 
State Law reference— Authority for establishment of local emergency management organization, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; local director required for state financial assistance, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; authority for nomination of local director of emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 14-22. - Duties of emergency management director and coordinator. 
The emergency management director and coordinator is charged with the following duties: 
(1)	To represent the governing officials of the county and cities and towns therein in matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)	To assist county and city officials in organizing county and city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)	To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments and agencies; the Rabun County Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) for emergency functions as provided herein. Such plan will be in conformity with state statutes and state emergency plans, as they may be amended from time to time, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities and towns therein for approval, and then to the designated state authorities for approval. 
(4)	To maintain the emergency management office and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)	To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices (e.g., financial, daily activity etc.). 
(6)	To procure, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center. 
(7)	To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operations center staff during periods of a declared emergency, and under the supervision of the county governing officials. 
(Res. of 3-10-1983, § I) 
Sec. 14-23. - Assignment of emergency functions. 
(a)	The county emergency management office shall be established around city and county departments and agencies and the emergency functions listed in this section, which are assigned as follows: 

 
*As appropriate to local organizations; function can be assigned to an existing department or may be separate. 
(b)	Heads of departments listed in subsection (a) of this section are responsible for developing the plan for their assigned emergency function. Such plans will be submitted through the emergency management director and coordinator to the board of commissioners and the governing officials of cities and towns within the county for approval. 
(Res. of 3-10-1983, § III) 
State Law reference— Local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 14-24. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may effect the lives and property of the cities and towns within the county, the chairperson of the board of commissioners, jointly with the mayors of the cities and towns within the county, or in their absence a legally appointed successor chairperson or mayor pro tem, may declare that a state of emergency exists and therefore shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(1)	To enforce all rules, laws, and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. 
(2)	To seize, take or temporarily use, or condemn any property for the protection of the public. 
(3)	To sell, lend, give, or distribute all or any such property or supplies upon the inhabitants of the county: to maintain a strict accounting of property and supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)	To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Res. of 3-10-1983, § IV) 
State Law reference— Rules, etc., authorized, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28; powers of local governing bodies during state of emergency or disaster, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54. 
Sec. 14-25. - Continuity of county operations; essential and nonessential employees. 
To promote civil stability and to provide basic services to the county in the case of emergencies or hazardous inclement weather, it is essential that the county be able to maintain an adequate workforce. Toward that end, the following rules shall apply during any state of emergency declared by authorized state or county officials: 
(1)	Essential employees shall be required to report to work at their regular shift unless called in early by their immediate supervisor, the board chairperson, or the chairperson's designee. 
(2)	The board chairperson or his designee, in consultation as necessary with county department heads and county emergency management officials, shall decide whether to open county buildings and count work facilities. It shall be their responsibility to notify county officers if county buildings are to be closed. If county buildings are open, all employees in all offices are expected to report for their assigned shift. If county buildings are not opened for business at the regular opening hour, all employees are required to check in periodically for updates. Employees will not be paid for regular hours that county buildings and services are not in operation. 
(3)	Any employee not able to report for their assigned shift may take annual leave for those hours. If an employee reports for work and is then sent home by the closing of his work building or site, the employee will be paid for the remainder of the day. 
Sec. 14-26. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the cities, towns, and county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. 
(Res. of 3-10-1983, § V) 
State Law reference— Immunity of emergency management personnel, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-35; rights, privileges, and immunities of emergency aid workers, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-30. 
Secs. 14-27—14-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for local rules and regulations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28. 

Sec. 14-56. - Institution of curfew; compliance with curfew required. 
(a)	Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor or the county, by and through its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county, its designee, or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the county. All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(b)	It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated county during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(2), §§ 1, 3) 
Sec. 14-57. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(3), § 1) 
Sec. 14-58. - Authority to hold meetings of board of commissioners at alternative locations. 
Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the geographical limits of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the board of commissioners shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the board of commissioners without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(4), § 1(a)) 
State Law reference— Operation of local governing authority during emergencies, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54. 
Sec. 14-59. - Authority to enter into public works contracts without notice or public bid. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county board of commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this section shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(4), § 1(b)) 
Sec. 14-60. - Authority to suspend enforcement of ordinances or parts of ordinances. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of any county ordinances or any portion thereof, if: 
(1)	The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2)	Suspension of enforcement is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)	Suspension of enforcement is consistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(4), § 1(c)) 
Sec. 14-61. - Authority to suspend county fees. 
Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(4), § 1(d)) 
Sec. 14-62. - Authority to authorize temporary dwellings without regard to zoning restrictions. 
(a)	Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of commissioners, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the health department and tax assessor's office. 
(b)	The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and at the discretion of the board of commissioners or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 6-26-2001(4), § 1(e)) 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Conservation and natural resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; control of water pollution and surface water use, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable county ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)	Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)	Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)	Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)	Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)	Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)	Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)	Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 16-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)	No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in [sections 16-1 and 16-2]. 
(b)	The Rabun County Marshall shall be the enforcement authority for [sections 16-1 and 16-2]. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)	Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-28-2010, § 2) 
Secs. 16-3—16-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 27, 2010, amended Art. II and supplied provisions for a new Art. II to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, §§ 16-18—16-122, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted May 9, 1985, §§ 30-1—30-46, and Art. 5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-18. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of Rabun County, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 16-19. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of Rabun County, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 16-20. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 16-21. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health; 
(2)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)	To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 1, § D) 
Sec. 16-22. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Rabun County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 16-23. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for unincorporated Rabun County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS (county road map or topographic map). 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located in the office of the planning and zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 16-24. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 16-25. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 16-26. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 16-27. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 16-28. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Rabun County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 16-29. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Rabun County from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 2, § H) 
Sec. 16-30. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter loadbearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the planning and zoning administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 16-23. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equated or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before June 19, 1985 [the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 9, 1985 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study [is] the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after June 19, 1985 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 9, 1985 [the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after May 9, 1985 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision [means] the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 6) 
Secs. 16-31—16-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 16-51. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The planning and zoning administrator of Rabun County is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 16-52. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the planning and zoning administrator on forms furnished by Rabun County prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage: 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsection 16-77(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)	Construction stage: For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The planning and zoning administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 16-53. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the planning and zoning administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 16-23, then the planning and zoning administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 16-52(2). 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 16-52(2). 
(7)	When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the planning and zoning administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 16-52(1)(c) and subsection 16-77(2) or 16-79(2). 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the planning and [zoning] administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the planning and zoning administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 16-54—16-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 16-76. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated Buildings-All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.	So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 16-77. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 16-76(4), "elevated buildings." 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 16-53(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 16-76(6) above.) 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
3.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)(a)c., above. 
(4)	Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-23, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if subsection 16-77(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 3. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 16-78. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-23, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 16-23, then the planning and zoning administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 16-76(4), "elevated buildings." 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The planning and zoning administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 16-79. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-23, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)	New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 16-77. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 16-80. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 16-23, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 16-76(4), "elevated buildings." 
The planning and zoning administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 16-52(1)c. and (2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 16-81. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 16-82. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 4, § G) 
Secs. 16-83—18-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 16-101. - Variance procedures. 
(a)	The Rabun County Planning Commission as established by Rabun County shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this division. 
(b)	The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the planning and zoning administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Rabun County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)	Conditions for variances: 
(1)	A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.	A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.	a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)	The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The planning and zoning administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-27-2010, Art. 5) 
Secs. 16-102—16-137. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-138. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices or BMP means and includes sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the state board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional means: 
(1)	A professional licensed by the state in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or 
(2)	A person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Blue Ridge Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 16-164. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of planted trees, shrubs, and perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 16-139(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act or MRPA means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units or NTUs means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a Notice of Intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a Notice of Termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party that has: 
(1)	Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)	Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (Manual), published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Blue Ridge Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface water or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § II) 
Sec. 16-139. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968; 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)	Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 16-164(18) and (19), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located, and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the state department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § III) 
Secs. 16-140—16-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 16-162. - General requirements. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of sections 16-163 and 16-164. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Mea sures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § IV(A)) 
Sec. 16-163. - Best management practices. 
(a)	Best management practices as set forth in section 16-164 and this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(b)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(c)	Failure to properly design, install or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(d)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(e)	The local issuing authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in section 16-164(18) and (19), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § IV(B)) 
Sec. 16-164. - Rules and regulations governing land disturbing activities. 
The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Mud or any form of sediments shall not be allowed on any roadway whether it is a county accepted roadway or a dedicated roadway. A dedicated roadway is one that has been dedicated by the filing of a final plat, but has not been accepted by the county for maintenance purposes; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(9)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(10)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(11)	To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
(12)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(13)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(14)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(15)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(16)	Utility companies which are utilizing roadway shoulders for construction are required to stabilize the earth shoulders every three days as a maximum period time and are required to stabilize the shoulder before leaving the work area on any particular day if rain is forecast with the next 24 hours; 
(17)	Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 16-163(b); 
(18)	Except as provided in subsection (19) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8; where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this subsection, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground water table yearround; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., a part of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.	No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(19)	There is established a 50-foot buffer, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.	No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § IV(C); Amend. of 4-26-2011) 
Sec. 16-165. - Adoption of stringent requirements that exceed minimum standards. 
Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 16-163 and 16-164. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § IV(D)) 
Sec. 16-166. - Injury to property not presumption of standards violation. 
The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § IV(E)) 
Secs. 16-167—16-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PROCESS 

Sec. 16-186. - All parties required to design/review development plans. 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § V(A)) 
Sec. 16-187. - Application requirements. 
(a)	No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the administrative office to perform such activity and providing a copy of a notice of intent (NOI) submitted to the EPD, if applicable. 
(b)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the administrative office and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Such plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 16-188. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of sections 16-163 and 16-164 will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-7-.10). 
(c)	A fee per the county fee schedule shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(d)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(e)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 16-164(18) and (19) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (g) of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(f)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this division, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(g)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § V(B)) 
Sec. 16-188. - Plan requirements. 
(a)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in sections 16-163 and 16-164, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)	Data required for a site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § V(C)) 
Sec. 16-189. - Permits. 
(a)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(b)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 16-164(18) and (19) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 16-187(g) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(c)	Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(d)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(e)	The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(f)	The local issuing authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § V(D)) 
Secs. 16-190—16-216. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 16-217. - Periodic inspection; regulation of primary, secondary and tertiary permittees; notice of violation. 
(a)	(1)	The administrative office will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
(2)	Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. 
(3)	If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)	The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § VI(A), (B)) 
Sec. 16-218. - Authority to conduct investigations. 
The administrative office shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § VI(C)) 
Sec. 16-219. - Right of entry for inspection. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § VI(D)) 
Sec. 16-220. - Certification of locality as local issuing authority—Semiannual review; assistance for local program effectiveness. 
The district or the commission, or both, shall semiannually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission, or both, may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § VI(E)) 
Sec. 16-221. - Same—Procedure for certification revocation. 
The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § VI(F)) 
Secs. 16-222—16-246. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PENALTIES AND INCENTIVES 

Sec. 16-247. - Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. 
If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § VII(A)) 
Sec. 16-248. - Stop work orders. 
(a)	(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
(b)	All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(c)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(d)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any failure of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control devices may subject the offender to an immediate citation. In particular, any soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution leaving the property of any person and/or any soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution flowing onto a county road and/or any soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution reaching any stream or flowing water may result in fines as outlined in section 16-250. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § VII(B)) 
Sec. 16-249. - Bond forfeiture. 
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 16-187(g). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § VII(C)) 
Sec. 16-250. - Monetary penalties. 
(a)	Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. The owner of any lands or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and each responsible party or other person assisting in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(b)	The courts shall have the power and authority to order the violation corrected in compliance with the requirements of this article and the courts may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(c)	In any case in which land is or is proposed to be used, or activities are undertaken in violation of this article or any amendment thereto adopted by the board of commissioners, the county, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § VII(D)) 
Sec. 16-251. - Education and certification. 
(a)	Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)	For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of such entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)	Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)	If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said statute. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § VIII) 
Secs. 16-252—16-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - APPEAL AND REVIEW 

Sec. 16-281. - Administrative remedies. 
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the county board of commissioners during its normal course of business after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § IX(A)) 
Sec. 16-282. - Judicial review. 
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § IX(B)) 
Sec. 16-283. - Liability. 
(a)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)	The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)	No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 4-27-2004, § X(C)) 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED PROTECTION 

Sec. 16-284. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the designated water supply watersheds in unincorporated Rabun County from potential adverse effects of residential and non-residential development, such as leaching of sewage from septic systems, increased stormwater runoff, sedimentation and other sources of water pollution, in order to protect raw water used for potable water production. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2014) 
Sec. 16-285. - Water supply watershed; defined. 
(a)	Watershed areas within Rabun County correspond to the topographical features that delimit the drainage basins of the respective creeks, streams and rivers within the county. 
(b)	A "water supply watershed" is the portion of a watershed upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
(1)	A "large water supply watershed" is one having a drainage basin of 100 square miles or greater. 
(2)	A "small water supply watershed" is one having a drainage basin less than 100 square miles. 
(c)	Large water supply watersheds: The requirements of this section apply to the large water supply watersheds identified by the State of Georgia associated with the Tallulah River and Little Tennessee River. 
(d)	Small water supply watersheds: The requirements of this section apply to the small water supply watersheds identified by the State of Georgia associated with Mud Creek. 
(e)	Upon the creation of a large or small water supply watershed in or extending into Rabun County as the result of construction of a governmentally owned public water drinking water supply intake, the rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources adopted pursuant to State law shall apply. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2014) 
Sec. 16-286. - conservation corridors in water supply watersheds; buffers. 
Along all watercourses within a water supply watershed, the conservation corridors shown on the Future Land Use Map shall be shown on all plans and plats and shall be protected by the following: 
(1)	Within seven miles upstream from a public water supply intake or reservoir: 
a.	A minimum 100-foot wide undisturbed buffer as measured outwardly and horizontally from the uppermost part of each stream bank; and 
b.	A minimum setback from the stream buffer of 50 feet for all impervious surfaces, septic tanks and their drainfields. 
(2)	Beyond seven miles upstream from a public water supply intake or reservoir in a small water supply watershed: 
a.	A minimum 50-foot wide undisturbed buffer as measured outwardly and horizontally from the uppermost part of each stream bank; and 
b.	A minimum setback from the stream buffer of 25 feet for all impervious surfaces, septic tanks and their drainfields. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2014) 
Sec. 16-287. - Development regulations. 
(a)	All requirements relating to the development of a site within a water supply watershed shall be those that apply to the underlying land development district, except where the provisions of the water supply watershed ordinance differ or are more restrictive than the development regulations applying to the underlying land development district or contained elsewhere in this ordinance. 
(b)	The maximum permitted impervious surface area in a small water supply watershed, including all public and private structures, utilities or facilities within the entire water supply watershed shall be 25 percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
(c)	No construction plans for a development containing a water supply watershed conservation corridor will be released until copies of all necessary state and federal permits have been provided to Rabun County. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2014) 
Sec. 16-288. - Water supply watersheds; restrictions. 
The following are limited within all water supply watersheds: 
(1)	New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(2)	New sanitary landfills, if permitted by Georgia Department of Natural Resources, shall have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(3)	Any new facility that handles hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 311 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(4)	The application of animal waste on land must follow guidelines established by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resource Conservation Service and Georgia Agricultural Best Management Practices. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2014) 
Sec. 16-289. - Water supply watersheds; exemptions. 
The following uses are exempt from the restrictions for water supply watersheds (with some limitations and conditions as noted): 
(1)	Development and land use legally established prior to the adoption of this article. 
(2)	Mining activities permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the Surface Mining Act (outside of stream buffer areas). 
(3)	Removal of vegetation from within stream buffers shall be allowed in accordance with Georgia Forestry Best Management Practices, and 
a.	Disturbance is required to construct mulched pedestrian paths; or 
b.	For the installation of a dam necessary for stormwater detention. 
(4)	Utilities shall be exempt from the water supply watershed buffer and setback provisions in accordance with the following conditions if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas: 
a.	The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible. 
b.	The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible using watershed best management practices to the greatest extent practical. 
(5)	Roadways, bridges and drainage structures may encroach upon required greenways and setbacks where such structures are necessary to provide access. Such roadways and bridges shall cross-streams perpendicularly where reasonably possible. The number of such stream crossings and associated structures shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible. 
(6)	Specific forestry and agricultural activities (outside of stream buffers) that are consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission/Department of Agriculture and do not impair the quality of streams. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2014) 
Chapter 18 - FEES, FINES AND OTHER CHARGES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FEES 

Sec. 18-19. - Specific fees. 

 
  

 
(Amend. of 3-22-2011) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and protection generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; minimum requirements for local fire departments, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-20 et seq.; authority of local government units to enact fire prevention regulations, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1; regulation of blasting generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-8-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; volunteer firefighters for counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 20-19. - Adopted. 
The county hereby adopts, as though fully set forth in this article, the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, which shall be applicable within the county. 
Sec. 20-20. - Enforcement. 
The fire code adopted in section 20-19 shall be enforced by the fire chief and such subordinate officers and employees of the fire department as are required to effectuate the provisions of said fire code. 
Sec. 20-21. - Power to make modifications. 
The chief of the fire department is authorized to modify any of the provisions of the adopted fire code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee of any property or his duly authorized agent when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided, however, that the spirit of the code shall be observed and the public safety secured. The particulars of any modification when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire chief thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be forwarded to the applicant. 
Sec. 20-22. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the board of commissioners within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
Secs. 20-23—20-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 20-48. - Composition. 
The fire department shall consist of a chief and such subordinate officers and firefighters as may from time to time be provided for by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 20-49. - Fire chief—Appointment and authority. 
The fire chief shall be appointed by the board of commissioners and shall be the chief executive officer of the fire department, subject to the orders and regulations of the board of commissioners. Prior to entering upon the discharge of his duties, the fire chief shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by this Code. 
Sec. 20-50. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The fire chief shall be responsible for and have control over the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging to the county, and shall have the following duties: 
(1)	To see to the proper and speedy extinguishment of all accidental or intentionally caused fires; 
(2)	To see to the enforcement of the fire prevention code adopted by the board of commissioners; 
(3)	To keep or cause to be kept adequate records of all fires, inspections, equipment, fire prevention efforts, and other activities of the department; 
(4)	To submit a monthly written report to the board of commissioners on the activities of the department; 
(5)	To establish rules and regulations concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care, and management of the fire department, subject to approval by the board of commissioners; 
(6)	To investigate the causes of all extended or destructive fires occurring within the county; 
(7)	To serve as meter readers for the county; and 
(8)	To serve as building inspectors for the county. 
Sec. 20-51. - Firefighter qualifications. 
Any person shall have the following qualifications to become a member of the fire department: 
(1)	Must be at least 18 years of age; 
(2)	Must not have been convicted of a felony within five years prior to employment; 
(3)	Must have good moral character as determined by investigation under procedure approved by the Georgia Firefighters Standards and Training Council; 
(4)	Must be in good physical condition as determined by a medical examination approved by said Georgia Firefighters Standards and Training Council; 
(5)	Must train, drill or study in council-approved school, classes, or courses the minimum number of hours in each calendar year following the first year of employment as is designated by the fire chief in accordance with state law. 
Sec. 20-52. - Firemen duties. 
It shall be the duty of all firefighter to become familiar with and proficient in the handling of all of the apparatus of the fire department, to be prepared at a moment's notice to respond to all alarms of fire, to observe all rules and regulations of the fire department established by the fire chief, and to obey all orders of the commanding officer at all fires. 
Sec. 20-53. - Daily inspections. 
Each fire station and its equipment shall be examined daily. Inspections shall be rigidly made and shall ensure that all apparatus is maintained in excellent working condition at all times, ready for immediate service, and that all fire stations and surroundings are in a clean and sanitary condition. 
Sec. 20-54. - Fire vehicles. 
The fire department, including its apparatus, when going to any fire in the county or returning therefrom, shall have the right-of-way over the streets, lanes, and ways or the, county to the exclusion of all persons, vehicles, and railroad trains of every kind. No persons other than members of the fire department shall be permitted to ride upon the firefighting apparatus in going to or returning from fires. 
Sec. 20-55. - Command at fires. 
In case of fire, the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire in the best manner possible. Such commanding officer may cause buildings to be removed, torn down, or destroyed when such acts are necessary for the protection of other property and for the prevention of the spread of the conflagration. 
Sec. 20-56. - Operating procedures. 
(a)	The county has adopted standard operating procedures with regard to the management and operation of the fire department. The fire chief is hereby authorized to distribute the operating procedures for the use of the employees and volunteers in the fire department and require the adherence to the rules. 
(b)	The operating procedures may be amended from time to time as necessary, with a copy of each amendment to be filed with the county clerk and supplied to the appropriate employees and volunteers. 
Sec. 20-57. - Fire service fees. 
(a)	Any time the county's fire equipment is dispatched for fires, medical emergencies, or any other emergency, other than vehicle accidents, the fire department shall charge a rolling fee, in the amount established by the board of commissioners. If the dispatch results from an actual or threatened structural fire or a bomb threat, the rolling fee shall be billed to the owner and occupant of the property. If the dispatch is to the site of a medical emergency, the rolling fee shall be billed to the sick or injured person or any person legally responsible for the sick or injured person. 
(b)	The fees for fire and other emergency response services shall be as provided in the county fee schedule. The fire chief and county clerk are hereby directed to issue invoices to insurance companies for such fire services and to collect such fees on behalf of the county and to deposit such fees in the county's fire fund, which shall be used to purchase equipment, training, services and supplies for the county fire department. However, if no response or payment is received from the applicable insurance company, the insured will not be contacted or invoiced by the county or any representative or contractor thereof. 
Secs. 20-58—20-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROHIBITED ACTS 

Sec. 20-88. - Tampering with fire alarms prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any fire alarm except in case of fire, except by authority from the county or its authorized employees. 
State Law reference— False fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27. 
Sec. 20-89. - False alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, give, send or turn in, in any manner or way whatever, a false fire alarm or riot alarm, knowing the same to be false. 
Sec. 20-90. - Tampering with equipment. 
No person other than those firefighter on official business shall tamper with firefighting equipment either on public or private property. 
Sec. 20-91. - Obstructing fire equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner any firefighting apparatus or any of the officers or members of the fire department in the performance of their duties. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, any fireplug so as to obstruct approaches to the same by the fire department. 
Sec. 20-92. - Persons permitted in vicinity of fire. 
No persons other than firemen, county officials, police officers, and the property owner or his agent shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of a fire, unless such persons are given permission to do so by the fire chief. 
Sec. 20-93. - Extraordinary fire hazards. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, maintain, suffer or permit an extraordinary fire hazard on his premises or on premises occupied or used by him, either in the construction of buildings, storage of inflammables, explosives or combustibles, the use of open flames, etc. The term "extraordinary fire hazard" as used herein shall be construed to mean any condition that would be manifestly unsafe as a fire hazard or that would greatly increase the probability of fire or the injury of persons by fire. In this connection the minimum standards promulgated in such cases by the National Board of Fire Underwriters shall be considered as prima facie evidence of such hazard. 
Secs. 20-94—20-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 20-115. - Permit required. 
No person or entity shall cause, allow, or permit open burning within the county limits except pursuant to a permit issued by the fire chief, other than as permitted in this article. 
Sec. 20-116. - Uncontrolled fires declared nuisances. 
Any fire burning uncontrolled on any forested or cut-over brush land or grassland is declared to be a public nuisance by reason of its menace to life and property. Any person responsible either for the starting or for the existence of such fire is required to control or extinguish it immediately. If such person shall refuse or neglect to do so, the county, or any other fire suppression force, may suppress the nuisance thus constituted by controlling and extinguishing the fire, and, in addition to any fines and penalties that may be imposed under section 1-11, the cost of controlling and extinguishing the fire may be recovered from the responsible person. 
Sec. 20-117. - Notice and permit requirements; exceptions. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person lawfully entitled to burn any woods, lands, marshes, or any other flammable vegetation, whether in cultivated or uncultivated areas, shall, prior to such burning, obtain a permit therefor from the county fire chief. The permit fee shall be as set forth in the county's fee schedule. 
(b)	It shall not be necessary to obtain a permit otherwise required by this section if a sudden emergency requires a firing in order to render one's premises safe. In any prosecution under this section, a necessary firing in a sudden emergency shall constitute an affirmative defense, but the burden of proving such necessity shall rest upon the person asserting it as a defense. 
(c)	Subject to the limitations and conditions otherwise provided in this section, it shall not be necessary to obtain a permit otherwise required to burn improved pastures, residue on cultivated crop land, or leaf piles if the person, intending to burn such residue shall, prior to such burning, give notice of the approximate time and location thereof to the fire chief or his designee. 
(d)	The notice and permit required by this section shall be in addition to any other requirement for burning provided for by this Code or state law or regulation. 
Sec. 20-118. - Notice of violation; penalties. 
Any person who violates this article shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 1-11. A written notification to a person of a violation at one site shall be considered adequate notice of the rules and regulations, and subsequently observed violations by the same person at the same or different site will result in immediately appropriate legal action by the county. 
Sec. 20-119. - No exception to burning prohibitions for materials that produce noxious and poisonous gases. 
No material or substance which emits noxious or poisonous gases such as nitrogen dioxide, hydrogen cyanide or chlorine or other poisonous gases that will not readily dissipate in the atmosphere may be burned within the county limits. 
Secs. 20-120—20-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 20-137. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect and safeguard the public health and welfare, and to prevent fires, and to eliminate unnecessary noises, explosions and nuisances. 
Sec. 20-138. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fireworks. 
(1)	The term "fireworks" means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, balloons requiring fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. 
(2)	The term "fireworks" shall not include: 
a.	Model rockets and model rocket engines, designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content does not average more than one-fourth grain of explosive mixture per paper cap nor toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; 
b.	Ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; 
c.	Inflatable balloons in which human beings are transported. 
Sec. 20-139. - Compliance with state law and permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose to sale, sell, use, possess or explode within the county any fireworks, except as permitted by state law and pursuant to a permit issued by the fire chief. Applications for permit shall be made to the fire chief on forms provided by him, and accompanied by a permit fee in the amount provided in the county fee schedule. The fire chief may make issue the permit subject to such conditions as he deems necessary or advisable for public safety purposes. Anyone aggrieved by the fire chief's denial of a fireworks permit may appeal the decision to the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2. 
Sec. 20-140. - Seizure. 
The sheriff or other official authorized by the county is authorized and directed, at any time, at the expense of the owner, to seize, take, or cause to be removed to a place of safety, any stock of fireworks or combustibles possessed, used, displayed, sold, offered or exposed for sale, or held in any manner in violation of this article. 
State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-6. 
Chapter 22 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 

Sec. 22-1. - Adoption of health regulations. 
The county hereby adopts the rules and regulations promulgated by the county health department as if fully set forth herein. 
Chapter 26 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Factory built buildings and dwelling units, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq.; manufactured or mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-180. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Manufactured home means a new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
Mobile home means a new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and built prior to June 15, 1976. 
(Ord. of 3-5-1987(1), § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160. 
Sec. 26-2. - Duty to report home location annually. 
Every person or other entity holding title to or possessing a manufactured or mobile home that is placed or located within the geographical limits of the county shall report the location of the manufactured or mobile home to the tax commissioner of the county annually, no later than April 1 of each year, and shall pay all ad valorem taxes due with regard to the home under this Code and state law. 
(Ord. of 3-5-1987(1), § 2) 
Sec. 26-3. - Mobile home park owners required to provide list of disposition of homes. 
Every person owning or operating a manufactured or mobile home park, and each such person engaged in the sale or rental of manufactured or mobile homes or lots upon which to place them, shall furnish the tax commissioner of the county on January 1 of each year with a complete list of all manufactured or mobile homes parked, rented, sold by the person or otherwise located upon the property of the person or in a manufactured or mobile home park operated by the person. Each list shall fully identify each manufactured or mobile home, its owner and location. The list to be supplied by all dealers shall include each manufactured or mobile home sold and delivered to the county, its owner and the location to which it was delivered. 
(Ord. of 3-5-1987(1), § 10) 
Sec. 26-4. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner or his designee, and such other officials as may be designated from time to time by the county board to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Upon information constituting probable cause made known to any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter that a violation of same has occurred, a citation and summons may be issued to the alleged violator requiring him to appear before the chief magistrate of the magistrate court of the county on a day and time certain, to answer the charge contained therein. 
(Ord. of 3-5-1987(1), § 11) 
Sec. 26-5. - Penalties. 
Any person which does any act prohibited by this chapter, or which fails to discharge any duty imposed hereby, shall be subject to the imposition of a fine for such offense, according to the following schedule. The amount of any fine shall be in the sound discretion of the courts, but not more than the following schedule: 

 
(Ord. of 3-5-1987(1), § 12) 
Sec. 26-6. - Property owners may not maintain mobile homes on their land unless all mobile home taxes are paid. 
It shall be a violation of this Code for any person or entity owning real property within the unincorporated areas of Rabun County to maintain, permit others to maintain or have others maintain without their permission, any mobile home, as defined by this section or as otherwise defined by state or federal law, on said person or entities' real property unless all state and local taxes of any kind relating to said mobile home has been paid in full. 
( Ord. of 11-26-2013 ) 
Secs. 26-7—26-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS AND DECALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-29. - Relocation permit required. 
No mover, hauler, or other person shall move a manufactured or mobile home into the county whose destination is within the county or move a manufactured or mobile home out of the county when its last location has been in the county without the owner first obtaining a relocation permit from the tax commissioner authorizing such relocation. The fee for the permit shall be as provided in the county fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 3-5-1987(1), §§ 3, 4; Ord. of 3-28-2000; Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 82) 
Sec. 26-30. - Relocation and occupancy prohibited if state, county, and municipal taxes are unpaid. 
(a)	It shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any permit required by this article that the owner of said manufactured or mobile home submit to the tax commissioner proof that all state and county taxes payable with respect to the manufactured or mobile home have been paid. If the manufactured or mobile home that is to be relocated or is then located within any portion of the county that lies within the limits of a municipality in the county, such owner shall likewise submit proof that all applicable municipal taxes have been paid before a permit may be issued. 
(b)	No person shall own or occupy a manufactured or mobile home within the confines of the county until and unless all applicable state and county ad valorem taxes shall have been paid on said manufactured or mobile home. 
(c)	The county tax commissioner shall issue a payment decal as prescribed by law at the time of the payment of any and all taxes and said decal shall be displayed on any and all manufactured or mobile homes or be otherwise available and presented to any enforcement officer upon request. Failure to pay all applicable state and county ad valorem taxes on any manufactured or mobile home and to display or otherwise present the decal evidencing payment of said taxes shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-5-1987(1), §§ 5, 7; Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 82) 
Sec. 26-31. - Building permit required. 
No mobile or manufactured home shall be installed for occupancy on any lot or parcel located within the county unless the owner or installer obtains a building permit pursuant to chapter 10. 
(Ord. of 3-28-2000; Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 82) 
Sec. 26-32. - Septic tank permit required. 
No building permit shall be issued for installation of a manufactured or mobile home for occupancy in the county unless a septic tank permit has been obtained from the county health department unless the manufactured or mobile home will be connected to a publicly owned sewer system. 
(Ord. of 3-28-2000; Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 82) 
Sec. 26-33. - Issuance of relocation permit; display of permit. 
Any owner of a manufactured or mobile home that has made application for the location or relocation of a manufactured or mobile home and whose application meets the requirements of this article shall be issued a permit for location or relocation. The permit authorizing location or relocation of a manufactured or mobile home within the county shall be of a size and color as prescribed by state law or the county tax commissioner and shall be affixed to the manufactured or mobile home being moved in a conspicuous place or otherwise be available and presented to any enforcement officer upon request at all times that the manufactured or mobile home is being moved or otherwise relocated within the confines of the county. 
(Ord. of 3-5-1987(1), § 6) 
Sec. 26-34. - Notice required when moving home from one county to another county. 
Whenever a permit authorizing the relocation of a manufactured or mobile home is issued and such manufactured or mobile home is to be relocated within the confines of another county in this state, the tax commissioner of the county shall notify the tax commissioner of such other county of the date of the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. of 3-5-1987(1), § 8) 
Sec. 26-35. - Inspections; fees. 
The tax commissioner or his designee may inspect or cause to be inspected the installation of any mobile or modular home that is the subject of a permit application under this article to ensure compliance of the home, and its installation, with the provisions of this chapter, and shall conduct such other inspections as are required by this chapter. For each such inspection, the applicant shall pay the inspection fees set forth in the county fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 82) 
Secs. 26-36—26-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AGE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 26-59. - Applicability of division. 
The provisions of this division shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, all other requirements of this chapter. 
Sec. 26-60. - Prohibition of homes more than seven years old. 
No used mobile or manufactured home being moved into the county shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this county if said mobile or manufactured home is more than seven years old, except as otherwise provided in section 26-61. 
(Ord. of 3-28-2000; Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 82) 
Sec. 26-61. - Exception. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a mobile or manufactured home may be moved into the county that is more than seven years old provided all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)	The home must be inspected by the county planning and zoning department prior to being brought into the county and prior to presentation of the application to the planning and zoning commission, and must pass the same test as to the condition of the mobile or manufactured home as that required by homes that are less than seven years old. The applicant shall pay the fees provided in the county fee schedule for each inspection necessary to satisfy the requirements of this provision. No inspection shall be made of homes more than 100 miles outside the county's geographical boundaries. 
(2)	An application for a permit to locate the home must be filed with the county planning commission, together with the fees therefor as provided in the county fee schedule. Each application must have with it a site plan for the placement of the home. 
(3)	The mobile or manufactured home is compatible with existing housing in the surrounding area in terms of type, style, age and condition. 
(4)	The home is installed pursuant to the specifications provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-2000; Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 82) 
Sec. 26-62. - Procedure for review of application. 
Each application will be heard by the county planning commission and then referred to the board of commissioners for final approval or denial. Each application will be processed and considered by the board of commissioners in the same manner as an application for zoning variance. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 82) 
Secs. 26-63—26-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION 

Sec. 26-83. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent of this article to prohibit moving mobile or manufactured homes into the county that do not conform to the applicable U.S. Housing and Urban Development Department's construction standards, as expressed in 42 USC 5401 et seq., and regulations established pursuant to that Act. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 82) 
Sec. 26-84. - Federal minimum construction standards applicable. 
(a)	No mobile or manufactured home shall be allowed to locate for permanent or temporary occupancy in this county unless that mobile or manufactured home complies with the minimum construction standards required by the U.S. Housing and Urban Development Department. 
(b)	Each newly installed mobile or manufactured home in the county shall conform to the minimum construction standards required by the U.S. Housing and Urban Development, as required by the National Mobile Home and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq., before that mobile or manufactured home is entitled to receive any utility service. 
(Ord. of 3-28-2000; Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 82) 
Sec. 26-85. - Installation to comply with state law and regulations. 
All mobile and manufactured home installations shall, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-165, comply with the provisions of Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 120-3-7-13, if the home has manufacturer's installation instructions, or with the provisions of Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 120-3-7-21 in the event manufacturer's installation instructions are not available. 
(Ord. of 3-28-2000; Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 82) 
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; crimes generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; maximum penalties that may be imposed by municipalities, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-6, 36-32-1, 36-32-5; additional penalties and bond in certain criminal and traffic cases, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to impose community service as punishment, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-1; alternative sentences by municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; powers of municipal court judges in criminal cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; jurisdiction of municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1—28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER 

Sec. 28-19. - Disorderly conduct. 
A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he does any of the following: 
(1)	Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of his life, limb, or health; 
(2)	Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)	Endangers the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence of threats of bodily harm; 
(4)	Causes, provokes, or engages in any fight, brawl, or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another or public property; 
(5)	Assembles or congregates with another or others and causes, provokes, or engages in a fight or brawl; 
(6)	Collects with others in bodies or in crowds and engages in unlawful activities; 
(7)	Assembles or congregates with another or others and engages or attempts to engage in gaming; 
(8)	Frequents any public place and obtains money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice, or device, or attempts to do so; 
(9)	Without provocation, uses to or of another person in such other person's presence opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; or 
(10)	Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 28-20. - Disorderly public drunkenness. 
It is prohibited for any person to be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, if his condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 28-21. - Disturbance of meeting, gathering, or procession. 
It is prohibited for any person to recklessly or knowingly commit any act that may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, or procession. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 28-22. - Hazardous excavations. 
No person shall leave any well, hole or pit in the ground uncovered or insecurely covered on any unenclosed premises in this county, or leave such well, pit or hole in the ground in such condition as to be dangerous to any persons or domestic animals. 
Sec. 28-23. - Obstructions or encroachments of any kind or character in or upon the right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to place or leave any equipment, vehicles, debris, obstructions or encroachments of any kind or character in or upon the right-of-way, for a continuous period of more than 24 hours, of any road or street which is owned or maintained by Rabun County. Any equipment, vehicles, debris, obstructions or encroachments of any kind or character which are placed or left in or upon the right-of-way of any road or street which is owned or maintained by Rabun County for more than 24 hours shall be deemed abandoned. 
Any person, at the direction of a duly authorized law enforcement officer, is hereby authorized to remove, or have removed at their direction, any equipment, vehicles, debris, obstructions or encroachments of any kind or character which are placed or left in or upon the right-of-way of any road or street which is owned or maintained by Rabun County, under any of the circumstances hereinafter enumerated. The board of commissioners hereby finds and determines that such equipment, vehicles, debris, obstructions or encroachments of any kind or character under such circumstances are obstructions to traffic and road maintenance efforts or public nuisances. Any such equipment, vehicles, debris, obstructions or encroachments of any kind or character are authorized to be removed under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)	When any equipment, vehicles, debris, obstructions or encroachments of any kind or character are left unattended upon any right-of-way (whether said right-of-way is deeded or prescriptive in nature), or where such equipment, vehicles, debris, obstructions or encroachments of any kind or character constitute an obstruction to traffic; 
(2)	When any equipment, vehicles, debris, obstructions or encroachments of any kind or character are abandoned as prohibited in this article; 
(3)	When any equipment, vehicles, debris, obstructions or encroachments of any kind or character is blocking any emergency access lane. 
( Ord. of 8-26-2014 ) 
Secs. 28-24—28-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 28-60. - Theft or destruction of road and traffic signs. 
It shall be illegal for any person to steal, vandalize, destroy or otherwise damage any public road or traffic sign in the county. 
(Ord. of 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 28-61. - Damage or destruction of county property. 
No individual or entity shall cause damage to or destroy any personal or real county property, including, but not limited to, vandalism or intentional destruction of county property or actions found to be done with knowledge of the potential for damage or in such a manner as to be negligent in the disregard of the potential for such damages. This section shall not prohibit the work of county employees or their agents in the performance of their duties to use, repair, replace or dispose of county property. In addition to all other applicable penalties, any person convicted of damaging county property shall be responsible for reimbursing the county for the cost of repair or replacement of the property or for the diminished value of the damaged property. 
State Law reference— Damaging local government property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 28-62. - Failure to return library property. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, retain, not return or have in his possession any book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, record, film, film projector, screen or any other property borrowed from the county's public library for a period longer than 60 days past the date the property was to have been returned or for more than ten days after the borrower has been requested in writing to return such property. 
(b)	Written requests to return property shall be deemed sent when mailed to the last address provided to the library by the borrower. 
(c)	Failure to return any library property within a period of 60 days after demand for the return thereof shall constitute the offense of disorderly conduct, the punishment for which shall be a fine of not less than $25.00 or more than $50.00 for each book or each item of other material. 
(Res. of 6-14-1982) 
Sec. 28-63. - Posting bills; defacing property. 
No person shall post any bills, advertisements or other notices of any kind on any public or private building, property or grounds in the county, nor write, paint, draw, carve, or cut any letters, word or device on any such property in this county without the owner's consent, and in cases made under this section the person committing such acts must show the consent or he will be presumed not to have had it. 
State Law reference— Damaging municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Secs. 28-64—28-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-137. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)	Any optional housing or abatement standard provided by state law as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)	Any fire or life safety code applicable under state law or adopted by ordinance or resolution of the county; and 
(3)	Any building codes adopted by the county provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The terms "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other buildings or structure used for the production, growing, raising, or harvesting of crops, livestock, or poultry. 
Junk motor vehicle means any abandoned, nonfunctioning, dilapidated, or discarded motor vehicle and includes any parts thereof not currently in use on an operable vehicle with a current tag and vehicle tag registration, including, but not limited to, any motors or component parts, doors, hoods, trunk lids, windshields, tires, wheels, seats, and any and all other similar automobile parts. 
Nuisance means anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another, provided that the hurt, inconvenience, or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary reasonable man; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. Nuisances include, but are not limited to, any act or omission to act to perform a duty or the permitting of a condition or thing to exist, which act, omission, condition or thing: 
(1)	Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health of safety of others; 
(2)	Offends decency; 
(3)	Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch, or drainage; 
(4)	Is offensive to the senses; 
(5)	In any way renders others persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 
(6)	Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
Nuisance per se means an act, occupation, or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings, or such nuisance as declared to be a nuisance per se herein. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)	Persons in possession of the property and premises; 
(2)	Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)	Persons having paid an occupational tax to the county board of commissioners for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)	Persons having filed a property tax return with the county board of commissioners as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Plainly audible as applied to noise nuisances means any loud unnecessary or unusual noise that disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area which includes the business area as well as public streets and sidewalks in the county. 
Public authority means any official appointed by the county, or his designee, to enforce state and county law and rules relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county. 
Public officer means the officer who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
Sec. 28-138. - Nuisances prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or business, owner or lessee, tenant, or other, having possession, ownership or control of private property to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation of a nuisance within the unincorporated areas of the county. Any violation of this article, or violation of any other provisions of this Code the result of which is the creation or maintenance of a public nuisance, shall subject the violator to penalties as provided in section 1-11 and, additionally, the remedies provided in this article for abatement shall apply. 
Sec. 28-139. - Enforcement powers of public officer and public authority. 
In the enforcement of this article, the public officer and public authority shall be authorized: 
(1)	To investigate the dwelling conditions in the county in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)	To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)	To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in the manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)	To delegate any of his functions and powers as is permitted by this article or otherwise specifically authorized by the board of commissioners. 
Secs. 28-140—28-211. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OTHER NUISANCES 

Sec. 28-212. - Cleanliness of private properties required. 
Every owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, proprietor, and person in charge of every dwelling, building, business, commercial establishment, institution, and industrial establishment shall, jointly and severally, be required to comply with the following: 
(1)	Keep driveways, yards, parking, loading, work areas and areas adjacent thereto and under his control reasonably clean at all times, and to keep property free of junk, salvage or scrap materials. 
(2)	Maintain garbage storage areas in a clean condition and to insure that all garbage is properly containerized; and all containers shall be shielded from public view. 
(3)	Furnish containers for construction debris, salvage materials and litter, and to containerize all such litter by the end of each work day. 
(Ord. of 3-28-2000, § 118) 
Sec. 28-213. - Disposal of fecal matter, dead animals, tainted meat, waste, similar matter. 
It shall be unlawful to place or throw or cause another to place or throw in or upon any street, or public or private property of another any dead bird or animal, tainted meat, decayed fruits or vegetables human or other excrement. Such conditions shall be considered nuisances as a matter of law. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the discharge of human excrement into the sewer system of the city, or the placing of the above-named objects in suitable containers at curbside for garbage pickup. 
Sec. 28-214. - Obstruction of natural flow of water. 
It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to, by the erection of a dam or other obstruction, prevent the natural flow of water, causing it to collect in pools upon any lot or in any street or alley, or to allow any such dam or obstruction to continue on any property owned or controlled by him after knowledge of its existence, or to do or cause to be done any work the effect of which will be to cause the damming up or collection of water in pools. This section shall not prevent persons owning or controlling property from filling, if sufficient draining is provided across such lots for such natural flow. This section shall not prevent the change of the grade of any street as may be for the public interest. 
Sec. 28-215. - Pollution of water. 
It shall be a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful for any person to keep a slaughterhouse, pen, stockyard, garage, carwashing facility or other similar activity on any property within the county that drains or could pollute any public water supply or to knowingly dispose of waste, rubbish or other matter directly into an open or flowing body of water. 
Sec. 28-216. - Junk motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts. 
(a)	Except on properties that meet the definition of an auto wrecking yard or junkyard, and provided that such uses are permitted in the district in which they are located, it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or tenant of any lot, tract or premises in the county to permit or allow any junk motor vehicle or vehicle parts to be parked, abandoned or maintained upon property within the county unless it is screened from view from the passing public. 
(b)	No junk motor vehicle shall be in such a condition as to constitute a health hazard or an unsightly nuisance, notwithstanding the fact that such junk vehicle may be located upon private property. Any such vehicle shall constitute a public nuisance per se, except that it shall not be a nuisance to maintain in an otherwise lawful manner: 
(1)	Any motor vehicle in an enclosed building. 
(2)	Any motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise. 
(3)	Any motor vehicle on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles in conformance with the zoning ordinances of the county. 
(4)	Any motor vehicle that is properly maintained as an antique vehicle pursuant to any laws or regulations of the state governing such vehicle. 
(Ord. of 3-28-2000, § 119) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
Sec. 28-217. - Defacing property; graffiti. 
No person shall post or put up, or allow to remain posted or put up, any indecent placard, writing or picture or write any indecent or immoral words or make any indecent pictures or drawings, any of which may be morally offensive to modesty and delicacy, on any public or private building, wall, fence, sign, monument, post, sidewalk or pavement, in any of the streets or public places of the county and such posting shall constitute a public nuisance. 
Secs. 28-218—28-242. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ABATEMENT 

Sec. 28-243. - Abatement cumulative to other remedies. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
Sec. 28-244. - Authority for issuance of citations. 
The public officer, public authority, or any county designee may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this section. 
Sec. 28-245. - Summary abatement. 
The public officer or public authority shall have the power to order the removal and abatement, without hearing, of those things which are declared either by common law or by the statute law to be nuisances, or which are nuisances per se and from their nature indisputably are so. Any requirement for service of notice to abate a nuisance which may be summarily abated may be complied with by the mailing of such notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the person so to be notified. 
Sec. 28-246. - Notice to abate. 
Except in urgent circumstances involving nuisances per se, where the public health and safety requires an immediate hearing, or in a summary abatement proceeding in the appropriate court of the county, the public officer or public authority, upon his own motion, or upon a request by a public authority or upon a request by at least five residents of the county, if his preliminary investigation discloses a probable basis for a finding that an alleged nuisance exists, the public officer shall give written notice of any alleged nuisance in the form of a complaint and notice to abate a nuisance. 
Sec. 28-247. - Findings and determination; service. 
If, after such notice and hearing or the waiver in writing of such hearing by the owner and all interested parties, the public officer or public authority determines that the alleged nuisance does constitute a nuisance under the provisions of this article, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof the following: 
(1)	In all cases of nuisance except those involving any dwelling, building or structure declared unfit for human habitation, or for commercial, industrial or business, an order ordering the abatement of the nuisance, the actions necessary to abate the nuisance and the prescribed time in which the abatement is to be accomplished. 
(2)	In all cases of nuisance involving any dwelling, building or structure declared unfit for human habitation, or for commercial, industrial or business use or involving any dwelling, building or structure which is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, the following: 
a.	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, an order requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial, or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building, or structure as a human habitation; or 
b.	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, an order requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, or structure. 
In no event shall the county board of commissioners require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building, or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this section. 
Sec. 28-248. - Failure of owner to abate; abatement by county. 
(a)	If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to abate a nuisance, then the public officer or public authority may cause such nuisance to be abated and that in all cases involving any dwelling, building, or structure the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished; and the public officer or public authority may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(b)	If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be removed or demolished, but only upon express consent of the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 28-249. - Costs of abatement. 
The amount of the cost of the abatement, or in all cases involving dwellings, buildings or structures such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. The lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs by the county and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of the costs by the public officer in the office of the clerk of the governing body of the county on a lien docket maintained by the clerk for such purposes. If the dwelling, building, or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer he shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings, or structures and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the appropriate court by the public officer or public authority, shall be secured in the manner as may be directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court. 
Sec. 28-250. - Collection of liens for abatement costs. 
The county may enforce the collection of any amount due on any lien created under this article in the following manner: 
(1)	As to all nuisances, except those involving dwellings, buildings or structures, the lien shall filed, proven and collected as provided for by law, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied. 
(2)	As to all nuisances involving dwellings, buildings or structures, the county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures only in the following manner: 
a.	The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the county, within 30 days after the perfection of the lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the county the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed; 
b.	Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the county; and 
c.	Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (2)(b) of this section, the county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon the property. 
Sec. 28-251. - Manner of giving notice in abatement proceedings. 
(a)	Complaints or orders issued by a public officer or public authority pursuant to this article shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of the property, each owner, and each party in interest; and the return of service signed by the public officer, the public authority, or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of this state, reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon each person in possession of the property, each owner, and each party in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of his residence, shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner, and party in interest. 
(b)	If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the county, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such party or parties by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party or parties or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen that such party or parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(c)	Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in the newspaper designated as the legal organ of the county. A copy of such complaint or orders shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(d)	In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section or this subsection in such cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or in the event such minor or insane person lives outside the county or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person or persons; in the case of other persons who live outside of the county or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)	In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer or public authority in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the public officer or public authority shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or order upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (c) of this article or service may be perfected upon any person holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(f)	A copy of the complaint or orders shall also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located and such filing of the complaint or orders shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or orders or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the clerk of the county commission. 
Chapter 30 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City and county recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; gifts of public parks or pleasure grounds to municipality, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1; park and recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; establishment of city and county supervised recreation, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-3; political subdivisions to have environmental testing on property acquired for park or recreational area, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-18. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOATING 

Sec. 30-19. - Definitions. 
As used herein the terms "person," "power boat," "vessel," and "waters of this state" shall have the same meaning as those set out in O.C.G.A. § 52-7-3. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990) 
Sec. 30-20. - Certain vessel equipment prohibited. 
No person shall operate any vessel upon the waters that lie within the boundaries of the county if such vessel contains a head, toilet, galley, kitchen facility or sleeping quarters. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of boating by counties, O.C.G.A. § 52-7-21; certain vessel equipment prohibited on Lake Rabun, O.C.G.A. § 52-7-13. 
Sec. 30-21. - Penalties. 
Any person found in violation of this article shall be fined by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00 as set by the appropriate court or magistrate pursuant to law. 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990) 
Sec. 30-22. - Enforcement; posting of sign. 
The county sheriff or his designated deputy is authorized to place in a prominent location at each public boat ramp at any public lake within the confines of the county a sign in substantially the following form: 
"Vessels with heads, toilets, galleys, kitchen facilities or sleeping quarters are prohibited pursuant to Rabun County Code section 30-20." 
(Ord. of 1-8-1990) 
Chapter 32 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; municipal and county ordinances for issuance of permits to charitable organizations for solicitation of contributions on streets and highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97.1; charitable solicitations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1; municipal and county occupation taxes for certain traveling salespersons, merchants, and dealers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Itinerant merchant means any person, regardless of whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, and regardless of whether a resident of the county, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, and merchandise within the county, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car, boat, or public room in any hotel, lodging house, apartment, or shop within the county for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. 
Peddler means any person, regardless of whether a resident of this county, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden produce, farm products, or provisions who offers and exposes the same for sale, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance. 
Secs. 32-2—32-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 32-21. - License required. 
Each peddler and itinerant merchant as such terms are defined herein who does business within this county shall be required to obtain a license from the county clerk. This article does not apply to charitable solicitors. 
Chapter 34 - ROADS, STREETS, BRIDGES AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Highways, bridges and ferries generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-19. - Suspension or revocation for violations. 
Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon violation by the permittee of any of the conditions upon which the permit is issued, the provisions of this chapter and this Code, or the provisions of any applicable state or federal law. 
Sec. 34-20. - Penalties; investigation; enforcement. 
Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 for each violation. Each day the violation exists shall constitute one violation of this article but in no event shall any person be fined more than $1,000.00 for the construction of one driveway, road, street or thoroughfare. Violations of this article shall be investigated and enforced by the county marshal's office. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(1), § 4) 
Sec. 34-21. - Effect of violation of conditions upon which permit is issued. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to the provisions of the permit and a failure to comply with the conditions of the permit shall be sufficient basis and grounds for the board of commissioners to revoke the permit or cite for violation of this article or both. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(1), § 5) 
Secs. 34-22—34-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREET AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 34-46. - Objectives and purpose. 
The objective of these requirements is to provide for permits to construct driveways, to provide for penalties for failure to obtain permits to construct driveways or other thoroughfares and to provide for the proper construction of driveways and other connections to the public road system for the county. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 1001) 
Sec. 34-47. - Permit required for street and driveway construction. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a driveway, road, street, or thoroughfare upon or adjacent to any public road within the county so as to intersect with the road unless such person shall first obtain a permit to construct such driveway, road, street, or thoroughfare for the purpose of gaining access to the public roads of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 1001) 
Sec. 34-48. - Driveway permit application. 
Any person wishing to construct a driveway, road, street or thoroughfare upon or intersecting with the public roads of the county shall make an application to the office of the board of commissioners in the county courthouse and pay a fee with the application as provided in the county fee schedule. The board of commissioners will provide for the application to be considered within three business days and will instruct the applicant of the requirements necessary to provide access to the county road. Each access shall be constructed in a manner which will not damage the public or county roads. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 1002) 
Sec. 34-49. - Inspection. 
Any driveway, road, street, or thoroughfare as described in sections 34-47 and 34-48 shall be subject to inspection prior to issuance of a permit to connect to the county road. The appropriate official as designated by the board of commissioners may consider any plans or other evidence deemed sufficient to inform the county of the intended construction of any such driveway. The permit issued by the county to construct any driveway, road, street, or thoroughfare may include specifications for grade, gravel, or other construction specifications so as to provide for the orderly management of the public roads within the county and their connection to private ways for access. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 1003) 
Secs. 34-50—34-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION PERMIT 

Sec. 34-72. - Permit for construction within county rights-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence construction within the right-of-way of any public road within the county unless the person shall first obtain a permit for the construction of any utility lines or other necessary cuts within the right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(2), § 1) 
Sec. 34-73. - Application; fees. 
Any person wishing to construct within the public roads of the county, shall make an application to the board of commissioners or their designee on the form provided by the county. The application for a right-of-way construction permit shall be accompanied by the permit fee provided in the county fee schedule. The county board of commissioners will provide for the application to be considered within 72 hours and will instruct the applicant of the requirements necessary to construct and repair within the right-of-way of the county road. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(2), § 2) 
Sec. 34-74. - Plans and other evidence may be submitted with application. 
The appropriate official as designated by the county board of commissioners may consider any plans or other evidence deemed sufficient to inform the county of the intended construction and repair. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(2), § 3) 
Sec. 34-75. - Permit may be issued subject to construction specifications. 
The permit issued by the county may include specifications for grade, compaction, or other construction specifications so as to provide for the orderly maintenance of the public roads within the county. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(2), § 3) 
Sec. 34-76. - Standard of construction generally. 
Each cut shall be performed in a manner which will mitigate damage to the public or county road and repair to the road shall be promptly made to the specifications determined appropriate by the official designated by the county board of commissioners to oversee the construction and repair work. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(2), § 2) 
Sec. 34-77. - Inspections. 
Any road, street, or thoroughfare shall be subject to inspection prior to issuance of a permit to construct within the county. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(2), § 3) 
Secs. 34-78—34-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WEIGHT LIMITS 

Sec. 34-135. - Weight limits on certain county roads. 
No vehicle weighing over ten tons shall be permitted upon: 
(1)	Devil's Branch Road, County Road #221; 
(2)	Blue Ridge Gap Road, County Road #216; 
(3)	Davis Gap Road, County Road #22; 
except for access to property lying adjacent to the roadways for delivery of goods and materials to the property. This section specifically prohibits the use of the roadways for through traffic along its right-of-way for all vehicles weighing in excess of ten tons. 
(Ord. of 7-28-1998, § 1) 
Sec. 34-136. - Signs to be posted warning of weight limits. 
Signage shall be placed along the roadways indicating that the vehicles are prohibited from using the county roads as a means of through traffic and that violators will be prosecuted. 
(Ord. of 7-28-1998, § 2) 
Secs. 34-137—34-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ROAD NAMES AND STRUCTURE NUMBERING 

Sec. 34-156. - Penalties. 
Any person that violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 or by confinement in the county jail or correctional institution for a period not to exceed 60 days or by community service of not less than 200 hours, or a combination thereof, in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that the violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(3), art. XI, § 11) 
Sec. 34-157. - Designation of street and road names and numbers. 
All streets, roads, or accesses to structures within the county, incorporated as well as unincorporated areas, whether maintained by the county or not, shall at the sole discretion of the county board of commissioners be named and numbered as they now or in the future may be designated on the official map and index of the board of commissioners. Any street, road, or access not designated on the official index shall hereafter be referred to as designated on the index for structure numbering purposes. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(3), art. II) 
Sec. 34-158. - Designation of structure numbers. 
Structure numbers for dwelling units, places of business, industrial locations, and all other structures and uses requiring structure numbers shall be assigned by the county mapping department during and following the implementation stage of the system in each area of the county. The mapping department shall keep a record of all address numbers and road names assigned under this article. Such records may be maintained in electronic or other data storage systems if so desired. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(3), art. III) 
Sec. 34-159. - Posting of designated structure numbers. 
(a)	The owner or occupant or person in charge of any dwelling unit, structure or use to which a number has been assigned shall be notified in writing by the mapping department of the number assigned. Within 14 days after receipt of the written notification, the owner or occupant or person in charge of any dwelling unit, structure or use to which a number has been assigned shall cause the same to be posted and subsequently maintained in either one or two locations depending on the conditions: 
(1)	If the mailbox is located on the same side of the street and adjacent to the driveway or curb cut, the number shall be affixed to the mailbox in letters four inches in height or larger and of a color contrasting with the color of the mailbox. This does not preclude an individual from also numbering the front entrance of the structure if so desired. 
(2)	If the mailbox is not on the same side of the street and adjacent to the driveway or curb cut, the number shall be posted on the mailbox as prescribed by federal postal regulations and either on the side of the structure that is visible from the street access or on an aboveground sign attached to a post or other object at the driveway or curb cut. If attached to a post or other object at the driveway or curb cut the post or object shall measure between three to five feet in height. The numbers shall be four inches in height or larger and of a color contrasting with the color of the background. This section does not preclude an individual from also numbering the front entrance if so desired. 
(3)	In the case that a building is served by two or more driveways or curb cuts, the number shall be assigned and posted at the location determined to be most favorable by the mapping department for emergency response purposes. 
(b)	If for any reason the assigned number cannot be posted as required in subsection (a) of this section, the number shall be posted as prescribed by the mapping department after consultation with the owner, occupant or person in charge of the dwelling unit, structure or use. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(3), art. IV, §§ 4.2.1—4.2.3, 4.2.5; Amd. of 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 34-160. - Duty of owner to remove prior or conflicting numbering. 
It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, or person in charge of the dwelling unit, structure or use, upon affixing the new number, to remove any different number which might be mistaken for or be confused with the number assigned to the structure by the mapping department. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(3), art. IV, § 4.2.4; Amd. of 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 34-161. - Primary and secondary numbering system. 
The county structure numbering plan shall consist of a primary and a secondary numbering system, as follows: 
(1)	A primary address number shall be assigned to each street or road frontage of each parcel of land, regardless of whether the parcel is occupied. The primary number is required to be posted only if the parcel is occupied by a dwelling unit or structure or is used for a purpose that require parcel numbering and the owner, occupant or person in charge is notified of the number assignment. Other primary numbers are reserved for future development of the numbered parcels and will be assigned at the time of development. 
(2)	Secondary numbers may be used when a number of units, structures, or uses coexist on the same parcel of land. Examples of parcels requiring secondary numbers include apartment projects, condominium projects, mobile home parks, office parks, planned unit developments and other uses where the use of secondary numbers is necessary to clarify the location of a unit or use for public safety purposes. To provide secondary numbers, the mapping department shall work with the owner, manager, or person in charge of the project to determine a logical numbering system under the following guidelines: 
a.	Existing numbered units and uses shall retain the present set of addresses with only the primary number being changed or added if existing numbers comply with this article. 
b.	Buildings on a single parcel with more than one and fewer than five units shall be given either letter (preferred) or number designations as requested by the owner. 
c.	A single building on a single parcel of land and with five or more units shall be given numerical designations such as Suite 5, Apartment 5, etc. 
d.	Multiple structures on the same parcel of land may be given secondary numbers consisting of number designations if the buildings are accessed from a main entrance to the project. Generally the number designations should increase in a clockwise direction from the main entrance. This shall also 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(3), art. V) 
Sec. 34-162. - Implementation in stages. 
Because of the large and complex nature of the county and the existing numbering system in place in some portions of the county at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the regulations of this article shall be implemented in stages covering small sections of the entire area without the need for the adoption of supplementary implementation resolutions for each section of the county. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(3), art. VI) 
Sec. 34-163. - Exempt structures. 
The numbering requirements of this article shall not apply to agricultural buildings such as barns, poultry houses, outbuildings or equipment storage buildings, or to storage and accessory buildings for the use of the occupant of another building on the property; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply if the structure requires a separate mailing address or is used as a dwelling unit, an office, or the nominal work station of an employee. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(3), art. VII) 
Sec. 34-164. - New structures and lots. 
Structure numbers will be assigned to each new lot, tract or building site on the original drawings of a final subdivision plat, mobile home park plan, planned unit development or other plan requiring the approval of the planning department. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(3), art. VIII, § 8.1) 
Sec. 34-165. - Permits and certificates of occupancy not to be issued until structure number is assigned. 
(a)	No building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or septic permit for any new or remodeled or repaired structure will be issued by the responsible official of the county in the affected area of the county until the owner, developer, or builder has procured from the mapping department the official structure number or numbers and presents proof of same to the responsible official of the county for issuance of the permit. 
(b)	Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any principal building, erected or repaired, or use requiring the number, shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the standards of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(3), art. VIII, § 8.2) 
Sec. 34-166. - Duties of utility companies to facilitate compliance with structure numbering system. 
(a)	All utility services regulated by the state public service commission or any utility cooperative service organization, shall withhold service from any building until the owner or requesting party has furnished the utility with a valid structure number. 
(b)	It shall be the responsibility of the county mapping department to notify each affected utility service of implementation in each area by issuing maps and/or lists of official numbers assigned to each affected structure or use. 
(c)	All utility services are required to cooperate with the county mapping department by providing a complete list of all customer information requested by the mapping department to facilitate implementation of this article. This shall include all pertinent information such as, but not limited to, customer name, phone number, mailing address, physical address, utility meter number or other identifying number or information. Said information shall be provided in an electronic format compatible with software used by the mapping department. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(3), art. IX, § 9) 
Sec. 34-167. - Nonemergency county services to be withheld until structure is validly numbered. 
Every county department and official under the jurisdiction of the county board of commissioners shall not render any nonemergency service until the occupant, owner, or requesting individual has provided the department with a valid structure number. Nonemergency service includes any service provided by the board of commissioners except fire, rescue, law enforcement or emergency medical service. 
(Ord. of 4-28-1995(3), art. X, § 10) 
Secs. 34-168—34-187. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC GATHERINGS 

Sec. 34-188. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mass gathering means any event likely to attract 1,000 or more persons and to continue for eight or more consecutive hours within the county. 
Sec. 34-189. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, promote, or otherwise allow a mass gathering, unless a permit has been issued for the gathering by the county clerk, with the prior approval of the county board of commissioners, at least 60 days before the first day of the gathering. 
Sec. 34-190. - Applications; fees. 
(a)	Application for a permit to hold a mass gathering shall be made to the county board of commissioners, or the person delegated by it to process the application, on a form and in a manner prescribed by the commissioners at least 60 days before the first day of the gathering. 
(b)	The application shall be accompanied by the plans, reports, specifications and letters of approval as the commissioners shall deem necessary for the particular event but in all events the plans shall clearly provide for adequate and satisfactory water supply and sewage facilities including refuse storage and disposal facilities, adequate emergency medical facilities, sanitary food service control, fire protection and security of life and health and shall include the number of persons expected to attend the gathering. 
(c)	In addition, the application shall disclose the names and addresses of all persons, corporations or other legal entity providing financial backing and the amount of money each is providing, and the name and address of each insurance carrier providing liability insurance for personal injury and property damage covering the event and the premises where the event is to be held and a copy of each insurance policy, which shall be with a company authorized by the state insurance commission to provide the coverage in an amount deemed adequate for the event by the county board of commissioners. 
(d)	The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount specified in the county fee schedule. 
Sec. 34-191. - Health department and sheriff's department approval required. 
Before approval of the application, the applicant must furnish a signed letter by the county health department and the county sheriff's department stating that they have reviewed the application and plans for the event and find that the applicant has provided satisfactory health and safety measures to allow approval of the application in accordance with the terms of this article and all applicable state law. 
Sec. 34-192. - Denial of permit; notice to applicant. 
If all of the necessary conditions for permit issuance are not timely complied with by the applicant then the permit shall be denied and the applicant shall be notified in writing by the clerk of the county of the denial. 
Chapter 36 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1; pawnbrokers generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; local regulation of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-135, 44-12-136. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1—36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAWNBROKERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; local regulation of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-135, 44-12-136. 

Sec. 36-19. - Compliance with state law required. 
Any person licensed under this article shall required to at all times be in full compliance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 
Sec. 36-20. - License required; fees. 
Each pawnbroker doing business within the county shall be required to obtain a license from the county clerk in the manner specified in this article. Application for licensure shall be as provided in chapter 12. The application for licensure as a pawnbroker shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable investigative fee to defray in part the county's costs in conducting the investigation required herein, and an annual business license fee, both in amounts as provided in the county fee schedule. If the application for license is denied, the annual business license fee shall be refunded. 
Sec. 36-21. - Review of application. 
No action on any application for a pawnbroker's license shall be taken by the county board of commissioners until the sheriff or his designee has reviewed the application, conducted a criminal background check, and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the county clerk, in the manner specified in this article. 
Sec. 36-22. - Limitation on issuance. 
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or of burglary or robbery. 
Sec. 36-23. - Responsibility for acts of employees. 
The holder of a pawnbroker's license shall be responsible for any and all acts of his employees and for any violation by them of the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 36-24. - Recordkeeping. 
Each pawnbroker licensed hereunder shall furnish to the sheriff or his designee each week a list of every article pledged with him or sold to him during the previous week, giving a full and accurate description of the article, from whom it was received, and the hour of the day received. 
Sec. 36-25. - Weapons. 
No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge or purchase any revolver, pistol, blackjack, or sawed-off shotgun, and no pawnbroker shall display in his window or shop any such weapons for sale. 
Sec. 36-26. - Minors. 
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
Sec. 36-27. - Stolen goods. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him, or which is sought to be pledged with him, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. 
Secs. 36-28—36-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1. 

Sec. 36-58. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Auto wrecking establishment means junkyard. 
Automobile body shop means automotive repair garage. 
Automotive repair garage means a business establishment involving maintenance, repair, conversion and other such services on cars, trucks, boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and mobile/manufactured homes, typically including vehicle storage and incidental sales of parts. Also referred to as automotive services. 
Business premises or premises means the area of a junkyard as described in a junk dealer's license or application for license, as provided for in this article. 
Junk means old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers, or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and motor vehicles no longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but "junk" shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as byproducts, waste, or scraps from the operation of his own business, or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing processes. 
Junk dealer means a person who operates a junkyard, as defined in this section, within the county. 
Junkyard means a yard, lot, or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing junk as defined in this section, upon which occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling, or offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by pans, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are to be used for charity. 
Sec. 36-59. - Business registration required. 
All junk dealers and persons operating junkyards shall comply with the business registration and all other requirements of chapter 12. 
Sec. 36-60. - Regulations. 
The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article: 
(1)	The junkyard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(2)	No space not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed business. 
(3)	No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(4)	No weeds shall be permitted to attain a height of more than four inches. 
(5)	No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises; nor shall any refuse or any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is junk as defined herein and is in use in the licensed business. 
(6)	No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, walkway, or curb, or become scattered or blown off the business premises. 
(7)	Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten feet in height and shall be arranged so as to permit easy access to all such junk for firefighting purposes. 
(8)	No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the licensed business shall be kept on the premises; nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard. 
(9)	Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on the premises. 
(10)	No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in any incinerator not meeting the requirements of the building code; and no junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in the open except in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(11)	No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with the licensed business or any Sunday, Christmas, Thanksgiving, or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(12)	The area on the premises where junk is kept other than indoors shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid, vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of eight feet measured from ground level. The fence or wall shall not contain any poster or advertising of any kind as may be permitted under the county's sign regulations. 
(13)	Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business. 
(14)	No junkyard shall be allowed to become a nuisance nor shall any junkyard be operated in such manner as to become injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the community or of any residents close by. 
Sec. 36-61. - Recordkeeping. 
Each acquisition of junk shall be recorded in a permanent type register kept on the business premises, giving the name and residence address of the person from whom the acquisition was made, a description of the junk acquired, and the date of the transaction. Such data shall be held available for inspection by any law enforcement officer. 
Sec. 36-62. - Minors. 
No junk dealer shall have any business dealings as a junk dealer with a minor, nor shall a junk dealer's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a junk dealer employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
Sec. 36-63. - Stolen goods. 
Every junk dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles, or things of value which may have been lost or stolen shall upon demand produce such article or thing to any member of the police department for examination. 
Sec. 36-64. - Vehicles. 
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear thereon in legible characters the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof. 
Sec. 36-65. - Screening of wrecked motor vehicle compounds required. 
Any person who owns, operates or maintains an auto wrecking establishment or junkyard, automobile repair garage, automobile body shop, or other permitted use involving junk, unlicensed motor vehicles, or junk motor vehicles outdoors shall provide a solid vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of six feet, measured along the ground level along the entire perimeter of the subject yard, compound or area, including entrance and exit gates, such that screening is provided on all sides from the view from public streets and adjacent properties. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 119.2) 
Sec. 36-66. - Junk or inoperable motor vehicles prohibited. 
Except on properties that meet the definition of an auto wrecking establishment or junkyard, and such uses are permitted in the zoning district in which they are located, no person owning real estate within the county shall allow or keep any junk or inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereof on said property unless vehicles are stored out of view of passing public and adjoining properties. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 119) 
Chapter 38 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 24, 2012, deleted the former Ch. 38, §§ 38-1—38-108, and enacted a new Ch. 38 as set out herein. The former C. 38 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 28, 1999, §§ 11.1—11.7, 11.9—11.12; an amendment adopted Aug. 22, 2000; an amendment adopted Dec. 18, 2001; and an ordinance adopted Aug. 28, 2007, §§ 131—138. 
State Law reference— Control of signs and signals, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq.; placement of posters, signs and advertisements on public or private property; permission and limitations, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58; limitations on signs identifying or advertising sale of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3; restrictions on certain signs providing information in the interest of the traveling public and multiple message signs, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75. 

Sec. 38-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sign Ordinance of Rabun County, Georgia." 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-2. - Purpose and scope. 
The board of commissioners of Rabun County, Georgia, finds that adoption of sign regulations serves the following purposes: 
(1)	The public health, safety and general welfare of the county is enhanced by ensuring the prohibition and removal of dangerous and unsafe signs. 
(2)	Pedestrian and motorist safety is promoted by reducing and limiting the number and area of signs, which can unduly distract motorists and pedestrians, create traffic hazards, confuse motorists when such signs are similar to traffic signs, and reduce the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public. 
(3)	This chapter is intended to promote attractive signs which clearly present the visual message in a manner that is compatible with its surroundings. The appearance, character and quality of the county are affected by the location, size, construction and graphic design of its signs. 
(4)	The economic well-being of Rabun County, Georgia, is enhanced by allowing individual businesses to identify themselves and the goods and services offered in a clear and distinctive manner, by creating a more attractive district to tourists, and by preserving and improving the appearance of the county, thereby assuring that signs are properly integrated with and harmonious to the buildings and sites in the county. 
(5)	The purpose of the county's regulation of mobile signs and billboards is to promote the safe movement of vehicular traffic, to reduce vehicular traffic, to reduce air pollution, and to improve the aesthetic appearance of the county. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-3. - By enacting this chapter, the county intends: 
(a)	To balance the rights of individuals, businesses, and government to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(b)	To afford the business community equal and fair opportunity to advertise and promote its products and services without discrimination; 
(c)	To preserve and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Rabun County, Georgia; 
(d)	To improve traffic and pedestrian safety; 
(e)	To maintain and enhance the visual environment and preserve the right of citizens and visitors to enjoy the county's scenic beauty; 
(f)	To protect property values of nearby public and private property by minimizing possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(g)	To avoid the harmful aspects of the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(h)	To promote economic development; 
(i)	To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations; and 
(j)	To promote the purposes stated in this article by regulating signs based on objective standards, including, but not limited to, height and size, and without regard to the content of the sign message. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-4. - Statement of findings. 
The county finds that signs provide an important medium through which individuals, businesses, and government may convey a variety of messages. Left unregulated, however, signs can become a threat to the public health and safety as a traffic hazard and a detriment to property values and the overall economic growth of the county as an aesthetic nuisance. (See, e.g. Scenic America, Billboards and Sign Control available at http://www.scenic.org; Jerry Weitz, PhD. AICP, The Public Purpose of Roswell's Sign Ordinance and the Implications of Doing Without It: A Position Paper (December 7, 1999), available at http://roswellgov.com; Street Graphics and the Law, 2004 Revised Edition, Daniel Mendelker, Andrew Bertucci, and William Ewald.) 
Having considered the following studies, which the board of commissioners finds to be relevant, useful and applicable to Rabun County, Georgia, the board of commissioners finds that the size, location and quantity of sign structures within the county must be regulated in order to achieve the above-stated intents and purposes: University of Georgia Land Use Clinic (2003, June 26). Sign Control on Rural Corridors: Model Provisions and Guidance; Wisconsin Department of Transportation (1994, December). Milwaukee County Stadium Variable Message Sign Study: Impacts of an Advertising Variable Message Sign on Freeway Traffic; Scenic America (2007). Billboards in the Digital Age: Unsafe (and Unsightly) at Any Speed. Scenic America Issue Alert; Nasar, Jack L. and Hong, Xiaodong (1999, September). Visual Preferences in Urban Signscapes. Journal of Environment and Behavior, 31(5), 671-691; Office of Safety Research and Development, Federal Highway Administration (2001, September 11). Research Review of Potential Safety Effects of Electronic Billboards on Driver Attention and Distraction. U.S. Department of Transportation; New York State Department of State, Division of Local Government Services (2006, January). Municipal Control of Signs. James A. Coon Local Government Technical Series; Weinstein, Alan C. A Study of Local Regulation of Outdoor Advertising in 268 U.S. Jurisdictions. Outdoor Advertising Association of America, Inc.; City Club of Portland (1996, September 6). Billboard Regulation in Portland. City Club of Portland Bulletin, 78(13), 1-40; Smily, Alison and Persaud, Bhagwant, et al. (2005). Traffic Safety Evaluations of Video Advertising Signs. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 1937, 105-112. 
In adopting these sign regulations, the board of commissioners especially recognizes the vast number of court decisions, coming from Georgia courts, the federal courts, and courts throughout the United States, which recognize that the regulation of the size, location and quantity of sign structures is a valid and lawful means of achieving the above-stated intents and purposes, and that such intents and purposes are valid and lawful governmental interests, which include the following: Granite State Outdoor Advertising, Inc. v. Cobb County, Ga., 193 Fed.Appx. 900 (C.A.11th 2006)(finding that the stated goals within a sign ordinance of protecting against traffic hazards and the adverse impact on the county's aesthetic qualities are substantial government interests); Gregory v. Clive, 2007 WL 2914515 (Ga. S.Ct. 2007)(recognizing as within a local government's police power to enact legislation governing billboards and signs, as such legislation clearly addresses the public health, safety, or general welfare of the community); H & H Operations, Inc. v. City of Peachtree City, Ga., 248 Ga. 500 (1981)(holding that, under its police power, a municipality can enact and enforce reasonable regulations governing the erection and maintenance of signs within its jurisdiction); Harnish v. Manatee County, Florida, 783 F.2d 1535 (C.A. 11th 1986)(finding that aesthetics is a substantial governmental goal which is entitled to and should be accorded weighty respect, and that the governmental entity charged with the responsibility of protecting the environment must be given discretion in determining how much protection is necessary and the best method of achieving that protection); Lamar Advertising Company v. City of Douglasville, Ga., 254 F.Supp.2d 1321 (N.D.Ga. 2003)(finding that where a sign ordinance asserts the goals of public safety, traffic safety, health, welfare and aesthetics, a municipality has shown an important or substantial governmental interest unrelated to the suppression of free speech); Metromedia, Inc. v. City of San Diego, 453 U.S. 490 (1981)(holding that the goals of traffic safety and aesthetics advanced by a municipality as justification for regulating signs is a substantial governmental interest); St. Louis Poster Advertising Co. v. City of St. Louis, 249 U.S. 269 (1919)(finding that billboards may be prohibited in the residential districts of a city in the interest of the safety, morality, health and decency of the community); Members of the City Council of the City of Los Angeles v. Taxpayers for Vincent, 466 U.S. 789 (1984)(finding that a government entity can regulate signs and billboards when necessary to advance a significant and legitimate state interest, such as the protection of the aesthetics and quality of life within its jurisdiction); City of Doraville v. Turner Communications, Corp., 236 Ga. 385 (1976)(finding that under its police power authority, a municipality can regulate the location and maintenance of outdoor advertising signs within their territorial jurisdiction); Spratlin Outdoor Media, Inc. v. City of Douglasville, 2006 WL 826077 (N.D.Ga. 2006) (upholding sign ordinance where the ordinance's height and setback restrictions were rationally related to its stated goals of promoting the health, safety, morality and general welfare of the community, promoting the orderly and beneficial development of the city, promoting adequate access to natural light and air, improving the aesthetic appearance of the city, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and buildings in accordance with the city's comprehensive plan). 
(1)	Based on the cited materials and the studies referenced herein, the Board of Commissioners finds that unregulated signs: 
a.	Can be a safety hazard to drivers and pedestrians; 
b.	Can create unsafe, cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares throughout the county; 
c.	Can hamper economic growth; 
d.	Can lower property values; 
e.	Can adversely impact public investments; 
f.	Can degrade the utility of public safety signs; and 
g.	Can adversely impact the aesthetic quality of the community and surrounding environment. 
(2)	As the regulations of the placement, construction, and maintenance of buildings and structures through zoning is a valid use of the police power, so too is the regulation of the placement, installation, and maintenance of signs, since such signs in the literal sense must ordinarily be considered structures, and in a practical sense are capable of producing many of the same nuisances as are produced by buildings. 
(3)	The regulation of the placement, installation, and maintenance of signs is further justified by the signs' innate schemes and primary purposes to draw mental attention to their content, potentially to the detriment of sound driving practices and the safety of the motoring public to whom a majority of the signs are oriented. Therefore, it is the intent of this article to regulate the size and location of signs such that their purpose can be served without unduly interfering with the motoring public and causing unsafe conditions. 
(4)	The objective of this chapter is to establish requirements for the placement, installation, and maintenance of signs and advertising in order to preserve and protect the health, safety, welfare, and general well-being of the citizens of the county. 
(5)	Further, it is an objective of this article to protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the county by regulating the number, size, placement, installation, and maintenance of signs. The fact that such signs are intended to command visual contact grants to signs a proportionally greater role than other structures in determining the overall aesthetic quality of the county. The aesthetic impact of signs is an economic fact that can bear heavily upon the enjoyment and value of property; therefore, the regulation of signs is validly justified on the basis of conserving the value of property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the county. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billboard: A sign larger than 50 square feet in area, not to exceed 300 square feet in area. 
Double-faced sign: A sign with two faces back to back mounted on the same sign structure. 
Electronic display: A message displayed through the use of LED, LCD, plasma, or other similar type of panels or screens. 
Electronic sign: A sign whose message may be changed at intervals by computer controller, microprocessor controller or by remote control, and whose message is displayed through the use of LED, LCD, plasma or other similar type of panels or screens, including devices known as commercial electronic message signs or similar devices. 
Foot-candle: A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light cast onto a given point, measured as one lumen per square foot. 
Ground sign: A sign that is anchored to the ground and is wholly independent of a building for support. Freestanding signs are included in this definition, as are signs on poles, frames, or other mounting structures other than buildings. 
Hanging sign: Any non-fabric sign hanging or suspended from the exterior walls of a building structure, or an awning attached to the building structure, which is directed so as to be plainly visible from a public right-of-way. 
Sign: Any display of words, shapes or images designed to convey a message to the viewer, located on the exterior of any dwelling, building or structure, or located anywhere on a lot upon a dedicated supporting structure or device, including poles, banners, windows and similar devices. 
Sign face: The actual message-carrying portion of the sign that can be used to display content, including any area that can display or does display words, pictures or other communicative elements of the sign, including the background color. 
Sign structure: This includes all the elements of the sign, including its supporting structure, sign face, base, lights and every portion of the sign. 
Variance: A minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading regulations as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
Wall sign: A sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior of a building, with the sign face parallel to the wall, and extending from the surface of the exterior no more than 24 inches. 
Window sign: A sign mounted inside of a structure and designed to be seen from outside of the structure through a window. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-6. - Penalties. 
(a)	Enforcement of this chapter may be through criminal prosecution in the Rabun County Magistrate Court. Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity who shall do anything prohibited by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended or which shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be subject to an enforcement action. 
(b)	The officers or officials designated by the board of commissioners shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may reasonably be deemed necessary to assure or compel compliance with the requirements and provisions of this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property for the purpose of investigation and inspection, as permitted by law. 
(c)	No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with any government official while in the process of carrying out his official duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(d)	Owners are ultimately responsible for the condition of their property and ensuring that their property and all activity occurring on such property are in compliance with this chapter. For any violation, both the owner of the property and/or the individual agent, tenant or invitee of the owner responsible for the violation may be cited, where appropriate. Agents of the owner would include, but not be limited to, developers, builders, contractors, and sub-contractors. Tenants and invitees would include, but not be limited to, any renter, leaseholder, owner of any vehicle or structure on the property, or other person conducting an activity on the property who is not a trespasser. Corporations and companies responsible for the work may be cited in lieu of or in addition to citations issued to the actual individuals on site committing violations. 
(e)	Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply with any provision of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate violation, subjecting the offender to a new citation, or other civil or criminal proceeding. 
(f)	Each violation of any specific provision of this chapter shall be a separate violation, subjecting the offender to separate citations. 
(g)	A designated officer or official may issue criminal citations for violations of this chapter. 
(h)	Criminal prosecutions for violation of this chapter shall be commenced by the completion, signing, and service of a citation by the designated officer or official. Warnings or notices to comply maybe issued prior to a citation being issued. The original of the citation shall be personally served upon the accused, his or her authorized representative, or, if a corporation, an officer of the corporation or its on-site representative or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property; a copy shall be promptly filed with the Rabun County Magistrate Court. 
(i)	Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial in the Rabun County Magistrate Court, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the designated officer or official who completes and serves it. 
(j)	Any defendant who fails to appear for trial may thereafter be arrested on the warrant of the magistrate court and required to post a bond for his or her future appearance. 
(k)	Fines shall be assessed in accordance with the applicable rules of the Rabun County Magistrate Court. 
(l)	Persons cited criminally are also subject to other penalties within the jurisdiction of the Rabun County Magistrate Court, including incarceration, community service, and probation. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-7. - Intent. 
(a)	It is contended that it is not irrational for the county's citizens to plan their physical surroundings in such a way that unsightliness is minimized. With these objectives and purposes in mind, it is the intention of this chapter to authorize the use of signs that: 
(1)	Are compatible with their surroundings in terms of zoning, existing land use, and architectural characteristics; 
(2)	Are appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain; 
(3)	Are expressive of the identity of the individual properties or of the county as a whole; and 
(4)	Are legible in the circumstances in which they are seen. 
(b)	In addition, it is declared that the regulation of signs within the county is necessary and in the public interest: 
(1)	To protect property values within the county; 
(2)	To protect the motoring public from damage or injury caused or partially attributable to distractions or obstructions from improperly designed or situated signs; 
(3)	To promote the economic well-being of the county by creating a favorable physical image; 
(4)	To create and maintain high quality commercial districts; 
(5)	To eliminate the clutter and unsightliness of excessive signage; 
(6)	To protect the right of citizens to enjoy the county's natural scenic beauty; 
(7)	To encourage the development of tourism; 
(8)	To regulate the construction, erection, maintenance and size of signs that may constitute a direct danger to pedestrians and property, especially during periods of high winds; and 
(9)	To preserve and promote the public health, safety and welfare in the county. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-8. - Jurisdiction and applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all properties within the unincorporated areas of the county. Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this sign ordinance, any sign, display or device allowed under this chapter may contain any commercial or non-commercial message, or any political or non-political message; except that such messages cannot depict obscenity, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, nor can they depict sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3, nor advertise any activity illegal under the laws of Georgia or the United States. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-9. - Compliance with this chapter and other laws required. 
All signs shall be constructed and maintained in strict conformity with the requirements of this chapter and with the building and electrical codes adopted by the state, the county, and the International Code Council (ICC). 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-10. - Conflicting provisions. 
If any provisions or requirements of this chapter are found to be in conflict with any other provision or requirement of this chapter or any other applicable governmental law, ordinance, resolution, rule or other governmental regulation of any kind, the more restrictive rule or standard shall take precedence. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Secs. 38-11—38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 38-21. - Permit required. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or convert any sign in the county or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a sign permit from the county. These directives shall not be construed to require any permit for change of copy on any sign, replacement of the sign face, nor for the repainting, cleaning, or other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure for which a permit has previously been issued, so long as the sign or sign structure is not modified or enlarged in any way. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-22. - Application and issuance of permits. 
(a)	Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner or his agent with the zoning administrator or his designee upon forms furnished by the county. Applications shall describe and set forth a minimum of the following: 
(1)	The type and purpose of the sign. 
(2)	The value of the sign. 
(3)	The street address and zoning designation of the property upon which the sign is to be located and the proposed location of the sign on the property. 
(4)	The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
(5)	The names and addresses of the owner of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(6)	Written consent of the owner or his agent granting permission for the placement of the sign. 
(7)	A sketch or print drawn to scale showing all dimensions with pertinent information such as wind pressure requirements and display materials in accordance with the technical codes adopted by the county and showing any other data deemed necessary by the zoning administrator. 
(8)	Name, address, phone number and business license number of the sign contractor. 
(9)	A written agreement to indemnify and hold the county harmless of all damages, demands or expenses of every type which may in any manner be caused by the sign structure. 
(b)	Within five working days of submission, the zoning administrator shall inform the applicant of any information or documents necessary for completion of an application. Until such time as the application is complete, the county will not consider the application properly filed. 
(c)	Once the application is determined complete, the zoning administrator shall within ten working days issue a written decision on the application, as follows: 
(1)	Grant approval of the sign permit application and issue a permit if the zoning administrator finds that the application complies with the standards of this chapter. 
(2)	Deny a permit if the zoning administrator finds that the application should not be granted for any of the following reasons: 
a.	The sign applied for fails to comply with the structural or design requirements in this chapter. 
b.	The sign applied for fails to meet the sign location or orientation requirements in this chapter. 
c.	The sign applied for fails to meet the type of sign permitted by this chapter. 
d.	The sign applied for fails to meet the sign display requirements in this chapter, including, but not limited to, lighting requirements and sign face requirements. 
e.	The sign applied for fails to meet the restrictions for the type of sign permitted by this chapter. 
f.	The sign applied for is a prohibited sign under the terms of this chapter. 
g.	The sign applied for fails to meet the dimensional, including size, requirements in this chapter. 
h.	The sign applied for exceeds the maximum number of signs permitted by this chapter. 
i.	The sign applied for fails to meet the placement requirements in this chapter. 
(d)	If the zoning administrator determines the application fails to comply with the standards of this chapter, the applicant shall be provided a written notification with an explanation of why the application has been denied. If the applicant resubmits the application within 60 days of the written notification of denial, the resubmitted application does not require payment of the fee. The time for resubmission may be extended an additional 30 days for good cause, if requested of the zoning administrator prior to the original deadline for resubmittal. 
(e)	A revised application shall be reviewed pursuant to the same procedures for receipt and review of the original application. 
(f)	A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been installed and completed within 120 days after the date of issuance; provided, however, that when an applicant can demonstrate that a commercial entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted sign, but the fabrication has not yet been completed, the zoning administrator may grant one 30-day extension. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an applicant desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be submitted and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(g)	Sign permits shall be issued in the name of the property owner upon which the sign is to be located. Issuance of the permit shall in no way prevent the county from later declaring said sign to be nonconforming if the permit is obtained based on false information submitted by the applicant. 
(h)	No person shall erect or assist in the erection, construction, maintenance, alteration, relocation, repair or painting of, or do any work upon any sign which violated any provisions of this chapter. Any such sign shall be illegal, and the zoning enforcement officer shall order the owner to remove the same immediately. If the owner fails to remove the same within 30 days, the zoning enforcement officer shall proceed in accordance with this chapter. 
(i)	All signs for which a permit is required by this chapter are subject to inspection by the zoning enforcement officer. 
(j)	The county is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any sign permit upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with the provisions of this section within 30 days after notification in writing. 
(k)	Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this section, the applicant shall pay a fee as follows: 
**** See Chapter 18 Section 19 for a schedule of fees for sign permits 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-23. - Appeals. 
(a)	Any applicant, person or entity aggrieved or affected by the denial or grant of an application for a sign permit may appeal the determination to the planning commission by filing a written notice of appeal with the zoning administrator within 30 days following the decision. The appeal shall be heard within 30 days of the filing of the written notice of appeal. 
(b)	The planning commission shall have 15 days following the hearing to issue a written decision. 
(c)	Any party aggrieved or affected by the decision of the planning commission may appeal the decision by filing a writ of certiorari with the Rabun County Superior Court pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1, et seq. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-24. - Electrical permit required for electrical signs. 
All applicants for illuminated signs, LED, LCD, plasma, or other similar types of panels or screens requiring connection to an electrical source must obtain an electrical permit and submit it with the application for the sign permit. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-25. - Renewals for billboards. 
Sign permits for billboards, as defined herein, are issued for a term of one year and must be renewed annually by payment to the zoning administrator of the renewal fee, which shall be the same amount as the fee provided in subsection 38-22(k). A billboard permit shall expire and the applicable billboard shall be removed in the event the annual renewal fee is not paid on or before the expiration date. If the owner or applicant files a new application for a permit within 30 days of the receipt of a written notice that a billboard shall be removed because of an expired permit, the removal of the billboard shall be stayed pending a decision on the new application, which shall be processed in the same manner as if it were an application for the construction of a new sign, and which shall be granted if the billboard complies with the provisions of this chapter. If a new application is not filed with the county as provided herein, the billboard for which a permit has expired shall be removed within ten days thereafter. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-26. - Expiration of permits. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been installed and completed within 120 days after the date of issuance; provided, however, that when an applicant can demonstrate that a commercial entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted sign, but the fabrication has not yet been completed, the zoning administrator may grant one 30-day extension. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an applicant desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be submitted and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-27. - Permit not to be construed as finding of compliance. 
Issuance of a sign permit shall in no way prevent the county from later declaring the sign to be nonconforming or unlawful if upon further review of available information the sign is found not to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-28. - Identification label. 
With each sign permit, the zoning administrator or his designee shall issue a label bearing the same number as the sign permit with which it is issued. It shall be the duty of the permittee or his agent to affix such to the sign or its supporting structure in such a manner as to be visible from a street right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-29. - Exempt signs. 
Except as otherwise provided, the following signs may be erected without securing a permit. The erection of any sign not listed in this section shall require a permit. Signs exempt from permit requirements are: 
(1)	Signs having no electrical connection and a sign face equal to or less than four square feet in area. 
(2)	One informational bulletin board for public, charitable, educational or religious institutions when located on the premises of said institution. Bulletin boards may not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall be located in such a manner that said bulletin board will satisfy the required setback requirements for the zoning district in which the bulletin board is located. 
(3)	Flags and insignia subject to being flown in accordance with standard protocol. 
(4)	Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings. 
(5)	Signs which appear on vending machines. 
(6)	One sign per gasoline pump at a service station which dispenses gasoline or diesel fuel to the general public. 
(7)	In the case of public or charitable events, arrow signs, tethered balloons, streamers, or other similar attention-getting devices may be placed at appropriate road intersections to help people find the event. Such devices may be displayed no earlier than 24 hours before the event and must be removed no later than 48 hours after the completion of the event. The devices utilized must be of a type that their display does not provide a sufficient distraction as to pose a hazard to passing motorists. In addition, one sign, which is no larger than 32 square feet and no higher than eight feet may be erected no earlier than two weeks prior to the event and must be removed within one week following the event. 
(8)	Billboards in C-B, M-I, and M-II zoning districts, subject to the following restrictions: 
a.	Sign may not exceed 300 square feet of face area per side. 
b.	1,500-foot distance must be maintained between any other billboards in any direction. 
c.	Maximum height for billboards is 40 feet. 
d.	Setback from right-of-way is horizontally 40 feet minimum. 
(9)	One sign per lot of not more than 50 square feet of sign face in zoning districts N-S, H-B, C-B, M-I, M-II and A. 
(10)	Any sign not visible from a street or adjoining property or any sign wholly within a business, office, mall, or other totally enclosed area. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Secs. 38-30—38-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-41. - General requirements. 
Signs, regardless of the zoning district in which they are located, shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)	Signs, together with any supporting members, shall be kept in good repair and maintained so as to present a neat, clean appearance and be in a safe state of preservation. 
(2)	All signs shall be erected in such a manner as to not interfere with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. 
(3)	All signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance from all overhead utilities in accordance with county electrical code specifications. In no case shall any sign be installed within five feet horizontally or vertically from an overhead utility line or utility guy wire. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-42. - Permitted signs by zoning district. 
(a)	If not otherwise provided in this chapter, any sign not specifically permitted in a zoning district as provided under this section shall be prohibited. These regulations apply to signs located on any lot or development, except that any sign not visible from a public right-of-way is not restricted or regulated by this article. 
(b)	Sign height: Sign height is measured as a straight vertical line from ground level at base to the highest portion of the sign structure. 
(c)	Sign face area: The area of a sign is calculated by determining the area of the smallest square or rectangle which encloses the sign face and the structure surrounding the sign face. For example, the pole or base would not be included, but any frame holding the sign face in place would be counted. 
(d)	Signs permitted in R-I, R-II, R-III, and V-C zoning districts: 
(1)	Ground signs: Two double-faced signs per lot. No single sign face may exceed four square feet. Height is limited to three feet. 
(2)	Window signs: Permitted, but total window signage shall not exceed ten percent of the area of windows facing road frontage. 
(3)	Wall signs: Not permitted. 
(4)	Hanging signs: Not permitted. 
(5)	Real estate "For Sale" signs: 
a.	This provision applies only to temporary signs advertising property for sale and situated upon the property that the sign is advertising for sale. 
b.	Real estate "For Sale" arrow signs not to exceed 1.5 square feet are permitted. 
c.	Standard real estate "For Sale" yard signs in residential areas, not to exceed four square feet plus one agent rider and one descriptive rider. 
d.	Single-sided real estate "For Sale" signs on the U. S. 441 corridor, not to exceed 50 square feet. 
e.	Single-sided real estate "For Sale" signs on raw land and commercial land not to exceed 32 square feet. 
f.	Temporary "Open House" signs advertising a scheduled one-day event for a house being marketed for sale. 
(e)	Signs permitted in the N-S, H-B, C-B, M-I, M-II, and A zoning districts: 
(1)	Ground signs: One double-faced sign per lot. Maximum square footage for each sign face shall be 50 square feet. Maximum height for each sign structure shall be eight feet, except on multi-tenant lots, in which case the maximum height shall be 15 feet. 
(2)	Window signs: Permitted, but total signage shall not exceed ten percent of the area of windows facing road frontage. 
(3)	Wall signs: 
a.	One sign per street frontage is permitted. Maximum square footage for the wall sign shall be 50 square feet, except as provided in subsection c., below. 
b.	Where the structure upon which a wall sign is located is greater than 50 feet from the right-of-way of the nearest public street, the maximum square footage shall be as follows: 

 
c.	Wall signs on multi-tenant lots: On all multi-tenant lots having less than 25,000 square feet of gross leasable area, each individual establishment shall be permitted wall signage as though each individual establishment was an individual building with individual street frontage. 
d.	Hanging signs: Permitted, but no hanging sign shall be greater than six square feet, and the square footage of hanging signs shall count towards the maximum amount of wall signage permitted for the wall to which the hanging sign is attached. 
(4)	Real estate "For Sale" signs: 
a.	This provision applies only to temporary signs advertising property for sale and situated upon the property that the sign is advertising for sale. 
b.	Real estate "For Sale" arrow signs not to exceed 1.5 square feet are permitted. 
c.	Standard real estate "For Sale" yard signs in residential areas, not to exceed four square feet plus one agent rider and one descriptive rider. 
d.	Single-sided real estate "For Sale" signs on the U. S. 441 corridor, not to exceed 50 square feet. 
e.	Single-sided real estate "For Sale" signs on raw land and commercial land not to exceed 32 square feet. 
f.	Temporary "Open House" signs advertising a scheduled one-day event for a house being marketed for sale. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-43. - Regulations for signs. 
(a)	The property owner must give permission for all sign structures erected on the owner's property. Sign structures are not permitted in the public right-of-way. 
(b)	No portion of a sign or sign structure erected on private property shall encroach on or overhang the public right-of-way or any other person's property. 
(c)	Distances are measured from the closest portion of the sign (whether that is the base, sign face, or the sign structure) to the right-of-way, curb or pavement. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-44. - Lighting restrictions and prohibitions. 
(a)	Signs cannot be illuminated in the R-I and R-II zoning districts. Signs may be illuminated in all other districts, subject to the following provisions. 
(b)	Flashing or blinking illumination is not permitted. No external or internal illumination that causes confusion with or distraction from any traffic signal or safety device shall be permitted. 
(c)	All externally-illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries, mounted in fixtures designed to direct the light at the sign and eliminate light trespass, such as light shining into residences or other neighboring structures. 
(d)	All internally-illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries designed to reduce light glow. 
(e)	All illuminated signs over ten feet in height shall be internally illuminated or illuminated by external lighting fixtures located above the sign area, firing downward, and not visible to passing motorists. 
(f)	No sign shall give off light which glares, blinds, or has any other adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(g)	No illuminated signs shall be constructed or maintained within 1,000 feet of any residential dwelling. 
(h)	No sign shall be erected which simulates an official traffic control or warning sign in such a manner as to confuse or mislead the motoring public or hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal. 
(i)	An externally-illuminated sign, when permitted, shall have concealed wiring and controls, and shall have shielded and screened external light sources. 
(j)	Internally-illuminated signs, where permitted, must completely shield the source of light from direct view. 
(k)	No sign may have exposed electrical wires. 
(l)	Series, lines or rows of electric, neon or other lights on signs or buildings, except as part of holiday celebration, are prohibited. 
(m)	Visually exposed neon tube letters, signs or strips of light are prohibited, except for neon signs inside a window. 
(n)	All components of an illuminated sign shall be U.L. listed, or the equivalent thereof, with an identification label that shows the manufacturer of the sign. 
(o)	Any structure extending beyond the face of any billboard, excluding the aprons, is specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-45. - Height requirements. 
No sign, regardless of type, shall exceed 40 feet in height from ground level or 40 feet from the elevation of the centerline of the adjacent road at a point perpendicular to the center of the base of the sign, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-46. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited within the unincorporated portions of the county: 
(1)	Roof signs mounted above a roof or projecting above the roofline of a structure, except that it shall be lawful to have roof signs projecting above the roof-line that are no larger than 50 square feet and only advertise the business or entity contained under the roof on which the sign is mounted. 
(2)	Moving signs, or signs with moving parts. This includes, but is not limited to, rotating signs; signs with moving words or content, except as permitted by this chapter; signs with waving elements, whether motorized or wind-powered; or similar moving signs. 
(3)	Portable signs. This includes any sign supported by its own frame or trailer, with or without wheels, that is designed to be moved from one place to another. 
(4)	A-frame, sandwich type, sidewalk or curb signs. 
(5)	Signs that resemble any official traffic control device or emergency vehicle markings. 
(6)	Signs which contain or make use of the words "stop," "go," "slow," "caution," "danger," "warning," or similar words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse vehicular traffic except construction signs or barricades and except when words are incorporated in the permanent name of a business. 
(7)	Searchlights and beacons. 
(8)	Any blinking signs (with the exception of blinking arrows or other similar directional indicators) attached to or painted on vehicles of any type which are conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way and obviously parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians. 
(9)	Signs which emit visible smoke, vapor, particles, or odor. 
(10)	Signs on the ground or attached to trees or on the county right-of-way. 
(11)	Any sign advertising any activity or thing which is prohibited by any local, state and/or federal law. 
(12)	Any sign advertising any activity or undertaking on the property upon which the sign is located when the activity or undertaking being advertised is prohibited upon said property by any local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012; Amend. of 2-26-2013) 
Sec. 38-47. - Sign and sign structure maintenance. 
(a)	The sign and sign structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, with proper anchorage capable of supporting the imposed loads, so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(b)	All exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. Sign faces shall be maintained in good repair, and shall have neatly painted, posted or otherwise maintained display surfaces, free of defects such as holes, tears, cracks, breaks or missing portions, which are plainly visible from the public right-of-way. 
(c)	When a sign or sign structure is found to be in need of maintenance, the zoning administrator or designee shall issue a notice of violation to the property owner, which shall describe the maintenance issue and provide 30 days to repair the violation. 
(d)	If, after receiving the notice of violation, the property owner fails to remedy the maintenance issue within 30 days, it shall be a violation of this chapter, subject to citation. The zoning administrator may also institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal of the sign or sign structure. The reasonable cost of any action taken by the county or its agents to remedy the maintenance issue shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall constitute a lien upon such real estate. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-48. - Electronic signs. 
(a)	Each electronic sign must be located on a parcel zoned for commercial use, and no portion of such sign is to be located within 1,000 feet of a single-family residence. 
(b)	Each electronic sign must be located at least 10,000 feet from any other sign containing an electronic display for which a permit was issued. 1,500-foot distance must be maintained from any existing non-electronic sign. 
(c)	No electronic message shall flash, scroll the entire display from one side of the sign to the other whether from top to bottom or from one side of the sign to the other, or give the illusion of movement. Only static electronic messages shall be allowed. The electronic display shall not have varying light intensity during the display of any single message. 
(d)	No more than six displays per minute shall be allowed. 
(e)	Upon erection of a sign containing an electronic display, the owner shall provide written proof from an independent contractor that the sign complies with the table in this paragraph. Such proof shall contain measurements taken during both daytime and nighttime hours. Such measurements and proof shall be provided each year within 30 calendar days of the anniversary of the erection of the electronic portion of the sign. Electronic display signs may not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.20 foot-candles above ambient light levels as measured at the following distances: 

 
(f)	Each sign must have a light sensing device that will adjust the brightness of the display as the natural ambient light conditions change. 
(g)	The owner of any electronic sign shall provide to Rabun County information for a contact who is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week and able to turn off the electronic sign promptly if a malfunction occurs. If, at any time, more that 50 percent of the digital display lights malfunction or are no longer working, the owner of the sign containing an electronic display shall turn off the electronic display until repairs are made. 
(h)	Each sign containing an electronic display must comply with all Georgia Department of Transportation rules and regulations not in conflict with this article. 
(i)	Each sign containing an electronic display shall contain a default design that will freeze the design in one position should a malfunction occur. 
(j)	Any sign containing an electronic display installed within 500 feet of an existing traffic signal shall be non-flashing and shall not contain any of the following colors: red, green or amber. 
(k)	No electronic sign shall utilize, house, or contain any interactive features or components, or function as an interactive sign. 
(l)	Electronic signs may not have sequential message, i.e., more than one message to form a single advertisement. Each message of an electronic sign must be self-contained in that it provides all of the information in one screen to communicate the message intended. 
(m)	The designated sign shall not be moved to another portion of the property, increased in size or height, or otherwise modified in a manner which increases the nonconformity of the structure unless a variance is first obtained to permit such modification. 
(n)	Any measurement of distance between signs required by this section shall be measured pole to pole. 
(o)	Should the county, at its sole discretion, until such time as an industry or federal standard is developed, acting within accepted standards, find the sign, any display or effect thereon, to cause glare or impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle on a public road or which otherwise interferes with the operation of a motor vehicle regardless of any other provision in this chapter, upon request, the owner of the sign shall, within one hour, reduce the intensity or contrast of the sign to a level acceptable to the county, or make any other changes necessary to reduce the interference with the operation of a motor vehicle. Failure to make changes on request shall be cause for revocation of the permit. 
Secs. 38-49—38-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OUTDOOR SIGN LIGHTING 

Sec. 38-61. - Purpose and applicability. 
This division is intended to minimize light pollution and the indiscriminate use of outdoor lighting and to create a unifying, community-wide approach to outdoor lighting. These standards apply in all zoning districts to public and private property. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-62. - Exemptions. 
The following outdoor lights are exempt from the requirements of this division provided that such lights do not create a hazard to the public: 
(1)	Temporary holiday tree lights; and 
(2)	Decorative seasonal or display lights. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-63. - Materials and methods of installation. 
Mercury vapor lights are prohibited, but the following types of lamps are permitted: 
(1)	High-pressure sodium (HPS); 
(2)	Low-pressure sodium (LPS); 
(3)	Metal halide, maximum 250 watts; 
(4)	Incandescent lights of 100 watts or less per fixture; 
(5)	Fluorescent lights 40 watts or less per fixture; and 
(6)	Alternative types of lights approved by the planning commission as substantially similar in appearance and impact on nearby properties. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-64. - Height requirements. 
(a)	The maximum height of a light, whether on a pole or building, shall not exceed 20 feet for the purpose of illuminating parking lots or streets. 
(b)	The maximum height of a light, whether on a pole or building, shall not exceed 16 feet for the purpose of illuminating pedestrian walkways, crossings, or trails. 
(c)	Municipal recreational fields and facility lighting shall be exempt from these height requirements if the planning commission determines that higher lights are required for the effective use of the facility and will not create serious adverse impacts on surrounding property owners. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-65. - Spacing requirements. 
The spacing of all lighting shall be the minimum industry standards as adopted by the illuminating engineering society to provide necessary illumination for life or safety purposes, including lighting of street intersections, trail or street crossings and access points, bridges, and other circulation system hazards or obstacles, and to clearly delineate other circulation systems features and required security or entrance lighting. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-66. - On-site lighting. 
(a)	Building-mounted and freestanding exterior lighting shall be directed downward using downeast light fixtures, with the light source screened and shielded from adjacent properties and from public rights-of-way so that the light source is not visible. 
(b)	The lighting or internal amenities and parking lots shall be designed to be lit from the outside perimeter inward or shall incorporate design features to reduce off-site glare. In all cases, placement of lighting shall be such that glare on-site or off-site does not negatively impact vehicles in adjacent street systems. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-67. - Shielding. 
(a)	All light sources shall be fully shielded so the light source is not visible from adjacent properties (i.e., no light is shining directly onto adjacent properties). This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit the glow of lights from being seen on adjacent property. 
(b)	Outdoor light fixtures installed and maintained on residential dwellings shall be positioned so that there is no direct light emission onto adjacent residential properties. All residential light sources shall be fully shielded so they are not obtrusively visible from adjacent properties. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-68. - Nonconforming lights. 
All existing outdoor lighting that does not conform to this division shall be required to be brought into conformity with these requirements relating to shielding within six months of the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived, but shall not otherwise be required to comply with the standards adopted under this article. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Sec. 38-69. - Legal status provisions. 
Should any section of provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 1-24-2012) 
Chapter 40 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid waste management generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; hazardous waste management generally, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings and disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; authorization for local government units to enforce collection of taxes, fees, or assessments for solid waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.3; authority of local governments to adopt and enforce local regulations for the handling and disposal of solid waste, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9. 

Sec. 40-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as "Rabun County Solid Waste Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-19) 
Sec. 40-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, term and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(4.1). 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes, but is not limited to, landfill and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(8). 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn or dispose of a substance. 
Industrial solid waste means waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, fertilizer, agricultural chemicals, food and food related products and other byproducts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(12.1). 
Inert wastes means wastes that will not, or are not likely to, cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rocks, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed in this definition (see section 391-3-4-.06 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-4-.06)). 
Litter means discarded materials of every kind as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(1). 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and includes solid waste from single-family residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds and day-use recreation areas. The term includes commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or industrial processes or operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(18). 
Open dump or dumpsite means a disposal site, location, or facility at which solid waste from one or more sources is left to decompose, to burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment as defined in section 391-3-4-.01(44) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-4-.01(44)). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42(2). 
Recovered materials means materials that have a known use, reuse or recycling potential, and diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(25). 
Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing and resale or reuse of recovered materials as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(26). 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect, or one that cannot be retreaded or otherwise recycled as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(31). 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted under section 391-3-4-.19(5.g) of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-4-.19(5.g)) for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user or disposal facility as set forth in O.C.G.A. §12-8-22(32). 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires as defined in Section 391-3-4-.19(2.i) of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-4-.19(2.i)). 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution contract facility; and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to a permit under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear or byproduct materials as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923) as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33). 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid waste, or any combination of such activities, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(34). 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new, retreaded or used replacement tires as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(39). 
Waste means all discarded substances and materials exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance in any weight or volume if biomedical waste, hazardous waste (as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-62), or any such substance or material dumped for commercial purposes, with the exception of nonhazardous, low-impact animal byproducts classified by the department of natural resources. This term includes, but is not limited to, bottles, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, tires, dead animals, including their bedding and other wastes from such animals, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, sludge from a wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, air contaminants from any source or facility and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining or governmental operations, including household, commercial, construction and demolition waste, or industrial solid waste which is nonhazardous, nonmedical and in a form classified as solid waste by the state department of natural resources as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, limbs and tree stumps, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals and vegetable matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-20) 
Sec. 40-3. - Disposal. 
(a)	The owner or occupant of any premises within the county shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposing of all litter, scrap tires and municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, open dump or permit the dumping of litter, scrap tires, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste or recyclables at any place in the county, including, but not limited to, any public or private property or waters in the county, unless such litter or waste originates in the county or other areas authorized by the county board of commissioners and the: 
(1)	Property is designated by the commissioners or their duly designated agent for the disposal of litter; municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste; scrap tires; or recovered materials, and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)	Litter; municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste; recyclables; or scrap tires are placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and 
(3)	Property has a valid solid waste handling permit issued by division of environmental protection. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place waste within the county, unless such person is authorized to do so by law or be a duly issued permit, in or on any: 
(1)	Public highway, road, street, alley or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any other public lands, except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; 
(2)	Freshwater lake, river, canal, stream or creek; or 
(3)	Public or private property, unless such dumping will not adversely affect the public health and is not in violation of any other local, state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(d)	All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers or tire retailers shall be subject to rules as defined in Rules for Solid Waste Management section 391-3-4-.19 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-4-.19) and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. and the Rules for Solid Waste Management, chapters 391-3-4 and 391-3-4-.19 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-4, 391-3-4-.19) applicable to solid waste and tires. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-21) 
Sec. 40-4. - Transportation. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle in the county hauling municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste that leaks, flows freely or spills from such vehicle. 
(b)	No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the county unless such truck or other vehicle is constructed, loaded or covered so as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown, scattered or in any manner deposited in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or private property within the county. Any litter or municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste hauled on a moving vehicle shall be covered in such a manner that litter will not blow or escape from such vehicle while such vehicle is moving or parked on public or private property in the county. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to transport litter or waste on any public streets or roadways in the county without a suitable covering or other restraint device securely fastening such litter or waste to the vehicle to prevent any material from being deposited onto other motor vehicles, pedestrians or the roadway and its adjoining areas. However, this subsection shall not prohibit the necessary and permitted spreading of any substance in public road maintenance or construction operations. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for a business or private person engaged in waste hauling or transportation for hire from businesses or private residences to a county landfill or lawfully permitted dumpsite to dispose of materials as solid waste that have been intentionally sorted as recyclables by the business or private residence customers rather than placing the materials in the location designated by the county or appropriate authority for such recyclables. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the county, the wheels or tires of which carry or deposit in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or private property within the county, any mud, dirt, sticky substance, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-22) 
Sec. 40-5. - Container and receptacle regulations. 
(a)	All solid waste or litter containers or receptacles within the county shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with the use of such containers or receptacles for solid waste and litter disposal. 
(b)	Persons using solid waste and litter containers or receptacles shall deposit only authorized solid waste and refuse in the containers or receptacles. 
(c)	No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any container or receptacle unless authorized by the owner of the receptacle, the board of commissioners or their designee. 
(d)	No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in a container or receptacle. 
(e)	No person shall set fire to the contents of any container or receptacle. 
(f)	No person shall deposit large noncompatible articles in containers or receptacles, including, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, bedsprings, automobile parts, boat parts, large tree limbs or air conditioning units, except containers or receptacles designated for such purpose only. 
(g)	No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any container or receptacle. 
(h)	No dead animals, livestock or poultry shall be deposited in any container or receptacle, except receptacles designed for such purpose and so designated by the board of commissioners. 
(i)	No person shall willfully damage or alter the location of any container or receptacle without the written consent of the board of commissioners. 
(j)	No salvage or scavenging operations shall be conducted in or around containers or receptacles, except by written consent of the board of commissioners. 
(k)	No person shall deposit any solid waste at a county solid waste collection and recycling center unless such solid waste is contained in such a manner that the attendant can handle it. Solid waste shall be deposited only during the official hours of operation of the center, unless the board of commissioners or their designee gives written permission. 
(l)	No person shall deposit solid waste, water or litter of any kind at a county solid waste collection and recycling center into county-owned receptacles or containers designated for the collection of recovered materials. Only authorized materials such as glass, aluminum, newspaper, cardboard, plastic, tin or other accepted material may be deposited in the appropriate container designated for such material. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-23) 
Sec. 40-6. - Landfill, collection and recycling center regulations. 
(a)	No landfill shall be operated in the county, other than a landfill designated by the board of commissioners as the county landfill, and no private municipal solid waste landfill shall be operated in the county without a solid waste handling permit issued by the state environmental protection division, with the exception of inert construction and demolition landfills which have been properly permitted by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit solid waste of any kind outside the gate of a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(c)	No scavenging operations of any kind shall be allowed at a solid waste collection and recycling center without the express written permission from the board of commissioners. 
(d)	No person shall move, remove or cross any fence, gate, barrier or sign at a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(e)	Price on solid waste brought to a solid waste collection and recycling center will be set to defray the total cost of solid waste and recycling operations. 
(f)	Hours of operation of solid waste collection and recycling centers will be set to maximize convenience to residents of the area. 
(g)	All recovered materials (recyclables) brought to solid waste collection and recycling centers will be accepted free of charge, provided such materials are separated under current market specifications and are uncontaminated. 
(h)	The attendant on duty at the solid waste collection and recycling center will have full authority of the center consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(i)	All regulations set forth in this section shall apply to all public and/or private property, waters and/or waterways and solid waste collection and recycling centers within the county. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-24) 
Sec. 40-7. - Accumulation. 
(a)	No owner or occupant of any property shall bury or burn litter or waste without the prior authorization and written permission from the board of commissioners or applicable regulatory agency, including, but not limited to, the Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental Protection Division and/or the state forestry service. Nothing in this section shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law. 
(b)	No owner or occupant of any property shall allow the accumulation upon such property of garbage, litter or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to or discriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize, any containers used for the storage or dumping of litter or waste. 
(d)	The conduct set forth in subsections (a) through (c) of this section shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter for each day the garbage or waste material remains or continues to unlawfully pollute, contaminate or burn on such premises. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-25) 
Sec. 40-8. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)	Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the county magistrate court, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)	For the first offense, a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and/or up to 30 days' imprisonment. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43. However, this subsection shall not preclude the county from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the county to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area; and/or 
(2)	For the second and subsequent offenses, the violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature, which shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $750.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and/or up to 60 days' imprisonment. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-53(b). 
(b)	In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the violator may also be directed to pick up and remove litter from any public streets or highways and/or other public rights-of-way or private areas, for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter the violator has deposited and all litter deposited by any other person prior to the date of execution of the sentence as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b). 
(c)	In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the violator may be directed to pick up and remove litter from any public park, private right-of-way or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the violator has deposited litter thereon, and all litter deposited by any other person prior to the date of execution of the sentence. 
(d)	The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this chapter. 
(e)	The court may order the violator to repair or restore damaged property, pay damages resulting from such violation or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violator. 
(f)	In the case of an improper garbage or waste disposal site, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The county shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation. 
(g)	The expenses incurred by the county for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to, court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this chapter. 
(h)	In addition to actions filed by the county for violations of this chapter, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-26) 
Sec. 40-9. - Yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any solid waste disposal facility having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion within the county. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. Any yard trimmings to be collected by any person other than the property owner shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting or other handling. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-27) 
Sec. 40-10. - Recycling. 
The board of commissioners finds that it is in the best interest of the citizens of the county, in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county, to recycle as many waste materials as possible in order to reduce the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste materials which must be properly disposed of; therefore, it is the policy of the commissioners to encourage recycling, whenever practicable. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-28) 
Sec. 40-11. - Enforcement; inspections; appeals. 
(a)	Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the commissioners, the county marshal's office and/or the county sheriff's office. 
(b)	Any person authorized to enforce this chapter shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this chapter, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this chapter must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon such officer having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, or by a judge's order upon such officer having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(c)	Appeals for violations of this chapter may be made to the county magistrate court, or a higher court if the offender chooses. The offender shall always have the right to consult his attorney at any time before the hearing is scheduled for court. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-29) 
Sec. 40-12. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(a)	If any person violates any provision of this chapter, the county or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation as set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-52, 16-7-53. In addition, the county may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other county issued permits related to the property involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(b)	Upon finding evidence of a violation of any provision of this chapter, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action, or if a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case shall be treated as a second offense by the court as set forth in section 40-8(a)(2). 
(c)	If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this article, the court and/or commissioners may cause written notice to be given or incorporate into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this chapter for which such violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service, but if the violator cannot be served with such notice, then such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the violator's last known address. 
(d)	Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address the provisions of such notice within 20 days after receipt of the notice, the commissioners are authorized to and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of, including, but not limited to, any litter or any type of waste which has been dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter on behalf of the county. The expense incurred by the county for such cleanup, removal or disposal shall be chargeable to the violator, and a statement of the amount due for such expenses shall be sent by the commissioners and/or the court by certified mail. 
(e)	When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of the statement as provided in subsection (d) of this section, the commissioners shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the county, the dates of county action, the location of the property for which action was taken and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged, and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(f)	If wastes or hazardous materials in a dumpsite cannot be removed from public or private property without causing further endangerment to the environment and/or public health, whether legal or illegal, caused with intent or by accident, acts of God or force of nature, or where a permit for such long term or permanent disposal has been issued by the proper authority as set forth in section 40-6, the county may attach or otherwise affix a permanent addendum to the deed of real property wherein the dumpsite exists, stating the approximate size of the dump on the property and an approximate description of the materials contained therein, as well as the approximate dates such dumping occurred, which shall be recorded on the property plat as a fill area as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30. The purpose of such attachment is to preserve the health and safety of current and future landowners and users of such properties, to promote the integrity of the property description and values, and to record the location of such dumpsites. The county's exercise of this subsection shall in no way be mandatory, and the county or its agents shall not be held liable for exercise of action or inaction for implementation of this subsection, nor for the costs of such action or inaction. (See Section 391-3-4-.06 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-4-.06) of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management.) 
(g)	The provisions of this section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-30) 
Sec. 40-13. - Evidence of violations. 
(a)	Whenever litter, or any type of waste as defined in this chapter, is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped by any person or from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that such person, or the operator of the conveyance, has violated this chapter. 
(b)	Whenever litter, or any type of waste as defined in this chapter, which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter is discovered to contain any chapter, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of a person on such article in such a manner as to indicate that the chapter belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-31) 
Sec. 40-14. - Repeal of conflicting resolutions or ordinances. 
All conflicting resolutions, ordinances or parts or sections of resolutions or ordinances in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 10-XX-2008, § 70-32) 
Chapter 42 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal annexations, O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; limitations on home rule for municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)	Any person who does any act prohibited by this chapter, or who fails to discharge any duty imposed hereby, shall be guilty of a violation of a county ordinance and subject to the process of the magistrate court of the county and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of no less than $500.00 or by confinement in the county jail not to exceed 60 days, either fine or confinement, or both, in the discretion of this magistrate court. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the county marshal to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Upon information constituting probable cause made known to any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter that a violation of same has occurred, a citation and summons may be issued to the alleged violator requiring him to appear before the magistrate court of the county, on a day and time certain, to answer the charge contained herein. In addition to the above legal remedy, the county may proceed in equity to obtain an injunction to any threatened construction or seek any other available equitable relief for any violation of the terms or intent of this chapter. 
(c)	Any practice or condition deemed to be in violation of these ordinances and regulations by any official of the permitting office, planning and zoning board, or board of commissioners shall, upon request, be brought into compliance immediately. Failure to do so will result in legal action being taken. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), art. XIV) 
Sec. 42-2. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: 
(1)	To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(2)	To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land development; 
(3)	To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in the land development; 
(4)	To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sited in land developments through the dedications or reservations of land or recreational, educational or other public purposes; and 
(5)	To assure that land is developed in conformity with the comprehensive plan of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 102) 
Sec. 42-3. - Conflicting laws. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter and those of another provision of this Code or ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, that law requiring the highest, or strictest standard shall govern. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 103) 
Sec. 42-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Lot means a portion or parcel of land separated from other portions of parcels by descriptions as on a subdivision plat or record of survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership for building development. For the purpose of this chapter, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
Planning commission means the county planning commission. 
Street means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley, or other way, and for the purpose of this chapter the term "street" is divided into the following categories: 
(1)	Major thoroughfares. Those streets designated as such on the major thoroughfare plan of the county. 
(2)	Collector streets. Those streets serving subdivisions to carry traffic from residential streets to the major thoroughfare. 
(3)	Residential streets. Streets used primarily for access to the abutting properties and serving minor traffic demands (subdivision streets). 
(4)	Alley. A minor way used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(5)	Cul-de-sac. A residential street with only one outlet, sometimes called a "dead-end" street. 
(6)	Turn-around. A dead-end street with an area for vehicles to turn around, similar to a cul-de-sac. 
Subdivider means the person having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided or the authorized agent of such person for the purpose of proceeding under this chapter. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract of land into any number of smaller tracts, lots or parcels for ready sale to the general public. Subdivision shall include adjoining parcels when added or included in the scheme to sell parcels to the general public. For the purpose of this chapter the term "subdivision" shall not include the division for the following: 
(1)	Land division resulting in three parcels or less. 
(2)	Land divided solely for the purpose of dividing an estate or interfamily transfers between parents, child or grandchild or their spouses. 
(3)	Parcels of three acres or larger regardless of the number of parcels. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 201) 
Secs. 42-5—42-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING, JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 42-27. - Sewer and water regulations. 
No person may sell, offer for sale, lease, rent, begin construction or otherwise begin the physical development of a subdivision or mobile home park where public or community sewage treatment systems are not available or contemplated to be available to serve the proposed development until proposals and plans for the water supply and sewage disposal method to be provided or installed have been submitted to and written approval has been obtained from the county board of health. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 301) 
Sec. 42-28. - Platting authority. 
The planning commission shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of land subdivision shall be entitled to record in the office of the clerk in the county superior court unless it shall have the approval of the planning commission as required by this article. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 302) 
Sec. 42-29. - Use of plat. 
The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell land by reference to or exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 303) 
Sec. 42-30. - Opening and improving public streets. 
(a)	The board of commissioners shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street or lay any utility lines in any street which had not attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, unless such street corresponds to the street location shown on an approved subdivision plat or on an official street map adopted by the planning commission, provided that the board of commissioners may accept, lay out, open and improve any street not so platted if it first submits such proposed action to the planning commission for it's review and comment. 
(b)	Any street that meets the minimum requirements of this article and any additional road right-of-way or maintenance requirements adopted by the board of commissioners may be accepted by the board of commissioners upon request and application of the owner and consent of the board of commissioners. Roads must be constructed and paved in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 304) 
Sec. 42-31. - Bond for road paving. 
(a)	Any land owner, by and through himself individually or through a licensed developer, who elects to develop lands lying and being in the county, and in accordance with the zoning and subdivision regulations established by the county, may delay the paving completion of any roadway or road system within the subdivision for a period not to exceed two years from the date that such subdivision plans are given final plat approval by the county zoning board, or, if all tracts are three acres or larger, from the date the first tract is sold. 
(b)	The paving of any roadway or road system within the subdivision must be planned, approved and performed in accordance with all of the provisions set forth in this article and otherwise in this Code. The cutting, compacting, and graveling of subdivision roads must be completed before any lot is sold. 
(c)	Paving may be delayed only and in such an event the land owner or developer posts a surety in the form of cash, a cash performance bond, or irrevocable letter of credit with such being deposited into the escrow account of the county attorney, in an amount equal to 125 percent of cost as determined by bids from paving contractors for preparing and paving the entire roadway designated for such subdivision. In the event the actual cost to pave exceeds the amount deposited, then and in such an event the county may seek the deficiency of such cost by all legal remedies afforded to the county and such being sought from the land owner, the developer or both. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 305) 
Secs. 42-32—42-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 42-51. - Required conditions. 
Preliminary plats shall address all of the required conditions and limitations as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 401) 
Sec. 42-52. - Preapplication review. 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the county is proposed, the subdivider is urged to consult early and informally with the administrative officer of the planning commission. The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. No fee shall be charged for the preapplication review and no formal application shall be required. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 402) 
Sec. 42-53. - Application for approval. 
(a)	The subdivider shall submit to the administrative officer of the planning commission, at least 15 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission, the following: 
(1)	Three copies of the preliminary plat and other documents, as may be specified. 
(2)	A statement specifying the name of the person who will be representing the request for preliminary plat approval. 
(b)	The subdivider shall contact the administrative officer of the planning commission either by telephone or letter and request to be placed on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 403) 
Sec. 42-54. - Review of preliminary plat. 
(a)	The administrative officer of the planning commission shall check the plat for conformance to the rules and regulations of this article and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a hearing on the preliminary plat; notice of the time and place of which shall be given at the time of the application by the administrative officer. 
(b)	Thereafter, the planning commission shall give tentative approval or disapproval to the preliminary plat. A notation of the action shall be made on the minutes of the planning commission including a statement of the reasons for disapproval if the preliminary plat is disapproved. One copy of the plat shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent and one copy added to the records of the planning commission. 
(c)	Tentative approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat, it indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. Tentative approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one year unless an extension of time is approved by the planning commission. 
(d)	If action on a preliminary plat is not taken by the planning commission at the next regular meeting, the preliminary plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
(e)	A preliminary and final plat cannot be submitted for review and approval at the same meeting of the county planning commission. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 404) 
Sec. 42-55. - Specifications. 
Each preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider. 
(2)	Proposed name of subdivision and its acreage. 
(3)	Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearings and distances. 
(4)	Proposed street names, as approved by 911 mapping with accompanying letter. 
(5)	Lot numbers. 
(6)	Provisions for water supply, sewerage, drainage, and all utilities. 
(7)	Present zoning classification. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 405) 
Sec. 42-56. - Certificate of tentative approval. 
A certificate of tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
"Pursuant to the land subdivision regulations of the county, all the requirements of tentative approval having been fulfilled, this preliminary plat was given tentative approval by the county planning commission on ____________ , 2 ____________ . This tentative approval does not constitute approval of a final plat. This certificate of tentative approval shall expire and be null on ____________ , 2 ____________ . 
____________ / ____________ / ____________ ____________    Date 
____________ ____________    Secretary    Rabun County Planning Commission 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 405) 
Secs. 42-57—42-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE 

Sec. 42-86. - Application for final plat approval. 
After the preliminary plat of a proposed land subdivision has been given tentative approval by the planning commission, the subdivider may, within one year from tentative approval, submit to the planning commission: 
(1)	Either a letter or a telephone call to the administrative officer of the planning commission requesting to be placed on the agenda of the next regular meeting. 
(2)	Three paper copies of the final plat and other documents, as may be specified, and the original tracing or reproducible print thereof drawn with permanent ink or equivalent on drafting film. 
(3)	A final plat filing fee of $10.00 per lot. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 501) 
Sec. 42-87. - Review of final plat. 
(a)	The secretary of the planning commission shall check the final plat for conformance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat, and with the rules and regulations of this chapter and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a hearing on the final plat. A notice of the time and place shall be given by the administrative officer at the time of the request to be placed on the agenda. 
(b)	Thereafter, the planning commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat. A notation of approval, if appropriate, shall be made on the final plat that is recorded. A notation of the action shall be made in the minutes of the commission including a statement of the reasons therefor, if the final plat is disapproved. If action on the final plat is not taken by the planning commission at the next regular meeting, the final plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 502) 
Sec. 42-88. - Recording of final plat. 
(a)	Upon approval of a final plat the subdivider shall be responsible for the recording of the final plat and payment of the recording fee. 
(b)	The copy of the final plat that is recorded must have the surveyor's original seal and signature affixed thereto. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 503) 
Sec. 42-89. - Final plat specifications. 
The final plat shall conform to and meet the following specifications and contain the required information: 
(1)	Scale. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than 100 feet to an inch. 
(2)	Sheet size. Sheet sizes shall be 16 inches wide and 21 inches long leaving a margin two inches in width on one end for binding purposes and a one half inch margin on the other three sides and where more than one sheet is required, an index map should be required on the same size sheet. 
(3)	Information to be provided on final plat. The following information is to be provided on the final plat: 
a.	Name and address of owner of record and subdivider. 
b.	North point, graphic scale and date. 
c.	Vicinity map showing location and acreage of subdivision. 
d.	Bearings and distances to the nearest existing street line or benchmarks or other permanent monuments (not fewer than three) shall be accurately described on the plat. 
e.	Municipal, county and land lot corner accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
f.	Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth foot and angles to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one to 3,000. 
g.	Name of subdivision, its acreage, its exact locations, width, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat. 
h.	Names of owners of adjoining land. 
i.	Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth foot and bearings. 
j.	Minimum front yard building setback lines. 
k.	Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
l.	Locations, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
m.	Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers. 
n.	Provisions for water, sewage, drainage, and all other utilities with written approval from each appropriate agency. 
o.	The present zoning classification. 
p.	A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants. 
q.	All plats shall show the direction and distance from the boundary of the surveyed property to a point of reference. The point or reference shall be the nearest established private or public road to the surveyed property, which the public road can be identified or located from maps, plats, or other documents of public record. Also included shall be any additional data that will help locate the surveyed property from the point of reference. 
r.	A certification by the county health department or other governing authority certifying that plans for water supply and sewage disposal meet with their requirements, or from a municipality confirming approval of hookups or supply. 
s.	All underground utility components, where applicable, must be complete for that phase of the development prior to such phase being granted final plat approval. 
t.	Road construction, graveling, and paving or a bonding procedure for paving of roads in a specific phase must be completed and approved by the board of commissioners or its designee prior to that phase of the development being granted final plat approval. 
u.	911 addressing office must review and give written approval of all road names to be used on final plat. 
(4)	Certifications. The following certifications shall be placed directly on the plat by the surveyor: 
a.	Planning commission statement. "The Rabun Planning Commission does not certify nor guarantee the availability of water and sewer services as stated on this plat. The availability water and sewer services shall be confirmed from the appropriate authorities prior to any purchase." 
b.	Surveyors certification. "It is hereby certified that the plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as future, and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown. 
BY ____________ ____________     Registered Georgia Land Survey Number" 
c.	Owner's certification. "Owner's Certification, State of Georgia, County of Rabun. The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, that all state, city or county taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid. 
Agent ____________ 
Owner ____________ 
Date ____________ 
Date ____________ " 
d.	Certificate of dedication. A certificate of dedication by the owner submitted with the final plat and in such form as approved by the county attorney who sets forth the description of the areas and improvements dedicated by the owner to the public and the extent of title which is being dedicated. 
e.	Copy of official action of governing body. 
f.	A copy of the ordinance or resolution adopted by the board of commissioners accepting the streets, improvements, easements and other property dedicated by the owner for public use, as indicated on a final plat, shall be attached to the final plat before recording. 
g.	A certificate of approval of the final plat by the planning commission directly on the plat as follows: "Pursuant to the land subdivisions regulations of the county, all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was given final approval by the county planning commission on ____________ . 
____________ ____________ / ____________ / ____________   Secretary   Rabun County Planning Commission" 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 504) 
Secs. 42-90—42-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 42-107. - Suitability of the land. 
It shall be the developers responsibility to ensure land subject to floodway, improper drainage, erosion, or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected with written verification from the proper authority. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 601) 
Sec. 42-108. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the planning commission. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 602) 
Sec. 42-109. - Access. 
Access to every subdivision shall be provided to a public street. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 603) 
Sec. 42-110. - Conformance to adopted major thoroughfare and other plans. 
(a)	All streets and other features of the major thoroughfare plan of the county, if applicable, shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the major thoroughfare plan adopted by the planning commission. 
(b)	When features of other plans adopted by the planning commission such as schools or other public building sites, parks, and other land for public uses are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within a reasonable time by the appropriate public agency. 
(c)	Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the planning commission finds not required or suitable for such public use, the planning commission shall refuse to approve the plat, and shall notify the board of commissioners of the reasons for such action. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 604) 
Sec. 42-111. - Easements. 
Easements, where necessary, having a minimum width of ten feet and located along the side or rear lot lines shall be provided, as required, for utility lines and underground mains and cables. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage right-of-way of adequate width. Parallel streets may be required by the planning commission in connection therewith. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 605) 
Sec. 42-112. - Reservation of public sites and open spaces. 
(a)	Where the features of the comprehensive plan such as school sites, parks, playgrounds and other public spaces are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, the planning commission shall not approve plats when such planned features, as specified by the comprehensive plan, are not incorporated into the plat. 
(b)	Whenever the planning commission finds that proposed reservation of land or dedication of land for public use is not required, that area may be used in the general scheme or plans as offered by the developer or owner. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 606) 
Sec. 42-113. - Community assets. 
In all subdivisions, due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as, but not limited to, large trees and water courses, and for historical spots and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 607) 
Secs. 42-114—42-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 42-140. - Continuation of existing streets. 
Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 701) 
Sec. 42-141. - Street names. 
Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the name of existing streets. In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, way, or court. 911 mapping must approve all street names. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 702) 
Sec. 42-142. - Cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets. 
(a)	Minor streets or courts designed to have one end permanently closed shall be no more than 800 feet long unless necessitated by topography. They shall be provided with a turn around at a closed end. 
(b)	If in the opinion of the planning commission, it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining property, streets shall be extended to the boundary of such property and provided with a temporary turnaround. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 703) 
Sec. 42-143. - Development along major thoroughfares, limited access highway, or railroad right-of-way. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains a major thoroughfare, a limited access highway, or railroad right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street or, at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land, with a nonaccess reservation strip suitably planted to screen adjoining property from objectionable noise or lights. Due regard will be given to requirements for approach grades and future grade separation in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to major thoroughfares, or limited access highways, but only to access streets. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 704) 
Sec. 42-144. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial, or industrial development but shall not be provided in one- and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 705) 
Sec. 42-145. - Street right-of-way widths. 
(a)	The right-of-way width shall be the distance across a street from property line to property line. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
(1)	Major street widths as shown on any approved major thoroughfare plan, in no event less than 60 feet or as further approved by the board of commissioners. 
(2)	Paved collector streets, 60 feet. 
(3)	Subdivision residential streets and dead-end streets, paved 35 feet 
(4)	Turnarounds, 60-foot diameter right-of-way. 
(5)	All subdivision or three-acre tract and larger development roads shall be constructed and approved according to the following specifications including all rights-of-way or easements: 
a.	All roads shall be constructed according to the specifications provided in this chapter. 
b.	All residential roads shall have 18 feet of pavement width and shoulders of not less than three feet on both sides. Right-of-way for all roads shall be the width necessary to build to specification and shall include the total width from ditch to ditch, but shall not be less than 35 feet. 
(b)	The board of commissioners may, in their sole discretion, accept roads constructed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or future maintenance, provided no roads shall be accepted unless a 60-foot right of way is provided. The board of commissioners will not accept gravel or unpaved roads. It shall be required that the board of commissioners or its designee inspects all roads for compliance prior to county consideration to take over ownership of any road. All roads shall meet or exceed the specifications provided for in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 706) 
Sec. 42-146. - Additional width on existing streets. 
(a)	Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the minimum street width requirements as set forth in section 42-145. 
(b)	The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the street. 
(c)	When the subdivision is located on one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the center line of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 707) 
Sec. 42-147. - Street grades. 
Maximum and minimum street grades shall be as follows: 
(1)	Major thoroughfares, not in excess of 15 percent. 
(2)	Collector streets, not in excess of 15 percent. 
(3)	Residential streets and dead-end streets and alleys, not in excess of 15 percent. 
(4)	Short runs of 200 feet or less may have a grade up to 20 percent. 
(5)	Total of grades steeper than 15 percent may not be more than ten percent of total road length. 
(6)	No street grade shall be less than one percent. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 708) 
Sec. 42-148. - Street intersections. 
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersections shall be at an angle less than 75 degrees unless required by unusual circumstances and approved by the county planning commission. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 709) 
Secs. 42-149—42-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS 

Sec. 42-180. - Block lengths and widths. 
Blocks lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
(1)	Blocks shall be no greater than 1,800 feet nor less than 600 feet in length, except in unusual circumstances such as a PUD. 
(2)	Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots, except where fronting on major thoroughfares, limited access highways, or railroads or prevented by topographical conditions or size of property, in which case the planning commission may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 801) 
Sec. 42-181. - Lot sizes and proportions. 
(a)	Residential lots shall meet the lot width and lot area requirements of the zoning chapter, one acre minimum. 
(b)	Residential lots shall have a depth of not less than 100 feet. 
(c)	Residential lots shall have a minimum road frontage of 100 feet, excepting cul-de-sac lots which shall have a minimum of 25 feet frontage. 
(d)	Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building set back requirements from both abutting streets. 
(e)	Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to provide service areas and off-street parking suitable to the intended use. 
(f)	Minimum lot sizes in R-1 zoning: 
(1)	Lot size: All subdivision lots shall abut a road for a minimum of 30 feet and have an area not less than the minimum square footage required by the Rabun County Zoning Ordinance in addition to all required setbacks. 
(2)	Lot size with public water and individual septic systems: Subdivision lots served by community or public water and individual septic systems shall contain not less than one-half-acre unless an officer of the health department determines that a larger lot size will be needed to adequately facilitate a septic system. 
(3)	Lot size with public water and public sewer: Subdivision lots served by community or public water and sewer systems shall contain a minimum lot area of 10,890 square feet or one-third-acre. 
(4)	Lot size with private water and individual septic system: Subdivision lots served by both private water and individual septic systems shall contain not less than one acre. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 802; Ord. of 12-22-2009) 
Sec. 42-182. - Health and sanitary conditions. 
(a)	Residential lots served by public water system or private community systems approved by state EPD or the county health department, but not a public sewer system, shall not be less than 100 feet wide at the site nor less than 43,560 square feet in area one acre minimum. 
(b)	Residential lots not served by a public water system or private community systems approved by Georgia EPD or the county health department, or public sewer system, shall not be less than 100 feet wide at the building site or less than 43,560 square feet in area. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 802) 
Sec. 42-183. - Adequate building sites. 
Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements or building setback lines required by this chapter and the zoning chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 803) 
Secs. 42-184—42-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 42-229. - Performance and specifications. 
Every subdivider shall be required to make the improvements outlined in this article in accordance with the specifications herein or otherwise adopted by the county. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 901) 
Sec. 42-230. - Surveying monuments. 
Surveying monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, and at intermediate points as required by the planning commission. Monuments shall be of reinforced concrete with dimensions of at least four inches by four inches by 24 inches, and after installation the top shall be flush with the finished grade, or lot corners shall be marked with solid steel rods not less than five-eighths inch in diameter and 24 inches in length and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 902) 
Sec. 42-231. - Road grading. 
(a)	Requirements. All streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded by the subdividers so that pavement can be constructed to the required cross section. The minimum width of grading shall be the pavement width as specified in this chapter, plus three feet on each side. Deviation from the provisions of this section will be allowed only due to special topographical conditions and approved by the county planning commission. 
(b)	Preparation. Before grading is started, the entire road bed area shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials and all trees not intended for preservation. 
(c)	Cuts. All tree stumps, boulders and other obstructions shall be removed. 
(d)	Fill. All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches or at other places as needed. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clays, etc., shall be removed from the roadway. The fill shall be spread in layers not to exceed six inches loose and compacted. The filling of utility trenches and other places not accessible to the roller shall be tamped and grassed. 
(e)	Subgrade. The subgrade shall be properly shaped, rolled, and uniformly compacted to 95 percent compaction to conform to the lines, grades and typical cross sections as shown on drawings approved by the planning commission. Unsuitable materials shall be excavated and replaced with acceptable compacted material. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 903) 
Sec. 42-232. - Storm drainage. 
Soil and erosion plans must be filed and approved by the county marshal's office or appropriate agency prior to any development beginning. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 904) 
Sec. 42-233. - Sanitary sewers. 
If the required sewer line cannot be connected to a trunk line sewer at the time of the development of the subdivision, septic tanks, an oxidation pond, or other approved method of treatment of sanitary sewage approved by the planning commission, shall be installed by and at the expense of the subdivider or lot purchaser for interim use, and only in strict conformity with the requirements of the county health department. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 905) 
Sec. 42-234. - Minimum street pavement widths and specifications. 
(a)	Street pavement widths shall be as follows: 
(1)	Collector streets, 24 feet. 
(2)	Residential streets (subdivision), 18 feet. 
(3)	Turnarounds and cul-de-sacs, an area 40 feet in diameter. 
(b)	Residential subdivision roads shall be constructed in accordance with the specification set forth in this chapter. 
(c)	The base shall consist of crushed stone or other approved material having a minimum thickness of six inches and constructed on a prepared subgrade in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades, and typical cross section as shown on the drawings submitted to and approved by the planning commission. The following requirements shall apply: 
(1)	Materials shall be secured from an approved source and shall generally conform to the state department of highways' minimum acceptable standards for this area. 
(2)	As soon as the base material has been spread and mixed, the base shall be brought to approximate line, grade and cross section and then rolled with a vibrating smooth drum roller, and finally with a pneumatic tire or general purpose roller until full thickness of the base course has been compacted thoroughly. Defects and soft spots shall be remedied as soon as they are discovered. New materials may be added if necessary and defective portions shall be entirely removed. 
(3)	The base course shall be maintained under traffic, and kept free from ruts, ridges, and dusting, true to grade and cross section until it is primed for paving. 
(d)	Required pavement thickness of 3½ inches shall be two inches of binder followed by a bituminous tack coat and 1½ inches of asphalt topping. 
(e)	Care and precaution shall be taken at all joints between such structures as manholes and curbs. 
(f)	All new roads in the county must be constructed to this standard. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(2), § 906) 
Chapter 44 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq.; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; county tax officials and administration, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-100 et seq.; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq.; miscellaneous local administration provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380; county sales and use taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; taxes on tobacco products, O.C.G.A. § 48-11-1 et seq.; levy of occupation taxes by counties and municipalities on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; imposition of regulatory fees by local governments on certain businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Financial institutions. 
(a)	In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for each year, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the incorporated and unincorporated area of the county, at a rate of twenty-five-hundredths percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. "Depository financial institutions" shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(b)	The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to subsection (a) shall be $1,000.00. 
(c)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-939(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1, of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Said return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of revenue, based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article, based upon the information provided in said return. 
(d)	Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due not later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by subsection (c), unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 8-23-2016 ) 
Secs. 44-2—44-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALES AND USE TAX (RESERVED) 

Secs. 44-19—44-39. - Reserved. 
Chapter 46 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWER CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 46-19. - Objectives. 
(a)	The objective of this chapter is to establish requirements for the placement, design, installation, and maintenance of cell towers and other wireless communication towers and structures in order to preserve and protect the safety, welfare, and general well-being of the citizens of the county. As the regulations of the placement, design, construction, and maintenance of buildings and structures through zoning is a valid use of the police power, so too is the regulation of the placement, installation, design, and maintenance of wireless communications towers. Therefore, it is the intent of this article to regulate the height, set back, design, and location of wireless communications towers, either existing or new, such that their purpose can be served without unduly interfering with the safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(b)	Further, t is an objective of this article to protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the county by regulating the number, size, placement, installment, and design of said towers and structures. The aesthetic impact of such towers is an economic fact that can impact the enjoyment and value of property; therefore, the regulation of wireless communication towers and structures is justified on the basis of conserving the value of property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the county in conformity with the existing zoning regulations of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-28-1999(2); Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 141) 
Sec. 46-20. - Jurisdiction and applicability; conflicting provisions. 
(a)	This article shall apply to all properties within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)	All wireless communication towers and structures shall be constructed and maintained in strict conformity with the building and electrical codes adopted by the state or county and the International Code Council (ICC). 
(c)	If any provisions or requirements of this chapter are found to be in conflict with any other provision or requirement of this chapter or any other applicable governmental law, ordinance, resolution, rule or other governmental regulation of any kind, the more restrictive rule or standard shall take precedence. 
(d)	All requirements of the Federal Telecommunications Act, 47 USC 151 et seq., and regulations of the FCC and other federal agencies must be strictly adhered to. 
(Ord. of 12-28-1999(2); Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 142) 
Sec. 46-21. - Height and setback requirements. 
No permitted wireless communication tower, regardless of type, shall exceed 200 feet from ground level and shall not be closer than 200 feet from a residence or a boundary line of the property where said tower is located. 
(Ord. of 12-28-1999(2); Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 143) 
Sec. 46-22. - Exempt towers. 
This article shall not apply to and specifically exempts any amateur radio tower or antenna. This article does apply to all commercially used towers and structures erected subsequent to the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Ord. of 12-28-1999(2); Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 144) 
Sec. 46-23. - Zoning district. 
Wireless communication towers may be allowed only in agriculture or commercial business districts with the specific site to be designated by plat to accompany application and said site must be specifically approved by the planning and zoning commission and the county board of commissioners as a special use for the specific site applied for. Procedure for site approval shall be the same as for a rezoning application. 
(Ord. of 12-28-1999(2); Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 145) 
Sec. 46-24. - General requirements for wireless communication towers. 
All wireless communication towers regardless of the district in which they are located shall be erected in such a manner as to be camouflaged sites with the specific design, construction materials, and engineering plan of said structures as well as the specific site location being necessary integral inclusion of any application considered for approval. 
(Ord. of 12-28-1999(2); Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 146) 
Sec. 46-25. - Permit application. 
Applications for all communication towers or structures shall be made by the tower owner or its agent with the administrative officer or his designee upon forms furnished by the county. The applications shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)	The type and purpose of the tower as defined in this article. 
(2)	The value of the tower and materials to be used in the construction of said structure. 
(3)	The street address and zoning designation of the property upon which the tower is to be located and the proposed location of the tower on the property as platted. 
(4)	The square foot area per tower and the overall height and setback, and number of signal carriers and type of signal to be transmitted from said tower. 
(5)	The names and addresses of the owners of the real property upon which the subject tower is to be located. 
(6)	Written consent of the property owner, or his agent, granting permission for the placement of the tower on the specific site. 
(7)	A sketch or print drawn to scale showing all dimensions with pertinent information such as wind pressure requirements and overall appearance as built. The zoning administrator or his designee may require additional information on such sketch or print to insure compliance with this article. 
(8)	Name, address, phone number and business license number of the contractor to construct said tower and an approved engineering drawing and plans for said structures. 
(9)	A written agreement to indemnify and hold the county harmless of all damages, demands or expenses of every type which may in any manner be caused by the wireless communication tower or structure being granted a permit. 
(Ord. of 12-28-1999(2); Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 147) 
Sec. 46-26. - Fees. 
No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the administrative officer or his designee and a permit fee as provided in the county fee schedule has been paid. 
(Ord. of 12-28-1999(2); Ord. of 8-28-2007, § 147) 
Sec. 46-27. - Co-location. 
The county shall have the right to co-locate its own antennas, equipment, and facilities on any approved tower, at no cost, if such installation does not interfere with existing or proposed antennas. 
( Ord. of 9-23-2014 ) 
Sec. 46-28. - Change of ownership notification. 
Upon the transfer of ownership of any tower, alternative tower structure, or lot upon which such a structure has been erected, the tower permittee shall notify the department of the transaction in writing within 30 days. 
( Ord. of 9-23-2014 ) 
Chapter 48 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; off road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq.; equipment and inspection of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; use of speed detection devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2 et seq.; cities and counties authorized to enact articles for removal of vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; removal of junk vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 48-1. - Authority of sheriff and fire department officials to enforce chapter. 
It shall be the duty of the officers of the sheriff's department and such officers as are assigned by the sheriff to such duty to enforce all traffic laws of this county. In addition, officers of the fire department when at the scene of a fire may direct or assist the law enforcement officers in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers preserved, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); obedience to persons directing traffic required, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-2. 
Secs. 48-2—48-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED ZONES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Speed restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-180 et seq.; when local authorities may or must alter maximum speed limits, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; use of speed detection devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2 et seq.; speed limits in highway work zones, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-188. 

Sec. 48-82. - Maximum speed. 
(a)	The county has established speed limits on certain county streets and roads set forth in the schedule of speed limits maintained in the office of the county clerk. 
(b)	No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions and with due regard for the actual and potential hazards that exist. In every event speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street, road, highway or other avenues of travel, in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care and caution. 
(c)	Where no speed hazards exist that require lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) of this section, the speed of any vehicle not less than the minimum limits or not in excess of the maximum limits established by the county shall be lawful. 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 48-83. - Speed detection device authorized. 
The law enforcement officers of the county are authorized to use speed detection devices as permitted by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2, except in those locations where such use is prohibited due to grade as provided in the schedule of prohibited locations maintained in the office of the county clerk. 
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officer Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; authority for use or speed detection devices by county law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2; requirements that county obtain state permit, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-2. 
Secs. 48-84—48-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing, and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

Sec. 48-110. - Prohibited parking of oversize vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck tractor, bus, trailer, or semitrailer, except to load or unload, on the right-of-way of any road, street, throughway or other avenue of travel in the unincorporated area of the county which has been zoned residential. 
Sec. 48-111. - Sale of vehicles on rights-of-way prohibited. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended on or within the right-of-way of any public road in the unincorporated areas of the county any used motor vehicle that is marked for sale or otherwise displayed for sale. A vehicle shall be considered to be displayed for sale when a reasonable person would perceive that the vehicle is for sale without having to inquire whether the vehicle is for sale. 
(b)	The law enforcement officials of the county are authorized and empowered to impound any vehicle found to be in violation of this section. The owner of such vehicle shall be responsible for all expenses and charges incurred in the towing and storage of the vehicle. 
Secs. 48-112—48-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BICYCLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290. 

Sec. 48-136. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bicycle helmet means a piece of protective headgear which meets or exceeds the impact standards for bicycle helmets set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the Snell Memorial Foundation or the federal government. For the purposes of this article, a person shall be deemed to be wearing a bicycle helmet only if a bicycle helmet of good fit is fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the helmet. 
(Ord. of 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 48-137. - Helmet use required. 
No person under the age of 16 years shall operate or be a passenger on a bicycle on a highway, road, bicycle path or sidewalk under the jurisdiction of the county without wearing a bicycle helmet. 
(Ord. of 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 48-138. - Impoundment of bicycle; proof of helmet ownership required. 
A person under the age of 16 failing to comply with this article shall have his bicycle impounded by the police, county marshal or sheriff's department. The parent or guardian of the child may then retrieve the bicycle by going to the sheriff's department and showing proof that the child now has a bicycle helmet or by indicating that the person will not ride the bicycle in the future without a bicycle helmet and by paying the administrative fee provided in the county fee schedule. Proof of ownership of a bicycle helmet may be the helmet itself or a receipt documenting the purchase of a bicycle helmet. 
(Ord. of 5-5-1998) 
Secs. 48-139—48-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq.; removal of junk vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; stopping, standing, and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 48-160—48-186. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC PROPERTY 

Sec. 48-187. - Cumulative to nuisance provisions. 
The provisions of this division shall be in addition to the provisions of this Code regarding junked vehicles as public nuisances. 
Sec. 48-188. - Abandoned vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator or owner of a vehicle to leave such vehicle parked in a public street for a continuous period of more than 24 hours. Any vehicle so parked for more than 24 hours shall be deemed abandoned. 
Sec. 48-189. - Grounds for impoundment of vehicles. 
Any person, at the direction of the a duly authorized law enforcement officer, is hereby authorized to remove, or have removed at their direction, a vehicle, from any public or private way or place, under any of the circumstances hereinafter enumerated, the board of commissioners hereby finding and determining such vehicles under such circumstances to be obstructions to traffic or public nuisances. Vehicles are authorized to be removed under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)	When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, subway or tunnel, or where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
(2)	When a vehicle upon a public way is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; 
(3)	When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street or parked illegally so as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic, or left unattended on any public street with engine running or with keys in the ignition switch or locked; 
(4)	When any vehicle is parked or left standing upon any area or portion of a public street in violation of or contrary to a parking limitation or prohibition established by the county, provided such area or portion of such public street has been posted with an official sign giving notice both of such limitation or prohibition and of the fact that such area or portion of such street is a tow away area; 
(5)	When a vehicle is parked in violation of any traffic rule and is an obstruction or hazard or potential obstruction or hazard to any lawful function or limits the normal access to a use of any public or private property; 
(6)	When the driver of such vehicle is taken into custody by the police department and the vehicle would thereby be left unattended upon a street, highway or restricted parking area, or other public way; 
(7)	When the driver of a vehicle is reasonably suspected of using license plates or license permits unlawfully or a vehicle is parked without proper license plates or license permits, or with no license plates or license permit or driven or parked with an invalid or expired license permit; 
(8)	When the driver of a vehicle is driving without an operator's license or chauffeur's license which is current and valid, or who does not have such license in the driver's immediate possession, or who drives a vehicle contrary to restrictions imposed upon the license, or who drives a vehicle while their operator's or chauffeur's license has been denied, suspended, cancelled or revoked by the state; 
(9)	When a vehicle is found parked on or so near to any railroad track as to block the same in any manner; 
(10)	When a vehicle is abandoned as prohibited in this article; 
(11)	When the driver of any vehicle, or the vehicle which the driver is driving, is reasonably suspected of having been involved in any hit and run accident; 
(12)	When any vehicle is reasonably suspected of being a stolen vehicle, or parts thereof to be stolen parts; 
(13)	When the driver of any vehicle is taken into custody for suspected felony or misdemeanor, or when the vehicle is suspected of containing stolen goods or other contraband; 
(14)	When any vehicle is parked or stopped in an emergency access lane in violation of or contrary to a parking limitation or prohibition established by the county, provided that such emergency access lane has been posted with an authorized sign giving notice both of such limitation or prohibition and of the fact that such area or portion of such public roadway or private property is a tow-away area. 
Sec. 48-190. - Redemption of impounded vehicles. 
The owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle impounded may redeem said vehicle at any time within 30 days of impoundment; provided, however, that the person claiming the same shall pay all redemption costs including the administrative fee established in the county fee schedule and costs of towing and storage. 
Sec. 48-191. - Sale of unredeemed vehicles. 
In the event the owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle impounded fails to redeem the impounded vehicle, the county may proceed to effectuate its disposition by selling it after advertising said sale in the official county newspaper once. Said sale shall be by public auction for cash. 
Sec. 48-192. - Vehicles subject to forfeiture. 
Any vehicle that is declared to be contraband, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-20 et seq., shall be seized and disposed of as provided by state law. 
Secs. 48-193—48-222. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 48-223. - Authority for removal. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4, derelict motor vehicles shall be removed from private property by the county and disposed of when requested by the landowner or when such motor vehicles are in such a condition that they constitute a health or safety hazard or an unsightly nuisance. For purposes of this division, the term "derelict motor vehicles" means motor vehicles or parts thereof that are inoperable due to lack of repairs or are unsafe to operate due to lack of repairs or damaged, or are discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped or ruined. 
Sec. 48-224. - Removal when requested by private property owner. 
When removal of a derelict motor vehicle is requested by the landowner or when a derelict motor vehicle is observed upon private property, the police department shall affix a decal to said vehicle which shall give notice that if the vehicle is not removed within ten days, the county will cause the vehicle to be towed or removed from the property. 
Sec. 48-225. - Log of vehicles removed; disposal. 
Any law enforcement agency removing vehicles under the authority of this division shall maintain a log identifying such vehicles. Any derelict motor vehicle which has been removed from private property as provided herein shall be disposed of as provided herein with regard to abandoned vehicles. 
Sec. 48-226. - Costs of removal; removal by private firms. 
To minimize the cost to the county for the removal of derelict motor vehicles, the county shall contract with private individuals and firms whose operation includes the recycling of discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped or ruined motor vehicles. The requesting landowner shall bear the cost of the removal of a derelict motor vehicle when such removal is requested by the landowner. 
Sec. 48-227. - Junkyards and automobile salvage yards excepted. 
Nothing contained within this division shall be deemed to apply to any motor vehicles which are located within the premises of any junkyard or automobile salvage yard complying with the laws of this state and county relating to the licensing and regulating of motor vehicles or junkyards. 
Chapter 50 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public utilities generally, O.C.G.A. § 46-1-1 et seq.; municipal home rule, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; municipal utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; public water systems, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq.; water supply, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-470; sewage and waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-29 et seq.; refusal by city or county to supply water because of indebtedness of prior owner, occupant, or lessee prohibited and limited liens for unpaid utility charges, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER (RESERVED) 

Secs. 50-19—50-39. - Reserved. 
Chapter 52 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Plant disease, pest control and pesticides, O.C.G.A. § 2-7-1 et seq.; forest resources and other plant life, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-1 et seq.; timber harvesting and removal requirements, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-23 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 52-1—52-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES 

Sec. 52-53. - Dead or diseased trees. 
Any dead or diseased tree or part of a tree is a nuisance per se when, by reason of such condition, natural forces may more readily than if such tree or part thereof were live or not diseased cause the tree or any part thereof to fall onto public ways, public sidewalks or public property or onto private property off the property of the owner of the tree and thereby imperil life, property or impede traffic. Upon receiving a written opinion from a qualified tree surgeon that any tree or part thereof is a nuisance per se as defined in this article, the county building inspector shall commence abatement proceedings pursuant to the procedure provided in chapter 10. 
Chapter 54 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of cities and counties to require certificate of public necessity and convenience as prerequisite to operation of taxicab within local government's geographical boundaries, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-18. - Reserved. 
Chapter 56 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 56-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generally. The word "lot" includes the word "lot" or "parcel". The word "building" includes the word "structure". The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the word "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied". Words included in the definition section are not to be construed as an allowable use (see appropriate districts for allowable uses). 
Abandonment means the cessation of the use of the property by the owner or lessee without any intention of transferring rights to the property to another owner or of resuming the use of the property. 
Abutting means having property or district lines in common, or having property separated by only an alley. Separation by a street right-of-way is not considered abutting. 
Accessory apartment means a second dwelling unit either in or added to an existing single-family detached dwelling or in a separate accessory structure on the same lot as the main dwelling, for use as a complete, independent living facility for a single housekeeping unit (family), with provision within the accessory apartment for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping. Such a dwelling is considered an accessory use and/or structure to the main dwelling. 
Accessory building or use means a building or use which is: 
(1)	Not more than two stories in height; 
(2)	Subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; 
(3)	Subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or use served; 
(4)	Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use; and 
(5)	Located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use. 
Administrative officer means the representative appointed by the county board of commissioners being assigned the responsibility for administering the zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations of the county. The office of the administrative officer shall act as staff to the planning commission and shall be given full responsibility of administration of applications, fees and filings from applicants and members of the public, and shall report to the planning commission as to the status of zoning, subdivision, and related planning activities. 
Agriculture means the cultivation or growth of a field or horticultural crop, including dairying, livestock and poultry raising, farm forestry, and other similar enterprises or uses. 
Airport means any area of land, water or mechanical structure which is used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft, including any appurtenant structures and areas which are used or intended to be used for airport buildings, other airport facilities, rights-of-way or easements. 
Alley means a private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to a building or abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, columns, girders), except such change as may be required for safety purposes, any addition to a building, any modification or change in construction, any addition which increases the area or height, any change in use from that of one district classification to another. 
Amusement arcade means a building or part of a building in which three or more pinball machines, coin-operated building tables, videogames, or other similar player operated amusement devices are maintained. 
Animal hospital means a facility operated by a licensed veterinarian specifically for the practice of veterinary medicine. 
Antique shop means a store or shop for the sale of relies, objects of ancient times or of an earlier period, works of art, pieces of furniture or decorative objects made at a much earlier period than present. 
Apartment house means a multifamily dwelling located on a parcel of land under a single ownership designed for use by three or more housekeeping units, living independently of each other, and doing their own cooking on the premises. 
Art gallery means a facility, structure or building used for the display of sculptures, paintings, photographs or other artistic works for public viewing with only incidental sales. 
Automated teller means an accessory facility through which certain banking functions such as deposits and withdrawals can be completed without the personal assistance of a bank employee. 
Automobile sales lot means an area of land on which more than one car, truck, van, boat, agricultural vehicle or implement, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, or other motorized vehicle exists, and where such vehicles are indicated as for sale, as evidenced by "for sale" signs, dealers tags, warranty signs in windows, or other such indications. 
Automotive repair garage means a use of land and/or structures involving maintenance, repair, conversion and other such services on cars, trucks, boats, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and mobile or manufactured homes, typically including vehicle storage and incidental sales of parts. Also referred to as automotive services. 
Basement means that portion of a building located wholly or partly underground but having less than one-half of its height above the grade. A basement shall not be counted as a story for the purposes of determining maximum permitted height. 
Bed and breakfast inn means a dwelling unit, or portion thereof, of no more than 14 rooms or units where short-term overnight lodging rooms, with or without meals, are provided for compensation, and where the operator of the inn resides on the premises. The offering of the same type rooms from a structure or building not occupied as a primary residence shall be considered as an inn, hotel or motel. 
Berm means an earthen structure used as a screening device in conjunction with the planting of grass, shrubbery and trees. 
Billboard means an offsite advertising sign larger than 50 square feet in area, not to exceed 300 square feet in area. 
Biomedical waste means pathological waste, biological waste cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, contaminated animal carcasses (body parts, their bedding, and other wastes from such animals), sharps, chemotherapy waste, discarded medical equipment and parts. 
Boardinghouse means a building where, for compensation, both lodging and meals are provided for persons, provided that a single family dwelling shall not be deemed to be a boardinghouse by reason of a contribution to or expense sharing arrangement with the owner or tenant occupying the dwelling by a person related by blood or marriage. 
Broadcasting studio means a room or suite of rooms operated as a radio or television broadcasting studio or station with local broadcast capability or intended for satellite distribution of programs. 
Buffer means a landscaped open space or screen located between compatible or incompatible land uses for the purpose of visibly separating uses through distance and to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances; or that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established for the purpose of screening and separating properties with compatible and incompatible land uses, the width of which is measured from the common property line and extending the developed portion of the common property line. A buffer consists of trees, shrubs and other natural vegetation undisturbed by grading or site development and replanted where sparsely vegetated or where disturbed for approved access and utility crossings. 
Buildable area means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards, buffers and building setbacks have been provided where construction of principal buildings is permitted. Also known as "building envelope." 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a roof or other covering, and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building inspector means the building inspector of the county or his authorized representative. 
Building, principal, means a building or structure in which is conducted the main use of the property on which the building or structure is located. In any residential district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building on the lot on which said structure is located. 
Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between any wall of a building or portion of any structure and the street right-of-way or property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. In the case of corner lots or double frontage lots, front yard requirements will be required to be observed for those areas adjacent to street rights-of-way. 
Bus terminal means an area and building where buses stop to load and unload passengers and luggage or packages and which may include the sale of bus tickets. 
Campground means land containing two or more campsites which are located, established or maintained for occupancy by people in temporary lodging units such as camp tents, or cabins, for recreation, education or vacation purposes. 
Carport means an accessory structure or portion of a principal structure, consisting of a roof and supporting members such as columns or beams, unenclosed from the ground to the roof on at least two sides, and designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles or boats. 
Carwash means an establishment engaged in the business of washing vehicles with self serve, automated or staffed facilities. 
Cemetery means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, but not including crematories and mortuaries. 
Centerline of street means that line surveyed and monumented by the Governing Body and designated as the center of a public street. If a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be the line running midway between the outside curbs, ditches, right-of-way edges, or pavement edges of such street. 
Certificate of occupancy means a legal statement or document issued by the building inspector indicating that the building and use or reuse of a particular building or land is in conformity with all applicable codes and regulations, and that such building or land may be occupied for the purpose stated therein. 
Church means an institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meeting and other purposes, including education, day care and recreation facilities when owned and operated by such church. 
Circus means the temporary use of land offering entertainment and instruction in the form of such things as thrill rides, games of chance and skill, educational exhibits, and animal displays or acts. The term also includes carnivals and fairs. 
Clinic means a building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of patients that does not include overnight care facilities. 
Club, nonprofit, means a building or facilities owned or operated by a group for social, educational or recreational purposes, but not customarily for profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on for gain. 
College means a degree-granting establishment, accredited or qualified, which provides formal academic education and generally requiring for admission at least a high school diploma or equivalent academic training. Accessory uses under this definition include but are not limited to dormitories, cafeterias, bookstores, research facilities, sports facilities and auditoriums. 
Commercial recreation facility means any use of building and/or land that involves the provision of sports and leisure activities to the general public for a fee, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)	Amphitheaters and stadiums; 
(2)	Assembly halls, auditoriums and meeting halls; 
(3)	Billiard halls, pool rooms and amusement/video arcades; 
(4)	Bowling alleys; 
(5)	Firearms shooting ranges and turkey shoots; 
(6)	Golf driving ranges, public golf courses, miniature golf courses and baseball batting cages; 
(7)	Private clubs operated for profit, racetracks for animals and motor-driven vehicles, ice and roller skating rinks; 
(8)	Horse- and pony-riding rinks; 
(9)	Circuses and carnivals; 
(10)	Indoor and drive-in theaters; 
(11)	Physical fitness facilities and health clubs; 
(12)	Botanical gardens and zoological gardens; 
(13)	Commercial museums and art galleries; 
(14)	Racquetball courts; 
(15)	Bungee jumping. 
Compatibility means the characteristics of different uses or activities that permit such uses or activities to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict. Some elements affecting compatibility include intensity of occupancy as measured by dwelling units per acre or gross square footage per acre; pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated; volume of goods handled; and such environmental effects as noise, vibration, odor, glare, lighting, air and water pollution, or radiation. 
Comprehensive plan means that coordinated plan or portion thereof which has been prepared by or for the governing body for the physical development of the jurisdiction; or any plan that designates plans or programs to encourage the most appropriate use of the land in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
Conditional zoning/use means the granting or adoption of zoning or use for property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, density or actions stipulated by the governing body to mitigate adverse impacts that are anticipated without imposition of such conditions. All zoning applications are considered conditional uses and are permitted as such. 
Condominium (residential building) means a building or complex of multiple-unit dwellings in which a tenant holds full title to his unit and joint ownership in the common grounds. 
Connecting route means a road or street designated as a connecting route by the county planning commission and shown as such on the official zoning map. 
Continuing care retirement community means a development or facility that provides to individuals accommodations and care such as board, independent living, licensed nursing care and medical or other health-related services, and that typically enters into contracts to provide care. 
Contractor's establishment means an establishment engaged in the provision of construction activities including, but not limited to, plumbing, electrical work, building, paving, carpentry and other such contracting activities, including the storage of materials and the overnight parking of commercial vehicles. 
Convalescent home means a home for the care of children, the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, wherein two or more persons are professionally cared for. 
Convenience store means a small retail store which sells prepackaged food products, household and other items and which may include the sale of gasoline and diesel fuel. 
Conversion means any change in the original use or purpose of a building or lot to a different use. 
County engineer means the engineer or engineering firm in the employ of the county, or authorized representative. 
Crematorium means the structure that contains the furnace for cremating a body. 
Curb cut means a provision for vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Day care center means any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody, seven or more children under 18 years of age. A day care center of six children or fewer may be considered to be a home occupation unless in conflict with state regulations. 
Decks means outside unenclosed auxiliary area adjacent to or attached to the primary structure, not considered living space and not capable of being artificially heated or cooled. 
Density means the number of dwelling units developed, or to be developed, per gross acre of land or the gross square footage of a building per acre of land. 
Development means any manmade change on improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Developmentally disabled person means a person with a disability resulting in substantial functional limitations in such person's major life activities which disability is attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, or autism or is attributable to any other condition related to mental retardation because such condition results in impairment of general intellectual functioning or adaptive behavior similar to that of persons with mental retardation. 
District, zoning, means a geographical area or areas, designated with the use of symbols on the official zoning map, wherein uses of land are restricted in type, size, height and other limitations as established in these regulations. 
Dormitory means a building, the primary purpose of which is to provide living accommodations for individuals, but which does not include individual kitchen facilities. 
Drive-in means a retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the customer within a motor vehicle on the outside of the principal building. 
Drive-in theater means a facility designed for the outdoor projection of motion pictures onto a permanent screen to be viewed from the patron's automobile. 
Driveway means a way upon which automobiles can travel which terminates on private property and originates from a public or private road or street. 
Dry cleaners means an establishment engaged in providing laundry, dyeing and dry cleaning services to individual customers. 
Dry cleaning plant means an establishment engaged in providing laundry, dyeing and dry cleaning services for institutions, businesses or other such establishments. 
Duplex means a building on a single lot containing two single-family dwelling units totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof. 
Dwelling means a building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used for permanent living and/or sleeping quarters. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more single housekeeping units with separate kitchen and bath facilities for each family or housekeeping unit, including apartment houses, rowhouses, townhouses, and similar housing types but not including motels, hotels, lodginghouses, hospitals, nursing homes, or public institutions such as prisons and mental institutions. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed or arranged to be occupied by one single housekeeping unit only. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex), means a building designed or arranged to be occupied by two single housekeeping units living independently of each other. 
Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residence. 
Easement means a nonpossessory interest in land or a grant by a property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or persons of a portion of land for a specified purpose. 
Exterminator means an establishment or person engaged in the service of killing insects, mice, rats or other pests. 
Family means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than three unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit and using the same cooking facilities; provided, however, that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families. Any group which is licensed by the state, or any political subdivision thereof which contains up to six developmentally disabled persons and up to two supervisors or surrogate parents residing on the premises at one time shall constitute a family. 
Farm means an area of land principally devoted to agriculture. 
Farm supply store means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of animal feeds, fertilizers, agricultural chemicals, pesticides, seeds and other such farm supplies. 
Fence means a structural barrier for enclosure, screening or demarcation presenting a solid face or having openings amongst or between its constituents members; also, a wall separate from or extending from a building. Fences must be constructed of wood, metal, or other conventional fence building material. Fences cannot be constructed from salvage or junk materials. 
Finance, insurance and real estate establishments means establishments including, but not limited to banks, savings and loan institutions and credit unions; security and commodity exchanges; insurance agents, brokers and service; real estate brokers, agents, managers and developers; trusts; holding and investment companies. 
Finished ground level means the elevation of the ground after final cutting and filling. 
Flea market means the use of land, structures or buildings for the sale of produce or new or used goods, usually of second quality or at cut-rate prices, in which more than two vendors are accommodated in spaces on the same lot or within the same building. 
Floor area means the gross heated, finished horizontal area of the floor of a dwelling unit. 
Foundation means the loadbearing structural elements of a building, usually of masonry construction. 
Funeral home means a building or part thereof used for funeral services, which may contain space and facilities for embalming and the performance of other services used in preparation of the dead for burial; performance of autopsies; storage of caskets; and chapel services. 
Garage means an accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles and other personal property as an accessory use. Garages will not include living quarters or sanitary and/or cooking facilities. 
Garage apartment means an accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles and other personal property as an accessory use, but may include living quarters, sanitary, and/or cooking facilities. 
Glare means a sensation of brightness within the visual field that causes annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
Governing body means the county commission, duly elected by the citizens within the jurisdiction. 
Green area (space) means land shown on a development plan, master plan, or official map for conservation, preservation, recreation, landscaping or parks. 
Greenbelt means an open area that may be cultivated or maintained in a natural state surrounding development or used as a buffer between land uses or to mark the edge of an urban or developed area. 
Greenhouse means a building designed or used for growing or propagating plants, with walls or roof usually designed to transmit light. Greenhouses shall not be construed to include commercial horticultural activities. 
Guesthouse means a lodging unit for temporary guests in an accessory building. Such lodging unit may contain limited cooking or kitchen facilities but shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Hazardous waste means any waste which is capable of posing a present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise, based on factors set forth in applicable regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
Height, highest living floor, means the vertical distance measured from the highest point at which the exterior foundation of the building or structure intersects the highest finished ground level to the highest living area finished floor level. 
Height, overall building, means the vertical distance measured from the highest point at which the exterior foundation of the building or structure intersects the highest finished ground level to the highest point on the finished roof. 
Heliport means an area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, licensed or approved for the landing and take offof helicopters, and including auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment. 
Helistop means a heliport, but without auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment. 
Home occupation means any activity carried out for gain or support in the home, excluding retail sales. Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation, with the exception of one person not residing in the dwelling. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the residential character of the building or lot. A home occupation shall not create any additional vehicular traffic for its address or location than what is expected for its residential use and shall not be detrimental to surrounding property owners. 
Hospital means an institution providing health services, for inpatient and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including, as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient department, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
Hotel means a public commercial lodging facility intended for use as temporary residence which may make provisions for meals, entertainment and various personal services provided for compensation to persons traveling for business, tourism or other visitation purposes in which ingress and egress from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge. 
Household pet means an animal which is customarily kept for company or pleasure within a home or yard which is not raised for commercial purposes. Household pets include domestic canines, felines, tropical birds, fish, rabbits, rodents and other animals customarily sold in pet stores. 
Impervious surface means any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land, including, but not limited to, buildings, paved roads, parking lots and driveways, decks, swimming pools and patios, but not including graveled driveways and parking areas. 
Inn means an overnight lodging facility. 
Inoperable vehicle means any motorized vehicle, other than those vehicles temporarily disabled, not in excess of 60 days, and under active repair, incapable of immediately being driven. Any motorized vehicle without a current vehicle registration tag shall be considered an inoperable vehicle. 
Junk means any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or disposition. Junk may include inoperable vehicles, boats, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, scrap building materials, household appliances, machinery, brush, wood and lumber, not to include wood that is commonly used as firewood. 
Junkyard or salvage yard means any property involving the abandonment, parking, storage or disassembly of junk, including inoperable vehicles or junked machinery, the abandonment, storage, sale, or resale of used auto parts, tires, scrap iron, metal, used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, refrigerators and/or other old household appliances, used brick, wood, or other building/structural materials, used paper, rags or other scrap materials. 
Kennel means the housing or boarding of dogs, cats or other domestic animals, operated for the purpose of providing income and revenue. 
Laboratory means a place devoted to research or study, such as testing and analyzing, but not including the manufacturing of products. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands of the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, scraping, excavating, transporting, or filing of land, and any construction, rebuilding or alteration of a structure, but specifically excluding agricultural and gardening practices. 
Landfill means an area wherein solid wastes are placed, under license, compacted and covered but specifically excluding hazardous or radioactive wastes. 
Landscape strip means that portion of a given lot not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, established as landscaped open space, the width of which is measured from a given property line and extending the developed portion of the property line. A landscape strip, as distinguished from a buffer, may be disturbed by grading or side development but is maintained as landscaped open space. A landscape strip may consist of grass lawns, decorative planting, berms, walls, fences or other features designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect within and outside of the development. 
Landscaping means changing, rearranging or adding to the original vegetation or scenery of a piece of land to produce an aesthetic effect appropriate for the use to which the land is put. It may include reshaping the land by moving the earth, as well as preserving the original vegetation. 
Landscaping service means an establishment engaged in performing a variety of lawn and landscaping services such as lawn fertilizing, mowing, spraying and planting, and the planting and maintenance of landscaping. 
Laundromat means a business that provides commercial washing and drying machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises. 
Library means a building in which literary, musical, artistic or reference materials are kept for use but not primarily for sale. 
Loading and unloading space means a space typically, but not necessarily, contained, with dimensions of 12 feet by 60 feet, logically and conveniently located for pickups and/or deliveries or for loading and/or unloading, scaled to delivery vehicles to be used, and accessible to such vehicles. 
Lodginghouse means a fraternity house, sorority house, dormitory, or other such building designed and occupied, with or without separate kitchen or housekeeping facilities for each unit. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public street rights-of-way but inclusive of easements. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot coverage means the part or percent of a lot occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings and structures, but not including unenclosed parking areas. 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
Lot, double frontage, means any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
Lot frontage means the width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts any street or roadway or right-of-way thereof. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the county superior court clerk, or a parcel of land the deed of which has been recorded in the same office as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum required front yard (regulatory front building setback) line. 
Mail order office means an establishment which engages in the taking of requests for mail order by telephone or facsimile machine for catalog merchandise but not including the storage or distribution of such merchandise. An establishment where orders are picked up or taken in person is not considered a mail order office. 
Manufactured home/mobile home means a structure built to conform to national standards embodied in the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq. administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes mandatory plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. A manufactured home displays a certificate from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development if manufactured after June 15, 1976. 
Manufactured home/mobile home park means a parcel of land which has been planned or improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for residential use, including land, buildings and facilities used by the occupants of manufactured homes on such property must comply with all other regulations for mobile/manufactured home park. 
Manufactured home/mobile home space means a parcel of land within a manufactured home park which is reserved or leased for the placement of an individual mobile home and accessory structures for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Manufactured home subdivision means parcels of land planned or improved for the placement of manufactured homes on individual lots for residential use and must meet all subdivision regulations as outlined in this document. 
Manufacturing, processing and assembling means the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. The land uses engaged in these activities are usually described as plants, factories or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Establishments engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered under this definition if the new product is neither a fixed structure nor other fixed improvement. Also included is the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastic resins or liquors. 
Marquee means a permanent rooflike structure made of metal or other durable material affixed to the wall of a building. 
Materials recovery facility means a solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials. 
Metes and bounds means a system of describing and identifying land by distances or measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference, such as a monument or other marker or the intersection of the center line of intersecting streets. 
Miniwarehouse means a building or group of buildings that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers used for storage, which may include accessory office and/or night watchman's residence, but not including retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any other commercial use; also known as self-service storage facilities. 
Modular structure means a factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential or commercial purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of either the International Code Council (ICC) or the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
Mortuary means a place in which dead bodies are kept until burial. 
Motel means a public commercial lodging facility intended for use as temporary residence, which may also include provision of meals, entertainment and various personal services, provided for compensation to persons traveling for business, tourism or other visitation purposes, distinguished from a hotel in that ingress and/or egress to and from all rooms is made primarily from an exterior walkway rather than from an interior lobby. 
Museum means an establishment engaged in the procurement, care, study, and display of objects of historical, educational and cultural value and interest. 
Nonconforming lot means a lot, the area, width, or other characteristic of which fails to meet requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and which was of record as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Nonconforming structure means any building or structure lawfully existing at the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or as a result of subsequent amendments to these regulations which does not conform to the regulations governing the bulk, location, height or size of buildings or structures permitted in the district. 
Nonconforming use means any building or use of land or building lawfully existing at the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or as a result of subsequent amendments to these regulations, which does not conform with the permitted use provisions established herein for the district in which it is located. 
Nuisance means anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of property, endangers public health or safety, or is offensive to the senses or anything that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, even though it may otherwise be lawful. 
Nursing home means a longterm care facility which admits patients by medical referral and provides for continuous medical supervision via 24 hour-a-day nursing care and related services in addition to food, shelter, and personal care. A nursing home may be licensed as a skilled nursing facility, an intermediate care facility, or an intermingled facility. 
Off-street means not located on a street as defined by this chapter. 
Office means a building or portion thereof wherein predominantly administrative, professional or clerical operations are performed and not involving retail sales or other sales of any kind on the premises. 
Official zoning map means the map, which accompanies the zoning ordinance text that delineates the geographic location of the boundaries of zoning districts established in this chapter in relation to natural features, manmade features and/or property uses. 
Open air business means any commercial establishment that displays products in a nonenclosed area. 
Open space, landscaped, means that portion of a given lot not covered by buildings, pavement, parking, access and service areas, set aside and maintained as a buffer, landscape strip or other approved open area. 
Original tract of land means any parcel of land conveyed by deed or other legal document that has not been subdivided for a period of five years or more from the date that said tract was originally conveyed. A division of land resulting from the settlement of an estate shall be considered to be an original tract of land immediately upon conveyance. 
Outdoor display means the keeping of any goods, junk, material or merchandise outside of a business, building or establishment or in an area visible from a public street for display, advertisement or purposes of attracting rental or sales. Such definition shall not be construed as to include the temporary loading or unloading of such goods, junk, material or merchandise to or from an enclosed area. 
Outdoor storage means the keeping of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or commercial vehicles in the same outdoor place for more than 24 hours. 
Parking lot means any public or private open area used for the express purpose of temporary parking of private motor vehicles. A parking lot may be the principal use on a given lot or an accessory use to the principal use on a given lot. 
Parking space means an area having an area of at least 200 square feet and 300 square feet including maneuvering space within a parking lot, to be used exclusively as a temporary parking space for a motor vehicle. 
Permitted use means a use which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or institution, including any trustee, assign or other representative. 
Personal care means protective care and watchful oversight of a resident who needs a watchful environment but who does not have an illness, injury, or disability which requires chronic or convalescent care including medical and nursing services. 
Personal care home means a building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals, and personal care, for non-family ambulatory adults. 
Personal care home, congregate, means a personal care home for adults which offers care to 16 or more persons. 
Personal care home, family, means a personal care home for adults in a family-type residence, noninstitutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons. 
Personal care home, group, means a personal care home for adult persons in a residence or other type building, non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven through 15 persons. 
Photography studio means an establishment engaged in photography for hire for the general public, including but not limited to portrait, passport, wedding and other special occasion photographs. 
Planned unit development (PUD) means an overlay or floating form of zoning classification (or development) usually characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units, clustered buildings, common open space, pedestrian amenities, and a mix of building types and land uses in a more dense setting (recognizing overall density) than allowable on separate zoned lots and maintained as a single entity. When a proposed PUD site plan is approved, then all guidance, recommendations and restrictions are specifically bound to the approved plan. 
Planning commission means the the county planning commission as established by ordinance of the governing body. 
Pool hall means an establishment containing one or more billiard tables, operated for profit, and open to the general public. 
Power plant, private means any facility that uses one or more energy sources, including water power, fossil fuels, biofuels, fuel cells, photovoltaic systems, solar power or other means of electrical generation, to provide electrical energy and/or steam, including equipment, fuel storage and other support facilities related to such power plant. Any such power plant, whether used off-grid or on-grid, shall have a peak generating capacity of not more than 20 megawatts. 
Premises means a lot as otherwise used in this chapter. 
Public use means any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by the federal government, the state, the county or other county, or other municipality, or any authority, agency, board or commission of the above governments, which is necessary to serve a public purpose, such as but not limited to the following: 
(1)	Government administrative buildings; 
(2)	Police and fire stations; 
(3)	Public health facilities and hospitals; 
(4)	Public works camps; 
(5)	Parks and community centers; 
(6)	Public roads and streets; 
(7)	Airports; 
(8)	Water and sanitary sewerage storage; 
(9)	Intake, collection and treatment and pumping facilities; 
(10)	Public housing facilities; 
(11)	Jails and correctional centers. 
Recreational vehicle (RV) means a vehicular-type portable structure which can be towed, hauled or driven and is primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping and travel uses. 
Recreational vehicle (RV) park means any lot of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy on a temporary basis by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters by campers, vacationers or travelers. 
Recycling collection center means a principal or accessory use that serves as a neighborhood or regional dropoff point for temporary storage of recoverable resources such as cans, bottles and newspapers, but specifically excluding processing of such resources. 
Recycling plant means a facility in which recoverable resources such as cans, bottles, newspapers and cardboard are recycled, reprocessed and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used in packaging or for production. 
Rehabilitation means the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values. 
Rehabilitation center means facilities authorized or licensed by appropriate agencies for the primary purpose of rehabilitation of: offenders against the law; persons with drug or alcohol abuse problems; mentally handicapped; and physically handicapped. 
Rental cabin means a unit built for the purpose of rental to guests for less than 30 days. 
Rental housing means housing occupied by a tenant paying rent to an owner and no part of the rent is used to acquire equity in the property. 
Residence for caretaker or night watchman means an accessory residence, located inside or in addition to the principal structure or use of a parcel of land, designed or occupied by security personnel for security reasons only. 
Residential district means any residential zoning district as indicated on the official zoning map. 
Restaurant means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverages. 
Restaurant, drive-in, means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment or beverage to persons in vehicles, including those establishments where customers may eat or drink on the premises. 
Retail sales means establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
Retail trade establishment, enclosed, means any business offering goods and products for sale to the public, which operates entirely within a structure containing a roof and walls on all sides, except for outdoor display or other use during business hours and accessory storage in enclosed, subordinate buildings. Incidental repair is also included. The following are considered enclosed retail trade establishments (list is not all-inclusive): 
(1)	Convenience stores including the sale of gasoline; 
(2)	Paint, glass and wallpaper stores; 
(3)	Grocery and miscellaneous food stores including retail bakeries; 
(4)	Apparel, shoe and accessory clothing stores; 
(5)	Furniture, floor covering and home furnishing stores; 
(6)	Household appliance stores; 
(7)	Radio, television and computer stores; 
(8)	Musical instrument stores; 
(9)	Record, tape and compact disc stores; 
(10)	Eating and drinking places not involving drive-in or drive-through facilities; 
(11)	Drugstores and proprietary stores; 
(12)	Liquor stores; 
(13)	Used merchandise stores; 
(14)	Sporting goods and bicycle shops; 
(15)	Book, art and stationery stores; 
(16)	Hobby, toy and game shops; 
(17)	Jewelry, gift, novelty, souvenir and antique shops; 
(18)	Camera and photographic supply stores; 
(19)	Luggage and leather goods stores; 
(20)	Sewing, needlework and piece goods stores; 
(21)	Catalog and mail order stores; 
(22)	Florists; 
(23)	Tobacco stores; 
(24)	Optical goods stores; 
(25)	Newsstands; 
(26)	Automotive parts stores not involving repair; 
(27)	Video rental and sales stores; 
(28)	Watches and clocks stores; 
(29)	Pawnshops; 
(30)	Convenience stores with or without retail gasoline sales. 
Retail trade establishment, unenclosed, means any business offering goods and products for sale to the public, which does not operate entirely within a structure containing a roof and walls on all sides, and which all or a portion of the goods and products are displayed and/or stored, or business transacted, in the open-air or other shelter not completely enclosed. The following are considered unenclosed retail trade establishments (list is not all-inclusive): 
(1)	Lumber and building materials; 
(2)	Retail nurseries and garden supply stores; 
(3)	Mobile and manufactured home/modular building dealers; 
(4)	New and used car, truck, boat, recreational vehicle, camper, motorcycle, and other motorized vehicle sales and leasing; 
(5)	Eating and drinking places including drive-in and drive-through facilities; 
(6)	Fuel oil and liquefied petroleum dealers; 
(7)	Agricultural implement and equipment sales and rental; 
(8)	Christmas tree sales; flea markets; monument sales establishments; 
(9)	Automatic teller facilities; 
(10)	Gas stations; 
(11)	Produce stands; 
(12)	Firewood sales. 
Rezoning means an amendment to or a change in the official zoning map. Rezoning applications may be considered conditional uses and permitted as such. Applicants must present all required documents, site plans, and plats prior to any rezoning being granted. 
Right-of-way means that area, distinguished from an easement, which is owned in fee-simple title by the governing body or other government, for the present or future use of roads, streets, and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
Roominghouse means a building where, for compensation, lodging only is provided. 
Sanitarium means a hospital used for treating chronic and usually longterm illness. 
Satellite dish antenna means a round, parabolic antenna intended to receive signals from orbiting satellites and other sources. 
School means a facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction. A school is considered public if operated by a unit of government. 
School, trade, technical, business, means an establishment in which is offered, for compensation, instruction in a trade, craft, technical field, or business skills. 
Screening means a method of shielding, obscuring or buffering one use or building from another use or building by fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, natural vegetation or other means; a visual and acoustical barrier which is of such nature and density that provides yearround maximum opacity from the ground to a height of at least six feet or that screens structures and activities from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot. Screening methods include opaque fences, walls, hedges, berms and other features. 
Semipublic use means any building, structure or use owned and/or operated by private utilities or private companies for a public purpose, or which is reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities, such as but not limited to the following: underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water distribution or transmission lines or systems, electric power substations, wires, towers, cables, and poles, railroad facilities and bus and air terminals. 
Septic tank means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Service, automotive, means an establishment providing services and repairs to motor-driven vehicles, including but not limited to: rental car facilities; automobile parking lots; top and body, paint, automotive glass, transmission, and tire repair shops; carwashes, including automated and full service facilities; oil change and lubrication. 
Service establishment, business, means a facility engaged in support functions to establishments operating for a profit on a fee or contract basis, including but not limited to: 
(1)	Advertising agencies; 
(2)	Photocopying, blueprinting and duplication services; 
(3)	Mailing agencies; 
(4)	Commercial art and graphic design; 
(5)	Disinfecting, exterminating and pest control; 
(6)	Personnel supply services and employment agencies; 
(7)	Computer and data processing services; 
(8)	Detective, protective and security system services; 
(9)	Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services; 
(10)	Publications and business consulting firms; 
(11)	Food catering, interior decorating, real estate and insurance offices. 
Service establishment, personal, means a facility engaged in the provision of services to persons and their apparel, including but not limited to: 
(1)	Barbershops and beauty shops; 
(2)	Coin-operated and full-service laundries and dry cleaners; 
(3)	Photographic studios; 
(4)	Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors; 
(5)	Dance studios, schools and halls; 
(6)	Specialized instructional studios and schools; 
(7)	Day care centers; 
(8)	Massage parlors; 
(9)	Travel agencies. 
Service, health, means health care facilities as well as establishments providing support to the medical profession and patients, such as medical and dental laboratories, blood banks, oxygen and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services; offices of doctors, dentists, physical therapists, and other medical practitioners. 
Service, lodging, means a facility which offers temporary shelter accommodations, or place for such shelter, open to the public for a fee, including but not limited to: 
(1)	Hotels, motels and motor hotels; 
(2)	Roominghouses and boardinghouses; 
(3)	Bed and breakfast inns; 
(4)	Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds. 
Service, miscellaneous, means those service establishments not otherwise specifically classified, including but not limited to: 
(1)	Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics; 
(2)	Funeral homes, mortuaries and mausoleums; 
(3)	Construction contractors establishments not involving outside storage of vehicles or materials; 
(4)	Palm reading and fortunetelling; 
(5)	Pet grooming, pet psychologists, dog obedience schools; 
(6)	Taxidermists; and 
(7)	Locksmiths. 
Service station means any building, structure or land used for the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel, oil, accessories, and motor vehicle servicing, except that major repairs, body repairs, and painting of motor vehicles shall not be considered motor vehicle servicing. 
Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a street, alley, or the property boundary lines of a lot and the front, rear, or side lines of a building located on that lot. 
Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit, with off-street parking on the property. 
Sign means any writing, pictorial presentation, illustration, or decoration, flag, banner or pennant or other device which is used to announce, direct attention to, identify, advertise or otherwise make anything known, and which is designed to be visible from any street or adjoining property, except for house numbers and address numbers and nonbusiness letters on mailboxes. For the purposes of these regulations, any sign not visible from a street or adjoining property or any sign within a business, office, mall or totally enclosed area is exempted from these regulations, as are all approved traffic control signs and devices. 
Sign, animated, means any sign of which all or any part thereof visibly moves in any fashion whatsoever; and any sign which contains or uses for illumination any light, lights or lighting device which change color, flash or alternate, show movement or motion, or automatically change the appearance of said sign or any part thereof. 
Sign area means the entire area within a rectangle, circle, triangle, or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign consists solely of lettering or other sign elements printed or mounted on a wall of a building without any distinguishing border, panel, or background; any blank rectangular area which consists of ten percent or more of the area of the sign as otherwise computed shall be disregarded. All of the lettering and other sign elements printed or mounted upon a wall of a building without any distinguishing border, panel, or background and pertaining to the same enterprise shall be treated as a single sign for purposes of area computation. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be counted as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. 
Sign, bench, means a sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
Sign, construction, means any sign giving the name and location of principal contractors, architects, and lending institutions responsible for construction on the site where the sign is placed. 
Sign, directional, means a sign temporarily or permanently erected on a site other than that to which persons are directed (off-site) which denotes the route to a particular business or other destination. 
Sign, flashing, means a sign designed to attract attention through the use of a flashing, changing, revolving or flickering light source, or through a change in light intensity. 
Sign, freestanding/ground, means a permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of any building for support. 
Sign height means the vertical distance from the finished grade at the base of the supporting structure to the top of the sign, or its frame or supporting structure, whichever is higher. 
Sign, identification, means a sign which depicts the name and/or address of a building, subdivision or establishment on the premises where the sign is located as a means of identifying said building, subdivision or establishment. 
Sign, internally illuminated, means a sign illuminated with a light source which is enclosed within the sign and viewed through a translucent panel. 
Sign, mansard, means a sign attached to or erected against a mansard or marquee of a building, with the face horizontally parallel to the building wall. Since said sign is mounted parallel to and within the limitations of the building wall on which same is mounted, such sign is deemed to be a wall sign and not a roof sign. 
Sign number means for the purposes of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be construed to be a single display surface or device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a single unit. A ground sign with sign surface on both sides of such sign shall be construed as a single sign, and the total area of such sign shall be the area computed on a single side. 
Sign, off-site, means any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise which directs attention to goods, commodities, products, services, entertainment or other items that are not sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, except that government notices shall not be considered off-site signs. 
Sign, on-site, means any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise which directs attention to goods, commodities, products, services or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
Sign, political, means a sign which announces, promotes or advertises the name, program, or political party of any candidate for public office, or an opinion regarding a public referendum. 
Sign, portable, means a sign, whether on its own trailer, wheels, or otherwise, which is designed to be transported from one place to another. It is characteristic of a portable sign that the space provided for advertising messages may be changed at will by the replacement of lettering or symbols. Even though the wheels or supports of such sign should be removed and the sign converted and attached, temporarily or permanently, to the ground or other structure, such sign shall retain its character as a portable sign based on its original design unless modified to change its original design through incorporation into a permanent ground sign. 
Sign, projecting, means a sign other than a wall sign affixed to any building or wall whose leading edge extends more than one foot beyond such building or wall. 
Sign, real estate, means a temporary sign erected by the owner, or his agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, for lease or for sale. 
Sign, roof, means any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building with the principal support on the roof structure. 
Sign, sandwich, means any sign, double or single-faced, which is portable and may readily be moved from place to place, but not including portable signs as defined herein. 
Sign, special event, means a temporary outdoor advertising sign announcing special activities, events, or shows to be held in the near future within the community which are open to the general public, not including political information or advertising for an individual business. 
Sign structure means any construction used or designed to support a sign. 
Sign, wall, means a sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building with the face in a parallel plane to the plane of the building wall. 
Sign, window, means any sign painted or placed inside or upon a door or window facing the outside and which is intended to be seen from the exterior, which is devoted to operational aspects of a business or other establishment (i.e., open, closed, out-to-lunch, no smoking, etc.) and which may contain general advertising material. 
Site plan means a graphic illustration, two-dimensional, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a lot or tract and the location of all buildings, structures, uses and principal site development features proposed for a specific lot or tract of land. 
Slaughterhouse means an establishment where animals are killed, butchered, prepared for further processing, or processed in a final form. 
Solid waste means discarded putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except water-carried body waste and recovered materials, and shall include: 
(1)	Garbage; 
(2)	Rubbish such as paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture and appliances, metal, tin cans, glass, crockery, or dunnage; 
(3)	Ashes; 
(4)	Street refuse; 
(5)	Dead animals; 
(6)	Sewage sludges; 
(7)	Animal manures; 
(8)	Industrial waste, such as waste materials generated in industrial operations; 
(9)	Residue from incineration; 
(10)	Food processing wastes; 
(11)	Demolition wastes; 
(12)	Abandoned automobiles and boats; 
(13)	Dredging and construction waste. 
Story means that portion of a building comprised between a floor and the floor or roof above. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare which is open to the general public and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, arterial, means unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan or zoning map and designated by the county planning commission, those streets and highway facilities, including full and partial access controlled highways and major urban area entrance highways, which are designed to carry the highest traffic volumes and the longest trips through and within an urban area. 
Street, collector, means unless otherwise specified by the comprehensive plan, transportation element of the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan, those streets that collect traffic from minor streets or other collector streets and channel it to the arterial system. 
Street, public, means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Street, residential, means streets within a residential neighborhood or subdivision. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent or semipermanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground, not including utility poles, but specifically including tents, bleachers, gasoline pumps, recreational vehicles, travel trailers signs, and structures from which products are vended and similar objects. 
Subdivision. 
(1)	The term "subdivision" means the division of a parcel or tract of land into any number of smaller tracts, lots or parcels for ready sale to the general public. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "subdivision" shall not include the division of property for the following: 
a.	Land division resulting in three parcels or less. Subdivision shall include adjoining parcels when added or included in the scheme to sell parcels to the general public. 
b.	Land divided solely for the purpose of dividing an estate or inter-family transfers between parents, children and grandchildren or their spouses. 
c.	Parcels of three acres or larger regardless of the number of parcels. Roads must be constructed as outlined in Exhibit A. Roads must also be approved by the county commissioners, or their designee. 
(2)	The term "subdivision" shall include adjoining parcels when added or included in the scheme to sell parcels to the general public. A lot or parcel obtained in the normal course of business by a parent, child or grandchild of the owner shall not be exempt from previous regulation because of the relationship. 
Taxicab station means an establishment engaged in furnishing passenger transportation by automobile or van, not operating on regular schedules or between fixed terminals and containing space for taxi cab fleets and related office facilities. 
Temporary use means a use intended for a specified limited duration. 
Tower means a structure that is intended to send and/or receive radio, telephone, or television communications. 
Townhouse means one of a group of three or more attached dwelling units under fee-simple ownership. 
Transitional use means a permitted use, building or structure that by nature or level and scale of activity acts as a transition or buffer between two or more incompatible uses. 
Transportation, communication and utility facilities means including but not limited to the following: 
(1)	Bus passenger stations and terminals; 
(2)	Airports, heliports and helistops; 
(3)	Taxicab and limousine services; 
(4)	Radio and television studios and broadcasting towers; 
(5)	Recycling collection centers; 
(6)	Truck stops and truck terminals; 
(7)	Trucking and courier services; 
(8)	Marinas; 
(9)	Railroad facilities; 
(10)	Gas, electric, water supply services; 
(11)	Emergency medical services; 
(12)	Ultralight flight parks. 
Travel trailer means a portable dwelling or lodging unit having no other foundation than wheels, distinguished from a mobile or manufactured home, designed for shortterm travel, recreational or vacation use, including pickup campers and motor homes. 
Tree means any self-supporting, woody perennial plant having a single trunk diameter of two inches or more which normally grows at maturity to an overall height of a minimum of 15 feet. 
Truck terminal means an area where cargo is stored for routing or reshipment and where trucks load and unload cargo on a regular basis, or an area in which semitrailers and/or trucks are parked and stored. 
Truckstop means an area principally devoted to the service of refueling, temporary storage or parking of trucks, including accessory buildings, structures and uses such as restaurants. 
Underground storage tank means any one or combination of tanks, including underground pipes connected thereto, which is used to contain an accumulation of regulated substances and the volume of which, including the volume of the underground pipes connected thereto, is ten percent or more beneath the surface of the ground. 
Unenclosed area means any area of a given lot or structure which is not covered with a roof and protected by opaque walls on each of the sides of said area or structure. 
Use means any purpose for which a building or structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or structure or on a tract of land. 
Utility means public or private water and sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, cable television lines, roads, driveways, river/lake access facilities, stormwater facilities, railroads, airports and bus terminals. 
Variance means a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the height, area, placement, setback, yard, buffer, landscape strip, parking and loading regulations as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
Warehouse means a building or group of buildings for the storage of goods or wares, with controlled access to contents. 
Wholesale distribution means an establishment engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users or to other wholesalers. 
Windmill means a mill or machine powered by the wind. 
Wrecked motor vehicle compound means an area used to store disabled motor vehicles until such time as their disposition (either by junk, salvage or repair) has been determined by the insurance company, the owner of the vehicle, or his legal representative. 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building, which is open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. A yard may contain a parking and/or loading area unless otherwise specified by these regulations. 
Yard, front, means a space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. In the case of a corner lot, both spaces with street frontage may be considered front yards. In the case of double frontage lots, the spaces as defined herein may both be considered front yards. 
Yard, rear, means the space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard sale means the temporary sale of home furniture, appliances, clothing and/or domestic items owned by an occupant of a residential dwelling and taking place on the premises on which such occupant resides, whether in the yard or in a carport or garage, usually as a result of the occupant moving/relocating to another place of residence. Yard sales which do not take place on the premises on which such occupant resides are considered open-air businesses. 
Yard, side, means a space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot line and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zero lot line means the location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building sides have no side building set back and rest directly on a side lot line. 
Zoning means a legislative procedure in which the community is divided into districts or zones within which permitted uses, and in some cases conditional uses, are established as well as regulations governing lot size, bulk, height and other development requirements. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 31; Ord. of 11-27-2007) 
Sec. 56-2. - Penalties. 
Any person who does any act prohibited by this chapter, or who fails to discharge any duty imposed hereby, shall be guilty of a violation of a county ordinance, and subject to the process of the county magistrate court, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not less than $500.00, or by confinement in the county jail not to exceed 60 days, either fine or confinement, or both, in the discretion of the magistrate court. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. It shall be the duty of the county marshal, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Upon information constituting probable cause made known to any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter that a violation of same has occurred, a citation and summons may be issued to the alleged violator requiring him to appear before the county magistrate court, on a day and time certain, to answer the charge contained herein. In addition to the legal remedy in this section, the county may proceed in equity to obtain an injunction to any threatened construction or seek any other available equitable relief for any violation of the terms or intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), art. XIX) 
Secs. 56-3—56-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 56-23. - Use districts. 
For the purpose of these regulations, the area of jurisdiction within is divided into ten districts designated as follows: 
(1)	Single-family residential district (R-I). 
(2)	Two-family residential district (R-II). 
(3)	Multifamily residential district (R-III). 
(4)	Vacation cottage district (V-C). 
(5)	Neighborhood shopping district (N-S). 
(6)	Highway business district (H-B). 
(7)	Commercial business district (C-B). 
(8)	Restricted industrial district (M-I). 
(9)	Heavy industrial district (M-II). 
(10)	Agricultural (A). 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 41) 
Sec. 56-24. - District boundaries—Area of jurisdiction on map. 
The boundaries of the area of jurisdiction and of these districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "RABUN COUNTY ZONING MAP," which is recommended and certified by the county planning commission and adopted by the board of commissioners as required by law. This map is hereby made a part of this chapter and shall be certified and on file in the office of the county commission chairman, or such other office designated by them, said map marked as exhibit "C" as kept on file with the city clerk. The clerk of the county board of commissioners is hereby authorized to separate the county zoning map from the official minutes of the county board of commissioners and display or present them in an appropriate office for public viewing. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 42) 
Sec. 56-25. - Same—Interpretation. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)	Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or railroad right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerlines, street lines, or railroad right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)	Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(3)	Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerline of streets, highways, or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the said zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. 
(4)	Where district boundaries follow a stream, lake or other body of water, and such district line also constitutes a county line, said boundaries shall be construed to be at the limits of the jurisdiction of the county unless otherwise indicated. 
(5)	Where district boundaries appear to follow corporate lines, such boundaries do follow the corporate lines. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 43) 
Sec. 56-26. - Same—Line divides a lot of single ownership. 
Where a district boundary line as appearing on the zoning map divides a lot in single ownership at the time of the enactment of these regulations, the requirements for the district in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall be extended to the balance of the lot provided that such extension shall not include any part of such lot more than 35 feet beyond the district boundary line and provided further that this provision shall not apply to a through lot. In the case of a through lot, the restrictions of the district applying to the adjoining lots which front on the same street as the proposed use of the lot shall apply. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 44) 
Secs. 56-27—56-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 56-56. - Single-family district (R-I). 
Within a single-family residential district (R-I), the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)	Residential subdivisions (single-family). 
(2)	Single-family detached dwelling (excluding mobile homes). 
(3)	Churches. 
(4)	Public or private schools offering general education courses. Private schools require site approval by the board of commissioners. 
(5)	Park, playgrounds, museums, library and community buildings owned and operated by public agencies. 
(6)	Country club or golf courses, except miniature course or practice driving range operated for commercial purposes. 
(7)	Home gardens and noncommercial greenhouses shall be permitted. 
(8)	Accessory uses may generally be considered as private garages, storehouses, noncommercial greenhouses, children's playhouses, summer houses, and home workshops, swimming pools, provided that auto repair facilities shall not be included if used as a business. Where the rear yard abuts upon a street, no accessory building shall be closer to the rear lot line than the required front setback for the zone. 
(9)	Quasi-public service uses. Utility company facilities on premises which are necessary for the convenience and general welfare of the public, such as telephone exchanges, pump houses, transformer substations, pressure resources, cable easements, etc. Such structures shall be architecturally harmonious with the general character of the surrounding area, shall be enclosed by proper fencing, and shall be suitably landscaped. 
(10)	None of the residential uses described in this section shall be used for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 51) 
Sec. 56-57. - Two-family residential district (R-II). 
Within a two-family residential district (R-II), the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)	Any use permitted in the single-family (R-I) residential district. 
(2)	Two-family dwellings (duplexes). (Not to exceed the maximum allowable building height.) 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 52) 
Sec. 56-58. - Multifamily district (R-III). 
Within a multifamily residential district (R-III), the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)	Any use permitted in the two-family district (R-II). 
(2)	Multiple-family dwelling units which includes condominiums, townhouses or attached dwelling units, not to exceed the maximum allowable building height. 
(3)	Roominghouses or boardinghouses accommodating more than two persons. 
(4)	Bed and breakfast accommodations. 
(5)	Institutions of a religious, educational, charitable or philanthropic nature, but not a penal institution. 
(6)	Private clubs, fraternities, sororities and lodges, excepting, if any of the above should engage in a service customarily carried on as a business and affords this service to the general public, such use would not be permitted. 
(7)	Mobile or manufactured homes in a mobile or manufactured home park subject to approval by the planning commission and after a public hearing by the county board of commissioners, provided that: 
a.	A minimum area of five acres shall be devoted to mobile home park purposes; 
b.	There shall be a lot of not less than 5,000 square feet for each mobile home space; 
c.	Provisions for sewage must be through a municipal sewage system or on-site treatment facility approved by the county health department. No septic tanks will be permitted; 
d.	Each mobile home shall be underpinned; 
e.	Mobile homes shall be separated by at least 30 feet and shall be at least 20 feet from internal and external roadways; 
f.	There shall be two parking spaces for each mobile home; 
g.	The front, side and rear setback requirements shall apply to the exterior boundaries of the park; 
h.	That the planning commission approve the location and design of the mobile home park. The planning commission may disapprove an application for a mobile home park provided that the park does not meet the stated requirements and/or the park will be detrimental to the neighborhood; 
i.	At least 30 percent of the land be greenbelt. Roads, parking area and required setback areas are not included as greenbelt. 
(8)	Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses when located on the same lot and not involving the conduct of a business, including a storage garage on a lot occupied by a multiple dwelling or institution. 
(9)	No signs exceeding 12 square feet in area will be permitted to identify R-III zone uses. Such signs shall be located not less than 15 feet from the front lot line of the property so identified. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 53) 
Sec. 56-59. - Vacation cottage district (V-C). 
Within a vacation cottage district (V-C), the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)	Single-family detached residences (excluding mobile, manufactured or modular homes or industrialized dwelling units). 
(2)	Noncommercial greenhouses and home gardens. 
(3)	Municipal, county, state and other public uses, including parks and playgrounds. 
(4)	Churches. 
(5)	Accessory buildings provided such shall be permitted only in a rear yard and shall not be less than ten feet from any property lines. 
(6)	Static electrical transformer stations and gas regulator stations if essential for the service of the immediate area, and subject to the following conditions: such uses shall be enclosed within a woven wire fence; shall be suitably landscaped; and the storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be prohibited. 
(7)	Rental cabins. A minimum of one acre is required for each cabin and each cabin must have its own septic system or be connected to a municipal sewage system. (Rental cabins shall not be sold separately unless applicable zoning requirements and subdivision regulations are met.) 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 54) 
Secs. 56-60—56-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 56-77. - Neighborhood shopping district (N-S). 
The following shall be permitted in the neighborhood shopping district (N-S): 
(1)	Automobile parking lots. 
(2)	Banks. 
(3)	Cemeteries, commercial. Site must be approved by board of commissioners and meet all criteria as outlined by the secretary of state. 
(4)	Clinics. 
(5)	Service stations. 
(6)	Florist shops or greenhouses. 
(7)	Offices and office buildings. 
(8)	Self-service laundries. 
(9)	Household appliances and furniture sales. 
(10)	Bakeries, but only when the products are sold at retail on the premises. 
(11)	Retail establishments, in connection with such stores there shall be no slaughtering of animals or poultry on the premises. 
(12)	Service establishments. 
(13)	Quasi-public service uses. Utility company facilities on premises which are necessary for the convenience and general welfare of the public, such as telephone exchanges, pump houses, transformer substations, pressure reducers, cable easements, etc. Such structures shall be architecturally harmonious with the general character of the surrounding area, shall be enclosed by proper fencing, and shall be suitably landscaped. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 61) 
Sec. 56-78. - Highway business district (H-B). 
The following uses shall be permitted in the highway business district (H-B): 
(1)	Any use permitted in the neighborhood shopping district (N-S) or the commercial business district (C-B). 
(2)	Automobile dealership or mobile home dealership. 
(3)	Business or commercial school. 
(4)	Bowling alley when located not less than 100 feet from any residential district. 
(5)	Frozen food locker. 
(6)	Radio or television broadcasting studio. 
(7)	Hotel or motel. 
(8)	Restaurant. 
(9)	Animal hospital and veterinary clinic. 
(10)	Theater and drive-in theater. 
(11)	Retail/service establishments. 
(12)	When located at least 50 feet from any residential district: 
a.	Used car sales lot. 
b.	Boat sales lot. 
(13)	Mortuary/crematorium/funeral home. 
(14)	Farm implement display and sales room. 
(15)	Milk distributing station. 
(16)	Parking or public garage. 
(17)	Dyeing and cleaning establishment or laundry, painting, plumbing or tinsmithing shop, printing shop, tire sales and service, including vulcanizing, upholstering shop, not involving furniture manufacture. Any other general service or repair establishment of similar character. 
(18)	Accessory building or use customarily incidental to any of the above uses. 
(19)	Hardware store. 
(20)	Bus terminal, passenger. 
(21)	Hospitals. 
(22)	Quasi-public service uses. Utility company facilities on premises which are necessary for the convenience and general welfare of the public, such as telephone exchanges, pump houses, transformer substations, pressure reducers, cable easements, etc. Such structures shall be architecturally harmonious with the general character of the surrounding area, shall be enclosed by proper fencing, and shall be suitably landscaped. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 62) 
Sec. 56-79. - Commercial business district (C-B). 
Within a commercial business district (C-B), the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)	Any use allowed in a highway business (H-B) district. 
(2)	Animal hospital or veterinary clinic. 
(3)	Nursing and convalescent homes. 
(4)	Automobile parts sales store. 
(5)	Miniwarehouses and boat storage (enclosed). 
(6)	Automobile washing establishment. 
(7)	Bed and breakfasts. 
(8)	Bowling alleys. 
(9)	Bus terminals. 
(10)	Business and outdoor advertising signs. 
(11)	Drive-in theater and theater. 
(12)	Electrical repair shops. 
(13)	Dry cleaning and laundry establishments. 
(14)	Fabricating shops of small size such as woodwork shops, cabinet shops, and upholstery shops. 
(15)	Farm equipment sales and service. 
(16)	Funeral homes or mortuaries. 
(17)	Service stations. 
(18)	Greenhouses or horticultural nurseries. 
(19)	Motels, hotels, inns. 
(20)	Public and semipublic recreational facilities. 
(21)	Repair services. 
(22)	Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants 
(23)	Retail establishments/service establishments. 
(24)	Hospitals. 
(25)	Customary accessory uses and structures, when located on the same lot as the main structure. 
(26)	Quasi-public service uses. Utility company facilities on premises which are necessary for the convenience and general welfare of the public such as telephone exchanges, pump houses, transformer substations, pressure reducers, cable easements, etc. Such structures shall be architecturally harmonious with the general character of the surrounding area, shall be enclosed by proper fencing, and shall be suitably landscaped. 
(27)	Recreational vehicle parks, campgrounds, and recreational vehicle lot sales. 
a.	Definition of allowed vehicles. A vehicle built on a single chassis and maintained on wheels, primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreation and camping. 
b.	Vehicles not allowed. No manufactured homes or mobile homes, or other structures generally recognized as a permanent structure. 
c.	Requirements. 
1.	Minimum acreage for use as a recreational vehicle park, campground, or recreational vehicle lot sales shall be ten acres, with said site having direct access to a county, state, or federal highway. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district, or shall require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. 
(i)	The minimum lot size of individual lots for sale or rent shall be 1,750 square feet. 
(ii)	The minimum frontage of individual lots for sale or rent shall be 35 feet. 
2.	The minimum paved road width for area of for sale or for rent lots shall be 20 feet with a total of 30 foot right-of-way. Roads shall be built with ten inches of base and 3½ inches of asphalt, and be approved for quality of construction by the county board of commissioners or its designee. 
3.	Before approval of any new site by the county planning and zoning commission, the applicant must secure written approval from the county health department, DNR, and all other applicable governing authorities, that said site and usage meets the minimum requirements of said authorities. Assurance of continuity of maintenance and operation of utilities, including an approved water source and sewage disposal system, must be approved and documented as provided by applicable state regulations to ensure the continuance of the operation and maintenance of said system for the benefit of the present and future owners of the properties connected thereto. For sale lots must have preliminary and final plat approval by the county planning commission prior to lots being sold. 
4.	Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities, and other use and structures customarily incidental to operation of a recreational vehicle park for rental or recreational vehicle lot sales, are permitted as accessory uses. 
(i)	Such establishments and the parking are primarily related to their operation. 
(ii)	Such establishments shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character, which would attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
5.	Prohibited usage. 
(i)	No business of any type shall be conducted from any individual recreational vehicle rental or sold lot. 
(ii)	There shall be no "time share" sale of lots or rental spaces. 
(iii)	No rental or sold lot shall be used for permanent living accommodations, and any recreational vehicle occupying a space within a recreational vehicle park, or campground, or located on a recreational vehicle park lot sold, must be removed for a period of at least 30 days within each calendar year, with accurate records of occupancy to be kept by the park management, and notice of this article to be furnished to all renters and purchasers of lots to be enforced by park management. The county marshal may enforce this chapter by ordering a vehicle removed from said park, campground, or lot, in violation of this provision. 
6.	Exceptions. This amendment shall not disallow the existing usage of recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds located within the county, or expansion onto adjacent land currently owned and appropriately zoned. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 63) 
Secs. 56-80—56-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - USE REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 56-102. - Restricted industrial district (M-I). 
Within the restricted industrial district (M-I), the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)	Warehousing, wholesaling, storage or light manufacturing uses. 
(2)	Bottling works. 
(3)	Large sawmill. Those sawmill operations having more than five full-time or part-time employees; operating more than 1,700 hours per year; occupying more than two acres including the lumberyard; or having a drying kiln. 
(4)	Coal or wood yard. 
(5)	Storage of petroleum products, but only after the location of the premises have been approved by the fire chief; and further provided that any residence shall not be located within 500 feet of the location. 
(6)	Textile manufacturing or processing. 
(7)	Fabrication of wood and metal products. 
(8)	Industrial and manufacturing plant where the process of manufacturing or the treatment of material is not objectionable because of dust, odor, gas, smoke, vibration, lighting or noise. 
(9)	Truck or transfer terminal or freight house, or bus garages and repair shop. 
(10)	Ice manufacturing plant. 
(11)	Laboratory; experimental, film and testing. 
(12)	Assembly plant. 
(13)	Quasi-public service uses. Utility company facilities on premises which are necessary for the convenience and general welfare of the public, such as telephone exchanges, pump houses, transformer substations, pressure reducers, cable easements, etc. Such structures shall be architecturally harmonious with the general character of the surrounding area, shall be enclosed by proper fencing and shall be suitably landscaped. 
(14)	Power plant, private. Any facility that uses one or more energy sources, including water powers, fossil fuels, biofuels, fuel cells, photovoltaic systems, solar power or other means of electrical generation, to provide electrical generation, to provide electrical energy and/or steam, including equipment, fuel storage and other support facilities related to such power plant. Any such power plant, whether used off-grid or on-grid, shall have a peak generating capacity of not more than 20 megawatts. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 71; Ord. of 11-27-2007) 
Sec. 56-103. - Heavy industrial district (M-II). 
Within a heavy industrial district (M-II), the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)	Any industrial use, provided that such use shall not be likely to be dangerous, offensive or detrimental to the health, safety, welfare, or general character of this zoning district or of the community by reasons of the emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibrations, glare or otherwise. 
(2)	Any non-residential uses permitted in the restricted industrial district (M-I). 
(3)	Business and outdoor advertising signs. 
(4)	Cold storage plants. 
(5)	Service stations. 
(6)	Laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
(7)	Public utility structures. 
(8)	Repair shops. 
(9)	Restaurants, cafes, and similar establishments. 
(10)	Truck terminals. 
(11)	Warehousing. 
(12)	Wholesale establishments, including building material yards. 
(13)	Accessory uses and buildings which are clearly incidental to a permitted use and which will not create a nuisance or hazard. 
(14)	Any building or land may be used for any purpose not in conflict with any ordinance of Rabun County regulating nuisances; provided, however, that no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered for residential purposes except for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises. 
(15)	Assembly plant. 
(16)	Recycled paper manufacturing. 
(17)	No permit shall be issued for any of the following uses until and unless the location of such use shall have been approved by the planning commission and the county commissioners: 
a.	Acid manufacture. 
b.	Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture. 
c.	Stockyards, or slaughter of animals. 
d.	Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture. 
e.	Asphalt manufacture or refining. 
f.	Auto wrecking yard and junkyard. 
g.	Coal, tar products manufacture. 
h.	Linoleum manufacture. 
i.	Mining operations. 
j.	Sanitary landfills and dumps. 
k.	Quarry operations. 
(18)	The following uses shall not be permitted in this or any other district: 
a.	Distillation of bones and glue manufacture. 
b.	Fertilizer manufacture. 
c.	Reduction or dumping of garbage, offal or dead animals. 
d.	Refining of petroleum or its products. 
e.	Paper manufactured from wood pulp. 
f.	Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores. 
(19)	Quasi-public service uses. Utility company facilities or premises which are necessary for the convenience and general welfare of the public such as telephone exchanges, pump houses, transformer substations, pressure reducers, cable easements, etc. Such structures shall be architecturally harmonious with the general character of the surrounding area, shall be enclosed by proper fencing, and shall be suitably landscaped. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 72; Ord. of 1-28-2007) 
Secs. 56-104—56-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - USE REQUIREMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 56-126. - Agricultural district (A). 
The following uses shall be permitted in the agricultural district (A): 
(1)	Farm residences, including quarters for migrant farm workers. 
(2)	Land divisions and dwellings for related family use. 
(3)	Mobile, manufactured or modular homes. 
(4)	All agricultural and forestry uses, including broiler, poultry, and other livestock raising. Agricultural uses must be nondetrimental to the environment. 
(5)	Customary and essential accessory buildings and uses including barns and other livestock structures, storage sheds, implement sheds, roadside stands for the sale of produce raised on the farm. 
(6)	Churches. 
(7)	Family/church cemeteries. Provided approval is granted by the planning commission and the county commissioners. (Requires one-quarter acre designated as cemetery. Plat must be recorded and public access shown.) 
(8)	Home occupations (see definitions). 
(9)	Public and semipublic buildings and land uses. 
(10)	Public and semipublic recreation facilities and grounds. 
(11)	Small sawmill; a sawmill operation that does not meet the characteristics of a large sawmill. 
(12)	Signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of property on which they are located when located at least 50 feet from road right-of-way. 
(13)	Subdivisions of three acre tracts of land or larger for residential purposes, provided that all roads constructed thereon are built to comply with articles VII and VIII of the subdivision regulations of the county. No subdivision of land for sale for residential purposes into parcels less than three acres in size shall occur in an agricultural district. 
(14)	Quasi-public service uses. Utility company facilities on premises which are necessary for the convenience and general welfare of the public such as telephone exchanges, pump houses, transformer substations, pressure reducers, cable easements, etc. Such structures shall be architecturally harmonious with the general character of the surrounding area, shall be enclosed by proper fencing, and shall be suitably landscaped. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 81) 
Secs. 56-127—56-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AREA YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 56-134. - Requirements table. 

 
*Setbacks for any buildings or development are subject to Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, and any other state or federal regulations regarding setbacks, but shall be no less than 25 feet from protected waters at any time. All lot sizes are contingent on health department requirements (no lot may be smaller than county requirements but, may have to be larger to meet health department regulations. Front yard setbacks are from the right-of-way. Side and rear setbacks are from lot line. The following land areas are not considered as a part of a lot when calculating the required minimum lot size; right of way of roads, easements (such as power lines or pipe lines), bodies of water, land within 50 feet of a lake, river, stream, wetlands, or other adverse topographic features. The highest living floor height of all buildings and structures in all use districts cannot exceed 26 feet. The overall building height of any single-family residential or commercial building or structure cannot exceed 40 feet. The overall building Height of any multifamily residential building or structure cannot exceed 46 feet. The maximum number of habitable floors of any building or structure in all use districts is three stories above the point used to determine the highest living floor height. For buildings or structures with two or more floors above the location of the point used to determine the highest living floor height, the immediate environs of the point used to determine the highest living floor height must be accessible to an over-the-road, wheeled vehicle. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), art. IX) 
Sec. 56-135. - Additional requirements. 
(a)	All three-story multifamily residential and commercial buildings or structures must be sprinklered throughout the entire building, including any enclosed attic/storage/garage spaces, and have a minimum of two stairwells. All sprinkler systems and stairwells must be installed in accordance with the applicable state fire code specifications. 
(b)	No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered in any way so as to depart from the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, the county board of commissioners may, upon application and approval of a variance, allow buildings and structures to depart from the provisions of this chapter as described above subject to application requirements and procedures for variances established in this chapter 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), art. IX) 
Secs. 56-136—56-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIAL ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS NOT DESIGNATED AS USE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 56-154. - Planned unit development (PUD). 
(a)	General character and purpose. It is the intent of this section to: 
(1)	Encourage the development of large tracts of land as planned neighborhoods or communities; 
(2)	Encourage flexible and creative concepts in site planning; 
(3)	Preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas within residential areas; 
(4)	Accomplish a more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of minimum requirements of this chapter; 
(5)	Provide for an efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets and thereby lower development and housing costs; 
(6)	Provide an environment of stable character compatible with surrounding residential areas. Within the planned area, a variety of land uses may be permitted in an orderly relation to one another and to existing land uses, as well as with due regard to comprehensive planning in the county. 
(b)	Requirements and standards for approval. 
(1)	An application for development as a planned unit development must contain a minimum area of 20 contiguous acres. 
(2)	The county planning commission and the county board of commissioners in their review of the proposed development plan shall consider: 
a.	The proper relation between the proposed development and surrounding uses, and the effect of the plan upon comprehensive planning for the county; 
b.	The adequacy of existing and proposed streets, water, sewer, electrical and gas service, and other public services to serve the development; 
c.	The character, design, and appropriateness of the proposed land uses and their adequacy to encourage desirable living conditions, to provide separation and screening between uses where desirable to preserve the natural amenities of streets, wooded areas and similar natural features; 
d.	The adequacy of open and play areas and the recreation facilities provided for the needs of the development. 
(3)	Approval and recommendation of the planning commission shall be accompanied by a report stating the reasons for approval of the application and specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed planned unit development will not adversely affect the property adjacent to the area included in the plan. 
(4)	Final approval of a planned unit development shall not be granted until the owner of the property gives written notice of his consent to the proposed development. 
(c)	Review and approval procedures. 
(1)	Preapplication conference. Prior to filing a formal application as a planned unit development, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the staff of the planning commission in order to review the general character of the plan (on the basis of a tentative land use sketch if available), and to obtain information on projected programs and other matters. 
(2)	Development plan. 
a.	An applicant shall file a petition with the administrative officer for approval as a planned unit development. This application shall be supported by a development plan and a written summary of intent, and shall show the relation between the proposed development and the surrounding area, both existing and proposed. 
b.	The following information shall be presented: 
1.	A general location map; 
2.	Existing topographic conditions, including contour intervals of no more than four feet based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods; 
3.	The existing and proposed land uses and the approximate location of all buildings and structures; 
4.	The approximate location of existing and proposed streets and major thoroughfares; 
5.	The approximate location of all existing and proposed utilities, including a preliminary utility and drainage plan; 
6.	The present zoning pattern in the area; 
7.	A legal description of the subject property; 
8.	The location and use of existing and proposed public, semipublic, or community facilities such as schools, parks and open area. This will include area proposed to be dedicated or reserved for community or public use; 
9.	Perspective drawings of representative building types, except for detached single-family dwellings and their accessory buildings; 
10.	If a proposed development creates special problems or involves unusual circumstances, additional information may be required in order to properly evaluate the proposal as follows: 
(i)	An off-street parking and loading plan. 
(ii)	An economic feasibility report or market analysis. 
(iii)	A traffic study of the area and a circulation plan within the development and to and from existing streets and thoroughfares. 
c.	The written statement submitted with the development plan shall include the following information: 
1.	A statement of the present ownership of all land within the proposed development. 
2.	An explanation of the character of the proposed development, including a summary of acres, dwelling units and gross density by type of land use. The statement shall include minimum standards for floor area, lot size, yard and spacing requirements. 
3.	Background and history of prior developments of developer and/or applicant. 
4.	Agreements, provisions and covenants which govern the use, maintenance and protection of the development and any common or open areas. 
5.	A general statement of the proposed development schedule and progression of unit division of staging. 
6.	All road rights-of-way shall be constructed according to required minimum sections approved by the county board of commissioners. 
d.	Approval. 
1.	An application for approval of a planned unit development will be considered administratively as a petition for rezoning, and will be subject to the procedures established in the zoning ordinance, including the requirements of a public hearing. 
2.	After review and public hearing, the board of commissioners may disapprove, approve, or approve with modifications, the plan after receiving the recommendation of the county planning commission. 
3.	If the development plan is approved as submitted, the administrative officer will cause the official zoning map to be changed to indicate the planned unit development. If the plan is approved with modifications, the applicant shall file written notice of consent to the modifications and a properly revised site plan with the administrative officer prior to changing the zoning map. The site plan and supporting information of an approved plan shall be properly identified and permanently filed with the administrative officer. No building permits shall be issued until the development plan has been approved by the board of commissioners. 
(3)	Building and occupancy permits. The administrative officer shall issue building permits for buildings and structures in the area covered by the approved development plan if they are in conformity with the approved development plan, the development schedule, and with all other regulations. He may issue a certificate of occupancy for any completed building or structure located in the area covered by the approved development plan if it conforms to the requirements of the approved development plan and all other applicable regulations. 
(4)	Revisions of development plan. Any change in the approved development plan which affects the intent and character of the development, the density of land use pattern, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar changes will be reviewed and approved by the board of commissioners subsequent to receipt of the recommendations of the planning commission. A request for a revision of the development plan shall be supported by a written statement of why the revisions are necessary or desirable. 
(5)	Revision of zoning approval. Approval of the board of commissioners shall be in effect for at least one year period. However, if no construction has begun within two years after approval of the development plan, or if the applicant fails to maintain the approved development schedule, the approval of the development plan shall lapse and be of no further effect. At its discretion, and for good cause, the planning commission may extend for six months the period for beginning construction for any phase of the project. If the approval of the development plan lapses under this provision, the building inspector shall cause the development to be removed from the official zoning map, file a notice of revocation with the recorded development plan, and reinstate the zoning district and regulations which were in effect prior to approval of the development plan. The planning commission shall be the sole authority to determine if construction has begun. 
(d)	Use, density and other regulations. 
(1)	Permitted uses. The uses permitted within the planned unit development shall be primarily residential in character, and may include the following uses: 
a.	Single-family detached dwelling. 
b.	Single-family attached dwellings, townhouses, duplexes or similar types. 
c.	Multifamily dwelling. 
d.	Churches, schools, community or club facilities, and similar public or semipublic facilities, including recreational. 
e.	Commercial or retail uses, including offices and clinics provided they meet the following criteria: 
1.	The location is appropriate in relation to other land uses. 
2.	The proposed use is designed so that it will primarily serve the planned development. 
f.	Accessory uses to those listed. 
(2)	Density controls. The maximum number of dwelling units per acre in residential areas of the planned unit development shall not exceed 6.0 dwelling units per acre. For purposes of this section, density shall be interpreted as the number of dwelling units per gross acre denoted to residential development. Gross acreage shall include, in addition to land area and parcels used primarily for residential purposes, all open space including private lakes reserved for common usage within the planned unit development and held under private or condominium ownership. Gross acreage for residential development shall exclude areas reserved or dedicated for street rights-of-way. 
(3)	Variance to required densities. 
a.	The board of commissioners may allow a higher overall density, or a higher density of a particular residential use provided that the applicant can show that such higher density will not be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood. The board of commissioners shall consider a variance to the required density only after consideration for a specific density by the county planning commission. 
b.	Land area proposed for common open space may be allocated to a single-family detached, single-family attached, and multifamily use areas in proportion to the percentage of the area of each use to the total area of residential use provided that open space acreage allocated to a use must be reasonably accessible to that use. 
(4)	Dimensional and bulk regulations. The approximate location of all structures shall be shown on the development plan, subject to minimum lot size, setback lines, lot coverage or floor area, specified in the approved plan. The proposed location and arrangement of structures shall not be detrimental to existing or proposed adjacent dwellings or to the development of the neighborhood. 
(5)	Perimeter requirements. Unless topographical or other barriers protect the privacy of existing adjoining uses, the board of commissioners, upon the recommendation of the planning commission, may impose one or both of the following requirements: 
a.	Structure or buildings located at the perimeter of the development shall be set back a distance of at least 100 feet to protect the privacy and amenities of adjacent existing uses. 
b.	Structures or buildings located at the perimeter of the development shall be permanently screened in a manner which sufficiently protects the privacy and amenities to the adjacent existing uses. 
(e)	Uses permitted subject to the approval of the planning commission and county commissioners. 
(1)	All uses permitted under section 56-59. 
(2)	Multifamily dwelling units. 
(3)	Church bulletin boards. 
(4)	Group camp developments of at least ten acres. Such development may include hotels, cabins, country clubs, trailer and tent accommodations, commercial boating facilities, and retail sales, are incidental to the group camp activities. Provided, however, that there shall be a minimum of 10,000 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit or nonhousekeeping accommodations and that there shall not be less than 20 feet of open space between buildings. Provided that such group camp developments are not used as permanent residential accommodations by any group or member of a group, excepting managers, night watchmen and any other employees of the organization whose duties shall require permanent residence on the premises. 
(5)	Mobile home parks (defined as more than two units) subject to approval by the planning commission and after public hearing, and final approval by the board of county commissioners. 
(f)	Control of area following completion. 
(1)	After completion of a planned unit development, the use of land and construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or structures within the area covered by the plan shall be regulated by the approved development plan. 
(2)	No changes may be made in the approved development plan except as provided as follows: 
a.	Minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of existing buildings or structures may be permitted after review and approval by the building and zoning office and the planning commission, provided they are substantially consistent with purposes and intent of the development plan. 
b.	Substantial change in permitted uses, location of building or other specifications of the development plan may be permitted following a public hearing and approval by the board of commissioners upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 100) 
Sec. 56-155. - Specific purpose. 
(a)	The county board of commissioners are hereby authorized to amend the county ordinance to allow property to be used for a specific purpose. Prior to approval of any amendment to allow use for a specific purpose, the county planning commission shall first determine that the purpose for which the property is to be used is not contrary to or in degradation of the overall purpose of this chapter. The application for amending for a specific purpose must be made by the property owner on a form prescribed by the county planning commission, as in other applications, but such form shall fully explain the intended use for the subject property. An application for specific purpose will be handled in the same manner as a rezoning application in regards to posting of signs and advertising. In the event an application to amend for a specific purpose shall be approved by the county board of commissioners, then that property may be used only for the specific purpose for which it was amended. 
(b)	When a property owner makes an application for an amendment to change a subject property's use district as defined in section 56-23, the planning commission shall not recommend amending for a specific purpose, unless the property owner shall consent to such specific purpose amendment and resubmit an application setting out the specific purpose. The resubmitting of an application shall not require additional public hearing scheduled pursuant to the original application. 
(c)	Rezoning of any property for a specific purpose shall not be approved by either the county planning commission or the county board of commissioners except upon the property owner's application and consent to such rezoning. 
(d)	The granting of a specific purpose amendment pursuant to this section shall remove the subject property from its former use district as defined by section 56-23, but shall not be considered to have been rezoned into a different use district. Said property may be returned only to its original use district by application of the property owner, as in other amendments of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(e)	Nothing in this section shall prohibit the county board of commissioners from rezoning or otherwise amending the ordinance from which this section is derived to change use districts where otherwise appropriate under this chapter. 
(f)	When property is zoned for a specific purpose and is not used for that purpose within 12 months, the zoning will then revert to its original use district. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 101) 
Secs. 56-156—56-178. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PARKING AND STORAGE 

Sec. 56-179. - Zoning affects every building and use. 
(a)	No building or land shall hereinafter be used or occupied and no building, or part thereof, shall be erected, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, and without first obtaining a building permit, except as hereinafter provided. In the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer may withhold building or occupancy permits until all provisions of this resolution are complied with or his decision is appealed to the county planning commission. 
(b)	An administrative officer, such as the county marshal, may with the knowing and voluntary consent of an occupant or owner, or pursuant to a warrant lawfully issued upon probable cause, enter at reasonable times any building, structure or premises in the county solely for the purpose of determining its compliance with the rules, regulations and limitations of this chapter. 
(c)	Certain private power plants permitting in all districts. Private power plants that have a peak generating capacity of not more than 85 kW, whether for residential or commercial application, and whether used on-grid or off-grid, shall be permitted in all zoning districts and special zoning classifications. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 111; Ord. of 11-27-2007) 
Sec. 56-180. - Continuance of nonconforming building or use. 
Any structure or use of land existing at the time of the enactment or subsequent amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but not in conformity with its use regulations and provisions, may be continued with the following limitations: 
(1)	It shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(2)	It shall not be reestablished after discontinuance or abandonment for one year. 
(3)	It shall not be extended, except in conformity with these regulations. 
(4)	Nonresidential buildings shall not be rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 75 percent of the fair sale value of the building immediately prior to damage. 
(5)	It shall not be allowed to continue if it involves junk, salvage materials, inoperable vehicles, and the storage thereof unless enclosed or completely screened from passing publics view. Properties in violation of this section shall have a six month period from the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived to come into compliance. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 112) 
Sec. 56-181. - Variances. 
The county planning commission may grant variances from the terms and provisions of this article under the following provisions: 
(1)	No such variance shall change the zoning or use classification of such property. 
(2)	No such variance shall permit a use of such property that is not otherwise permitted in its zoning classification. 
(3)	Such variance shall not be contrary to the public interest or detrimental to the adjoining land owners or neighborhood, and shall not impair the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(4)	There must be extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography. 
(5)	There must exist a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship in the use and utilization of said property without such variance. 
(6)	The circumstances of the hardship cannot be self-created by the applicant. 
(7)	The provisions of section 56-261 must be followed as the same pertains to the public hearing and advertisement requirements thereof. 
(8)	If a requested variance application is denied by the county planning commission, it will be forwarded to the county board of commissioners for reconsideration under the above stated provisions. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 113; Ord. of 1-22-2008) 
Sec. 56-182. - Only one principal building on any lot. 
Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any lot. In zones approved for individual mobile homes, the lot size and other lot specifications for mobile homes shall be the same as for other housing units in the zone. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 114) 
Sec. 56-183. - Reduction of a lot area prohibited. 
No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width, yard requirements, lot area per dwelling unit, or other requirements of this resolution are not maintained. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 115) 
Sec. 56-184. - Off-street automobile parking and storage. 
Off-street automobile parking or storage space shall be provided in every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established in all districts except commercial district, or provided that no parking space can be reasonably provided on the same lot, such space shall be provided on any lot a substantial portion of which is within 400 feet of such uses. The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one half of the parking space required for churches, theatres or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays, may be used to augment parking for adjacent day-use activities. Each automobile parking space shall not be less than 200 square feet in area exclusive of adequate access drives and maneuvering space. Maneuvering space shall be provided (except for single-family residents) to prevent any vehicle from backing into the street. Such space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley; such use shall not thereafter be encroached upon or altered; and shall be equal in number to at least the minimum requirements for the specific use set forth below. When application of said provision results in fractional space requirement, the next largest requirement shall prevail. 

 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 116) 
Sec. 56-185. - Off-street loading and unloading spaces. 
Every building and structure used for business, trade or industry hereafter erected shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or if there is no alley, to a street. For the purpose of this section, off-street loading spaces shall have minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 40 feet and an overhead clearance of 14 feet in height above the alley or street grade. 
(1)	Retail business. One space for each 3,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(2)	Wholesale and industry. One space for each 10,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof. 
(3)	Terminal facilities for trucks, buses, or railroads. One space for each bus or truck to be stored or loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 117) 
Secs. 56-186—56-208. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 56-209. - Existing lots. 
Where the owner of a lot consisting of one or more lots of official record in any district at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived does not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot size requirements of this chapter, such lot may be used as a building site provided, however, that the requirements of this district are compiled with, health department issues approval for sewage and water supply if necessary. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 121) 
Sec. 56-210. - Adjoining and vacant lots of record. 
If two or more adjoining or vacant lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which these regulation are derived and such lots individually are less than 50 feet in width, such groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size and the lot or lots in one ownership shall be subject to the requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 122) 
Sec. 56-211. - Front yard setbacks for dwellings. 
Setbacks are from rights-of-way, where roads are involved. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 123) 
Sec. 56-212. - Visibility at intersection. 
On a corner lot in any zoning district, no planting, structure, fence, wall, or obstruction to vision more than three feet in height measured from the centerline of the street shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line connecting points on said street lines each of which is 25 feet distance from the point of intersection. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 124) 
Sec. 56-213. - Corner lots. 
The side yard setback requirements for corner lots shall be the same for front yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 125) 
Secs. 56-214—56-234. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 56-235. - Zoning classification and stamp of approval on plats. 
(a)	All plats of survey of real property in the county prepared after the enactment of this section shall have placed thereon, prior to recordation of said plat in the office of the clerk of the county superior court, the zoning classification of the property thereon delineated. Such zoning classification shall be placed upon said plat of survey by the surveyor in such manner as to show the zoning classification of each district within which such property lies. 
(b)	All plats prior to recordation must be stamped approved by the administrative officer. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 151) 
Sec. 56-236. - Plats of lots less than 43,560 square feet are not allowed. 
In addition to the zoning classification required to be shown upon each plat of survey recorded in the county, in the event such plat of survey delineates a tract or parcel of land, or directly or indirectly subdivides a tract or parcel of land in such manner as to create delineated parcels of less than 43,560 square feet (one acre), then such plat shall not have the stamp of approval of the administrative officer of the county planning commission prior to being recorded. The following land areas are not considered as a part of a lot when calculating the required minimum lot size; right-of-way of roads, utility easements (such as power lines or pipe lines), bodies of water, land within 25 feet of a lake, river, stream, wetlands, or other adverse topographic features. Such approval of such administrative officer shall state that such tract or parcel of land and any subdivision thereof meets the requirements of the chapter as to area when applied to the zoning classification. Should such plat of survey contain less than the generally required area under this chapter, and be permissible for conveyance or subdivision under a limited or restrictive use provision of this chapter, then the administrative officer may approve the same, but his approval placed upon such plat of survey shall specifically set forth any qualifying or limited conditions to such approval. The administrative officer may require additional information other than that which is shown upon the plat offered for approval, and the person offering such plat for approval shall comply with such request for additional information, including, but not limited to, topographical profiles of such property, additional measurements as to street or road frontage, the owners of adjoining property and any other information which might be reasonably needful to the administrative officer in determining whether or not such plat should be approved as being in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 152) 
Sec. 56-237. - Common ownership exceptions. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 56-183, or any other provision to the contrary, a parcel of land may be subdivided or reduced in size so as to create a parcel of less than the required applicable area if the two following conditions are first met: 
(1)	Such parcel shall be conveyed to and acquired by the owner of adjoining lands which, together with the added portion, does comply in all respects in this chapter; and 
(2)	The remaining lands from which such parcel is being taken shall, after the removal of such parcel, comply in all respects with this chapter. Any parcel approved for division under this section shall not again be platted or conveyed as a single tract or parcel unless the same then complies in all respects with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 153) 
Sec. 56-238. - Deeds from unapproved plats prohibited. 
No deed or other conveyance of title to real property in the county shall be recorded in the county from any plat of survey or from information obtained from a ground survey unless and until such plat has met the requirements of the foregoing sections 56-135 through 56-137. Further, no deed or other conveyance of title to real property in the county shall be recorded in violation of the provisions of section 56-183. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 154) 
Sec. 56-239. - Building permit required. 
(a)	No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, extended, or enlarged, or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for construction of any building be commenced until the administrative officer has issued a building permit for such work. 
(b)	Authorities. The design, installation and construction requirements of all systems, appliances and equipment shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the latest applicable publications. The editions currently adopted and in force of the following listed authorities are accepted as the county minimum requirements, and any further publications by these authorities may be adopted: 
(1)	Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Guide; 
(2)	National Warm Air Heating and Air Conditioning Association; 
(3)	International Code Council; 
(4)	National Fire Protection Association; 
(5)	Georgia State Heating and Air Conditioning Code and the Standard Mechanical Code. Size of equipment in new residential construction. All heating, ventilating or air conditioning equipment used in all new residential construction shall be sized in accordance with national minimum standards and must be adequate for all areas; 
(6)	National Electrical Code with required plans and drawings. The seal of an architect or engineer currently licensed by the state shall be affixed to the plans of the following projects: 
a.	All places of assembly with a calculated occupant load of 100 or more persons using occupant load calculations as set forth in the NFPA Life Safety Code. 
b.	All healthcare facilities as defined by NFPA Life Safety Code #101. 
c.	All penal and correctional institutions. 
d.	All educational facilities. 
e.	All personal care facilities with a calculated occupant load of five or more persons. 
(c)	All buildings must adhere to fire safety standards. 
(d)	The state minimum fire safety standards as adopted in the state safety fire commissioner rules and regulations for the prevention of loss and property from fire, panic from fear of fire, explosions or related hazards in buildings, structures, occupancies and facilities as specified in the 1949 Georgia Safety Fire Act, amended effective March 1, 1979, including all subsequent revision thereof, as shall become considered the fire safety standards for the county. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 155) 
Sec. 56-240. - Application for building permit. 
(a)	Each application to the administrative officer for a building permit shall be accompanied by dimensioned plans showing: 
(1)	The dimensions of the lot to be built upon (plat); 
(2)	The size, highest living floor height and the overall building height of the building to be erected; 
(3)	The location of the building on the lot; 
(4)	Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(b)	Any building permit issued shall become invalid 12 months after date of issue subject to being renewed upon application to the administrative officer. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 156) 
Sec. 56-241. - Remedies. 
In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter, the building and zoning officer or any other person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action for injunction, or mandamus, or other appropriate action of proceeding to prevent such violation. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 157) 
Secs. 56-242—56-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - AMENDMENTS AND VARIANCE REQUESTS 

Sec. 56-261. - Amendments to text and zoning map. 
(a)	This chapter, may be amended from time to time by the board of commissioners of the county, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the county planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 30 days after hearing such proposal to submit a report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within a 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
(b)	Before enacting an amendment to this chapter or map, the county shall hold a public hearing thereon, prior notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days but no more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. Such public hearing shall be advertised and held by the county board of commissioners; however, the board of commissioners of the county may in its discretion hold such other and additional hearings as it deems appropriate. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. Proponents of any zoning decision shall have no less than ten minutes to express their views and present data, evidence and opinions on the proposed zoning decision. Opponents of any zoning decision shall have no less than ten minutes to express their views and present data, evidence and opinions on the proposed zoning decision. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 161) 
Sec. 56-262. - Application for zoning map amendment and/or variance request by individuals. 
(a)	A zoning map amendment and/or zoning variance request may be proposed by an individual or an entity owning fee-simple title to the subject property, or by one with written authorization to act on behalf of such owner or owners, by: 
(1)	Obtaining an application for a zoning map amendment or variance request from the administrative officer of the planning commission in the county courthouse. 
(2)	Filing with the administrative officer the completed application along with a plat of the subject property outlining its proposed use and an advertising fee as set by the planning commission. 
(b)	Notification of public hearing. Before the county planning commission makes a recommendation regarding an application for zoning map amendment or variance request by an individual property owner to the county board of commissioners, the commission shall hold a public meeting or hearing thereon, official notice of which shall be advertised in the current legal organ of the county (Clayton Tribune) or its successor at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days, prior to the hearing. The notice of the public hearing shall include the time, place and purpose of the hearing, the location of the property, the present and proposed zoning classifications, and the name of the owner or owners. Signs shall be posted on the subject property in a conspicuous place at least 15 days before the public hearing is to be held. Signs shall contain the time, date, place of public hearing and the present and proposed zoning of property. 
(c)	Hearing on proposed zoning map or zoning text amendment and/or variance request by individuals. 
(1)	A public meeting or hearing to consider a zoning map amendment and/or variance request will be heard before the county planning commission. Proponents of any zoning decision shall have no less than ten minutes to express their views and present data, evidence and opinions on the proposed zoning decision. Opponents of any zoning decision shall have no less than ten minutes to express their views and present data, evidence and opinions on the proposed zoning decision. 
(2)	In hearings on rezoning and/or variance applications, if the owner applicant, or an attorney representing the applicant, cannot be present for the hearing, a written document signed by the applicant and notarized, designating a person who will be appearing on his behalf must be furnished to the planning commission no later than 72 hours prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. 
(3)	It will be the responsibility of the applicant to prove to the planning commission, through use of witnesses, written statements, technical data, field data or any other materials the applicant deems relevant to the subject property, the need for the rezoning and that the rezoning will be compatible with the long range requirements of the public health, safety and welfare, and is not contrary to the overall objective to this zoning chapter. Provisions for all utilities must be submitted at the hearing. 
(4)	After all parties present have had an opportunity to express their views and present evidence on the proposed zoning decision and after the planning commission has discussed, propounded questions to the applicant and participants, and considered the rezoning request or variance request, the chairman will call for a motion to be made by one of the members of the planning commission. If the motion is made and seconded, a vote will be made by the members of the commission, with the chairman voting only in the event that the vote is tied. 
(d)	Standards on which the planning commission will base their decision. The planning commission will base their decision, for or against, on the following six standards: 
(1)	Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(2)	Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(3)	Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(4)	Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will, or could, cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
(5)	If the local government has an adopted land use plan, whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; 
(6)	Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which gives supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed zoning amendment. 
(e)	Recommendations of planning commission. The decision of the planning commission will be forwarded to the board of commissioners, in the form of a recommendation, for their review. The board of commissioners will then make the final decision as to whether or not the zoning change will be made. 
(f)	Hearing before board of commissioners. 
(1)	Notice is hereby given that the same notice and advertising requirements pertain to the hearing to be held before the board of commissioners as those that pertain to the hearing before the planning commission. It is the responsibility of the applicant to assure, through the county board of commissioners that the necessary notices are published in the legal organ of the county (Clayton Tribune) and to present sufficient evidence before the board of commissioners, either to refute the recommendation of the county planning commission, or to support recommendation under the same standards set out in subsection (d) of this section. The applicant has the same burden before the board of commissioners as before the planning commission and must be present, or be represented, at all hearings. 
(2)	Proponents of any zoning decision shall have no less than ten minutes to express their views and present data, evidence and opinions on the proposed zoning decision. Opponents of any zoning decision shall have no less than ten minutes to express their views and present data, evidence and opinions on the proposed zoning decision. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 162) 
Sec. 56-263. - Defeated zoning or variance requests. 
If the zoning decision of the board of commissioners is for the rezoning of property or for a variance request concerning property, and the amendment to the zoning ordinance to accomplish the rezoning or the variance request is defeated, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning or for a variance request until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning or variance request by the board of commissioners. 
( Ord. of 8-26-2014 ) 
Secs. 56-264—56-287. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - APPEALS 

Sec. 56-288. - Individual challenge of commission decision. 
A person who is dissatisfied with a zoning decision rendered by the county board of commissioners may challenge the decision by appealing to either state or federal court. Zoning cases are ordinarily decided by the state courts. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), art. XVII) 
Secs. 56-289—56-309. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 56-310. - Conflicts with other regulations. 
Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width or size of yards, courts, or other open space, or require a lower height of buildings, or lesser number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statues, the regulations and requirements of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2007(1), § 181) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Local Acts and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia law. 

 